                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             VERY LONG-RUN DISCOUNT RATES

                                            Stefano Giglio
                                           Matteo Maggiori
                                          Johannes Stroebel

                                        Working Paper 20133
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20133


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2014


We thank Sumit Agarwal, John Campbell, Raj Chetty, John Cochrane, Xavier Gabaix, Bob Goldstein,
Christian Gollier, Bob Hall, Barney Hartman-Glaeser, Mervyn King, Anil Kashyap, Amir Kermani,
Ralph Koijen, Martin Lettau, Hanno Lustig, Tim McQuade, William Nordhaus, Arthur van Benthem,
Jules van Binsbergen, Stijn van Nieuwerburgh, Monika Piazzesi, Tomasz Piskorski, Tarun Ramadorai,
Amit Seru, Martin Weitzman as well as seminar participants at the NBER (Public Economics, Asset
Pricing, Financing Housing Capital), Harvard (HBS and Department), Princeton (JRC Conference),
Chicago Booth, NYU Stern, Adam Smith Conference (LBS/LSE/Oxford), UBC Winter Finance Conference,
ASU Sonoran Winter Finance Conference, HULM Conference, and Notre Dame for helpful discussions.
We gratefully acknowledge the generous research support from the NYU Stern Center for the Global
Economy and Business as well as from the Fama-Miller Center and the Initiative on Global Markets
at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business. We thank Brent Ambrose, Mihnea Constantinescu,
Piet Eichholtz, Marc Francke, Thies Lindenthal, Niclas Sjölund, Nigel Stapledon as well as Trulia,
iProperty, and Rightmove for sharing part of their data. We thank Miguel de Faria e Castro for excellent
research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Stefano Giglio, Matteo Maggiori, and Johannes Stroebel. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Very Long-Run Discount Rates
Stefano Giglio, Matteo Maggiori, and Johannes Stroebel
NBER Working Paper No. 20133
May 2014
JEL No. E44,G11,G12,R30

                                             ABSTRACT

We provide direct estimates of how agents trade off immediate costs and uncertain future benefits
that occur in the very long run, 100 or more years away. We exploit a unique feature of housing markets
in the U.K. and Singapore, where residential property ownership takes the form of either leaseholds
or freeholds. Leaseholds are temporary, pre-paid, and tradable ownership contracts with maturities
between 99 and 999 years, while freeholds are perpetual ownership contracts. The difference between
leasehold and freehold prices reflects the present value of perpetual rental income starting at leasehold
expiry, and is thus informative about very long-run discount rates. We estimate the price discounts
for varying leasehold maturities compared to freeholds and extremely long-run leaseholds via hedonic
regressions using proprietary datasets of the universe of transactions in each country. Agents discount
very long-run cash flows at low rates, assigning high present values to cash flows hundreds of years
in the future. For example, 100-year leaseholds are valued at more than 10% less than otherwise identical
freeholds, implying discount rates below 2.6% for 100-year claims. Given the riskiness of rents, this
suggests that both long-run risk-free discount rates and long-run risk premia are low. We show how
the estimated very long-run discount rates are informative for climate change policy.


Stefano Giglio                                      Johannes Stroebel
University of Chicago                               New York University
Booth School of Business                            Leonard N. Stern School of Business
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue                             44 West 4th Street, KCM 9-98
Chicago, IL 60637                                   New York, NY 10012
and NBER                                            johannes.stroebel@nyu.edu
stefano.giglio@chicagobooth.edu

Matteo Maggiori
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West Fourth Street, 9-8
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
matteo.maggiori@stern.nyu.edu




An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w20133
     Long-run discount rates play a central role in economics and public policy (Cochrane,
2011). For example, much of the debate around the optimal response to climate change
centers on the trade-off between the immediate costs and the very long-term benefits of
policies that aim to reduce global warming (Nordhaus, 2007; Weitzman, 2007; Gollier,
2006; Barro, 2013). Similar cost-benefit analyses are required of all U.S. government agen-
cies prior to proposing and adopting regulation.
     Unfortunately, there is little direct empirical evidence on how households discount
payments over very long horizons, because of the scarcity of finite, long-maturity as-
sets necessary to estimate households’ valuation of very long-run claims. For regulatory
action with “intergenerational benefits or costs,” the U.S. Office of Management and Bud-
get therefore recommends a wide range of discount rates (1% - 7%), lamenting that while
“private markets provide a reliable reference for determining how society values time
within a generation, for extremely long time periods no comparable private rates exist.”
     We provide direct estimates of households’ discount rates for payments very far in the
future. We exploit a unique feature of residential housing markets in the U.K. and Sin-
gapore, where property ownership takes the form of either very long-term leaseholds or
freeholds. Leaseholds are temporary, pre-paid and tradable ownership contracts with ma-
turities ranging from 99 to 999 years, while freeholds are perpetual ownership contracts.
The price difference between leaseholds and freeholds for otherwise identical properties
captures the present value of perpetual rental income starting at leasehold expiry, and is
thus informative about households’ discount rates over that horizon.
     Our empirical analysis is based on proprietary information on the universe of res-
idential property sales in the U.K. (2004-2013) and Singapore (1995-2013). These data
contain information on transaction prices, leasehold terms, and property characteristics
such as location and structural attributes. We estimate long-run discount rates by com-
paring the prices of leaseholds with different maturities to each other and to the price
of freeholds across otherwise identical properties. We use hedonic regression techniques
to control for possible heterogeneity between leasehold and freehold properties. This al-
lows us to identify price discounts associated with differences in lease length. We find
that 100-year leaseholds are valued 10-15% less than otherwise identical freeholds; lease-
holds with maturity of 125 to 150 years are valued 5-8% less than freeholds. There are
no price differences between leaseholds with maturities of more than 700 years and free-
holds. Our results suggest that households apply annual discount rates of below 2.6% to
payments more than 100 years in the future.
     While these housing markets provide a unique and important setting for understand-
ing very long-run discount rates, they are not frictionless markets. We, therefore, address
a number of possible concerns that the observed price differences between leaseholds of

                                            1
different maturity and freeholds might not only be driven by the different duration of
the claims, but also by other differences between the two contracts or frictions specific to
housing markets. We show that the empirical results are consistent across the U.K. and
Singapore, two housing markets with otherwise very different institutional settings. In
addition, we provide direct evidence that the leasehold discounts are not related to either
systematic unobserved structural heterogeneity across different properties, differences in
the liquidity of the properties or a different clientele for the different ownership struc-
tures, and are unlikely to be explained by contractual restrictions in leasehold contracts.
    We first address the concern that our estimated price discounts are driven by system-
atic differences in unobserved property characteristics. To do this, we analyze how an-
nual rents differ across freehold and leasehold properties with different maturities. Con-
ditional on observable property characteristics, we find no differences in the rental prices
of leasehold properties with different maturities and freeholds. This suggests that the
observed sale price differences are not related to differences in the flow utility from these
properties, but to the maturity of the contracts. Consistent with this, the absence of a price
difference between leaseholds with 700 or more years remaining and freeholds provides
further confidence that our hedonic control variables allow us to partial out all important
sources of structural heterogeneity between leasehold and freehold properties.
    We next consider whether covenants in leasehold contracts might explain the esti-
mated price discounts. Since leaseholds with more than 700 years maturity trade at the
same price as freeholds, we conclude that the price discounts between shorter leaseholds
and freeholds are unlikely to be explained by fundamental differences in the general con-
tract structure (e.g., a significant control premium or a duration-independent preference
of households for freehold ownership), since these should show up along the entire term
structure. This is confirmed by an analysis that estimates discounts only within lease-
holds of different maturity, and finds them to be similarly large. We also show that our
estimated price discounts persist even after controlling for the initial lease length of con-
tracts, addressing concerns that restrictive covenants might be more prevalent for shorter
maturity leaseholds. This is confirmed by a direct, systematic analysis of the covenants in
a subset of leasehold contracts. Finally, since most covenants restricting a short-maturity
leaseholder would need to be passed on to possible renters of the property, the absence of
differential rental prices for leaseholds of different maturity further confirms the absence
of important restrictive covenants that differ by lease length.
    We also document that price differences are not driven by differential liquidity of
leasehold contracts with different maturities and freehold contracts, by showing that the
time on market does not vary systematically across the term structure of remaining lease
length. We then consider whether the presence of a different clientele for leasehold and

                                              2
freehold properties can explain the price differences, but find evidence that buyers of
freehold and leasehold properties are essentially identical on observable characteristics.
Our estimates also cannot be explained by potential financing frictions that might be im-
portant for short-maturity leasehold properties (50-70 years), since leasehold discounts
remain substantial even for maturities of 200 years, for which the effects of potential fi-
nancing frictions are more than a hundred years away.
    To interpret the economic magnitude of the observed leasehold discounts and implied
discount rates, we first analyze the predictions from a simple valuation model with con-
stant discount rates across maturities; then, we consider the impact of risk and frictions
in more general models. In the simplest constant-discount-rate model, rental income Dt
grows deterministically at rate g and is discounted at a constant rate r. The prices for the
freehold Pt , and the T-maturity leasehold PtT are given by:

                                      Dt                    Dt
                              Pt =       ;         PtT =       (1 − e−(r− g)T ).
                                     r−g                   r−g

The first formula is the Gordon (1982) growth valuation for infinitely lived assets, the
second formula corrects the freehold price for the shorter maturity of the leasehold to
obtain the leasehold price.1 In this model, the price discount between leaseholds and
freeholds is:
                                      PT
                             DisctT ≡ t − 1 = −e−(r− g)T .
                                      Pt
To understand the magnitude of the observed discounts, we estimate unconditional ex-
pected housing returns r and rent growth g in the U.S., the U.K. and Singapore. Real rates
of rent growth are low, about 0.5% a year. Expected real returns to housing are relatively
high, between 7% and 9% a year, and primarily driven by high rental yields. Therefore,
the constant-discount-rate model predicts that even with a conservative rate of return of
6.5% and optimistic rent growth of 2% the price discount of 100-year leaseholds relative
to freeholds should be at most 1%. By contrast it is as high as 10-15% in the data.
     This simple model highlights that the challenge for economic theory is to jointly ratio-
nalize a relatively high expected return to housing with the low discount rates necessary
to match the observed discounts for leaseholds relative to freeholds. Intuitively, given the
low long-run growth rates of rents, a model that can rationalize these valuation patterns
requires a downward sloping term structure of discount rates for rents. Discount rates
have to be sufficiently high in the short to medium run to contribute to high expected re-
turns to housing, but sufficiently low in the long run to match the observed prices of very
long-run cash flows. These patterns imply a low long-run risk-free discount rate, and a
  1 In   Section 5.1 we derive both formulas explicitly. Here we focus on the related intuition.


                                                       3
low long-run risk premium for rents. Since rents are risky, they also imply a low long-run
price of risk. This result is complementary to the recent innovative contribution of Bins-
bergen, Brandt and Koijen (2012) and Binsbergen et al. (2013), who show that the term
structure of equity discount rates is downward sloping for maturities up to 10 years.2
    Beyond these insights for asset pricing theory, our results have implications for envi-
ronmental economics. The literature on environmental policy has discussed extensively
the importance of long-run discount rates in assessing the benefits of policies such as
reducing carbon emissions (Gollier, 2012; Weitzman, 2001, 2013; Pindyck, 2013). For ex-
ample, Stern (2007) calls for immediate action to reduce future environmental damage
based on the assumption of very low discount rates, arguing that while agents discount
the future over their lifetimes, they have an ethical impetus to care about future gen-
erations. This assumption has been criticized amongst others by Weitzman (2007) and
Nordhaus (2007), who argued that private markets reveal discount rates well above zero.
For example, Nordhaus (2007) points out that the private return to capital is 4-6%. Such
estimates are based on claims to infinite streams of cash flows and, as such, are not di-
rectly informative of long-run discount rates. We contribute to this literature by providing
direct empirical evidence on long-run discount rates. Our long-run discount rates of less
than 2.6% are higher than those in the Stern report but substantially smaller than those
suggested by the unconditional return to the capital stock or housing. While the direct
implications of our findings for climate change policy depend on the relative risk prop-
erties of real estate and climate change investment, the low price of long-run risk makes
optimal climate change policy less sensitive than previously believed to the long-run β of
the proposed investments.
    Our results are of direct relevance for real estate economics and the ongoing effort
to understand house prices. We add to the recent research effort to understand the re-
turn properties of real estate (Flavin and Yamashita, 2002; Lustig and Van Nieuwerburgh,
2005; Piazzesi, Schneider and Tuzel, 2007; Favilukis, Ludvigson and Nieuwerburgh, 2010)
by focusing on a previously unexplored aspect of real estate: the term structure of house
prices. Finally, we also contribute to the recent literature on historical comparative anal-
ysis of asset price behavior during financial crises and rare disasters as in Bordo et al.
(2001), Barro (2006), Reinhart and Rogoff (2009) and Schularick and Taylor (2012) by pro-
viding an extensive analysis of house price behavior during these events.
   2 Binsbergen, Brandt and Koijen (2012) discuss the challenges of leading asset pricing models to match
a downward sloping term structure of discount rates. For risky cash flows, the external habit formation
model of Campbell and Cochrane (1999) and the long-run risk model of Bansal and Yaron (2004) produce
an upward sloping term structure of discount rates, while the rare disaster model of Barro (2006) and Gabaix
(2012) generates a flat term structure. A recent literature inspired by Binsbergen, Brandt and Koijen (2012)
includes Belo, Collin-Dufresne and Goldstein (2012), Ai et al. (2012) and Boguth et al. (2011).


                                                     4
1     Housing Markets in the United Kingdom and Singapore
In this section we discuss the relevant institutional details of housing markets in the U.K.
and in Singapore, highlighting the distinguishing characteristics of freeholds and lease-
holds. Appendix A.1 provides detailed additional information on each of these.

1.1   Leaseholds and Freeholds in the U.K.
Property contracts in England and Wales come in two forms: permanent ownership,
called a freehold, and long-duration, temporary ownership, called a leasehold. A lease-
hold is a grant of exclusive possession for a clearly defined, temporary period of time
(Burn, Cartwright and Cheshire, 2011). Common initial leasehold maturities are 99, 125,
150, 250 or 999 years. During this period, ownership of the leasehold entitles the lessee to
similar rights as the ownership of the freehold, including the right to mortgage and rent
out the property. Unlike for commercial leases, the vast majority of the costs associated
with a residential leasehold come through the up-front purchase price; annual payments,
the so-called “ground rents,” are small to non-existent and do not significantly affect the
prices paid for leaseholds. Leasehold properties are traded in liquid secondary markets,
where the buyer purchases the remaining term of the lease.
    Once the leasehold expires, the ownership reverts back to the freeholder. However, it
is common for leaseholders to purchase leasehold extensions ahead of leasehold expiry.
Over time, a number of laws have regulated the rights of leaseholders in the U.K. to
extend their lease terms, and have codified the bargaining process between leaseholders
and freeholders. For our sample period, the law states that leaseholders had the right to
request a lease extension from the freeholder in exchange for paying a premium, and if
leaseholder and freeholder cannot agree on such price, they can appeal to government-
run leasehold valuation tribunal (LVT) with the power to set the prices for extensions. In
Section 3.7, we discuss the effects of LVT decisions and lease extension regulation on the
interpretation of our results, and show that the particular institutional setting of the U.K.
tends to balance the potentially stronger negotiating power of freeholders with laws and
court decisions that are favorable towards the leaseholder.
    Some leaseholds contain covenants that might, for example, restrict the type of com-
mercial activity that can be operated on the land. In Section 3.2 we provide empirical
evidence that differential covenants across contracts are unlikely to explain the observed
differences in prices between leaseholds and freeholds, and between leaseholds of differ-
ent maturity. Finally, management fees and service charges that are sometimes levied on
leaseholders for the maintenance of the property primarily cover expenses also faced by
freeholders, and do not significantly confound our analysis.

                                             5
1.2   Leaseholds and Freeholds in Singapore
Residential properties in Singapore are also either sold as freeholds or leaseholds, where
the latter almost always have initial terms of 99 years or 999 years. By far the largest
freeholder is the government of Singapore, represented by the Singapore Land Authority
(SLA). As in the U.K., there is a vibrant private secondary market for leaseholds, where
buyers purchase the remaining term of the original lease.
    At the expiration of the lease, the ownership interest reverts to the SLA. Leaseholders
may apply for a renewal of the lease before expiration. The granting of an extension is
decided on a case-by-case basis; considerations include whether the development is in
line with the government’s planning intentions, and results in land use intensification or
the mitigation of property decay. Between 2007 and 2010 about 60% of lease extension ap-
plications were approved. If the extension is approved, the Chief Valuer determines the
“land premium” that will be charged. Prior to 2008 an additional “building premium”
was charged, based on the value the Chief Valuer puts on the building sitting on the land
with an expiring lease and was payable if a lease extension was sought and the building
not demolished. The new lease cannot exceed the original, and might be shorter if other-
wise not in line with the Urban Redevelopment Authority’s (URA) planning intention.

2     Empirical Analysis
The estimation of the relative prices of leaseholds and freeholds is potentially challeng-
ing because the underlying properties are heterogeneous assets. Since leasehold and free-
hold properties could differ on important dimensions such as property size and location,
comparing prices across properties requires us to control for these differences. We use
hedonic regression techniques (Rosen, 1974), which allow us to consider the variation in
price over time and across lease terms for different properties while controlling for key
characteristics of each property.

2.1   U.K. Residential Housing Data
We begin by analyzing data from England and Wales. We obtained transaction-level ad-
ministrative data on all residential housing sales between 1995 and 2013 from the Land
Registry. The data include the price paid as well as some characteristics of the house:
whether the property is a flat or a house, the type of house (detached, semi-detached or
terraced), the full address and a “new construction” indicator. In addition, the Land Reg-
istry has provided us with an indicator of whether the transaction was for a freehold or a
leasehold property, as well as previously unexplored information on leasehold character-


                                            6
istics such as origination date and lease length.
     Two limitations affect the combined transaction-leasehold data. First, until the Land
Registry Act 2002, which was enforced from October 2003 (see Appendix A.1.2), leasehold
registration was not mandatory for all leases, and leases were valid and enforceable even
if they were not registered with the Land Registry. This limited the incentive to register
a lease. Therefore, data before October 2003 are subject to measurement error because
transactions that occurred before that date may have been erroneously associated with
out-of-date leaseholds. For this reason, we focus our analysis on the period 2004-2013.
     The second limitation is that the leasehold associated with each transaction in the
Land Registry dataset is the lease registered with the Land Registry at the time of the
transaction. This is not a problem for our analysis except when the freeholder and lease-
holder agree to a lease extension, the timely registration of which is encouraged, but not
required. A problem occurs if the lease extension happened before the transaction but
is only registered afterwards. We have manually detected a number of such instances in
a subsample of leasehold transactions. In those cases, the data erroneously reports the
terms of the older and shorter lease, while the price paid pertains to the new and longer
lease. This biases our analysis against finding a large price discount for short leases be-
cause a higher price (corresponding to a longer lease) would be mistakenly associated
with a leasehold with fewer years remaining. When we can identify lease extensions (be-
cause we observe transactions that occur under both the old and the new lease), we ob-
serve that around 84% of extensions occur for leaseholds of less than 80 years remaining.
We therefore focus on estimating price discounts for leaseholds with maturities above
80 years, where extensions are rare and which are particularly informative about very
long-run discount rates.3
     For 80% of the properties, we have obtained additional proprietary property charac-
teristics such as the number of bedrooms, bathrooms, the size and age of the property as
well as information on the condition, type of heating and availability of parking. These
are collected by Righmove.co.uk from “for sale” listings and other data sources. Right-
move also provided us with information on the time on the market for most properties,
as well as rental data for about 29, 000 flats that were listed in London in 2011 and 2012,
which allows us to compare rental prices across leasehold and freehold properties.
   3 We  also exclude the 3.1% of transactions for properties for which we observe both a freehold and a
leasehold transaction. This is because it is unclear whether transactions of the freehold cover the rents
after leasehold expiry or the infinite flow of rents. In addition, when the same person purchases both the
freehold and the leasehold, it is unclear what the division of price between the two titles captures. This also
removes properties where the leaseholders have jointly purchased the freehold, and now own a “leasehold
with a share of the freehold.” We found these instances to be equally common across different remaining
lease lengths.



                                                      7
2.2    U.K. Data: Summary Statistics
Our final dataset contains more than 8 million property transactions between 2004 and
2013. Table 1 provides key summary statistics for the U.K. transaction sample. Houses
in the U.K. are mainly transacted as freeholds, with some very long leases and very few
shorter leases. Flats (apartments) are mainly traded as leaseholds. Since the market for
flats and the market for houses are relatively segmented and differ in their propensity
to use freehold and leasehold contracts, we study them separately. In our main analysis
we focus on flats, which have significant variation in terms of remaining lease length.
Appendix A.3.1 shows that the estimated price discounts are, if anything, larger in the
sample of house transactions for which we have limited variation across contracts.
     The top panel of Figure 1 shows the distribution of remaining lease lengths for flats
at the time of sale. There are many transactions with remaining lease lengths below 300
years and above 700 years, allowing us to trace out the term structure of leasehold dis-
counts across long horizons. To reduce noise in our estimation, we pool leaseholds into
a number of buckets with similar remaining lease length at the time of transaction, as
shown in Table 1. The top panel presents the composition of our sample of flats, compris-
ing almost 1.4 million transactions. About 3% of transactions are for freeholds, and 27%
are for long leaseholds (700 or more years remaining). The rest of the transactions are for
shorter-maturity leaseholds.
     While our dataset covers all of England and Wales, it is important to verify that all
type of contracts are present in most locations. We focus on the variation in lease length
within 3-digit postcodes; these relatively small geographical units correspond to the level
of geographic fixed effects used in our hedonic analysis. Overall, flats have significant
variation across contract types (freehold vs. leasehold), within leaseholds (by number of
years remaining), and across geographic areas.4
     In the next section we study the price differences between freeholds and leaseholds
of various remaining lease length, controlling for observable characteristics such as the
number of bedrooms, bathrooms, property age and property size. Within each 3-digit
postcode there are no systematic differences in these observable characteristics across
leaseholds with different remaining lease length (which will be our main source of price
variation); there are some small differences between freeholds and leaseholds, as docu-
mented in Appendix Figure A.27.
   4 Foreach of the 2,375 3-digit postcodes in the U.K., we compute the fraction of transactions that occur
with each lease length remaining as well as the fraction of freeholds. Appendix Table A.1 presents the
distribution of the shares of freeholds and each type of leasehold across postcodes. To visualize the geo-
graphic variation of freeholds and leaseholds, Appendix Figures A.3 - A.26 also provide maps of the shares
of freeholds and leaseholds of different lease length remaining by postcode. The maps show significant
geographic dispersion for freeholds and leaseholds in the case of flats.


                                                    8
2.3       Price Variation by Lease Length Remaining in the U.K.
In this section we estimate the relative prices paid for leaseholds of varying remaining
maturity and freeholds for flats in England and Wales. Given the support of the “re-
maining lease length” distribution, we construct a set MaturityGroup with 5 buckets for
different remaining lease length: 80-99 years, 100-124, 125-149 years, 150-300 years, and
700+ years. We then estimate regression (1). The unit of observation is a transaction i
of a property in 3-digit post code h at time t. We assign each leasehold transaction with
remaining maturity at time of sale Ti,t to one of the MaturityGroup. The β j coefficients
capture the log-discount of leaseholds with that maturity relative to otherwise similar
freeholds.
                                  5
          log( Pricei,h,t ) =α + ∑ β j 1{Ti,t ∈ MaturityGroup j } + γControlsi,t + ξ h × ψt + ei,h,t    (1)
                                 j =1


We control for average prices in a property’s geography by including 3-digit postcode
(ξ h ) by time of sale (ψt ) fixed effects. We also include dummy variables for whether the
property is a new construction, as well as for the number of bedrooms, bathrooms, prop-
erty condition, whether there is parking, and the type of heating. We further control for
the size and age of the property in a flexible way by including dummy variables for 50
equally sized groups of these characteristics.5 Standard errors are clustered at both the
year and 3-digit postcode level, following the procedure in Petersen (2009).
      Table 2 shows the results from regression (1) for flats; the different columns test the
robustness of our estimates to different samples and specifications. In column (1) we
control for the time of sale in the interacted fixed effects by including the month of sale,
in column (2) by including the quarter of sale, and in column (3) by including the year
of sale. In column (4), we interact all our controls with year dummies, to allow for time
variation in the effect of property characteristics. In column (5) we report the results
obtained by winsorizing prices at the 1% level to reduce the possible effect of outliers.
In column (6), we report the results obtained using only flats with non-missing property
characteristics. In column (7) we report the results excluding the London postal district.
      The coefficients β i of our baseline case, column (1), are also plotted in the bottom
panel of Figure 1. Freeholds and leaseholds with maturities of more than 700 years trade
at approximately the same price: the coefficient on β 700+ is small and statistically indis-
tinguishable from zero. This suggest that the present value of rents starting in 700 years is
   5 Inall cases, observations with a missing characteristics are assigned a unique indicator variable. This
means that we do not have to drop the observation from the dataset. As a robustness check, column (6) of
Table 2 considers only properties with a complete set of observable characteristics.



                                                      9
negligible. Leaseholds with shorter maturities trade at significant discounts to otherwise
identical freeholds: leaseholds with 80-99 years remaining trade at an approximately 16%
discount to freeholds; the discount decreases to 10% for leaseholds with 100 to 125 years
remaining, 8% for 125-150 years remaining, and 3% for 150-300 years remaining. The
results are robust to the various specifications reported in Table 2.
    To our knowledge, this is the first extensive analysis of the relative valuation of lease-
holds and freeholds using the universe of transactions and lease terms in England and
Wales, combined with an extensive set of hedonic characteristics for the properties. The
analysis reveals substantial discounts for shorter leaseholds compared to longer lease-
holds and to freeholds. Interestingly, when informally investigating the priors of partici-
pants in this market (home buyers, valuers, estate agents) we found them to be very dis-
persed. In particular, a number of valuers believe the discounts to be smaller than those
we found in our systematic analysis, while a number of homebuyers believe them to be
bigger. As discussed in Appendix A.1.5, the priors appear to be based on either little data,
introspection, or exponential discounting at some conventional rate.6 This dispersion is
consistent with significant heterogeneity of properties, segmentation of the housing mar-
ket, and the absence of a large-scale systematic empirical analysis of buyers’ valuations.
In Section 3, we show that our estimated price differences are not driven by a number
of frictions that could differentially affect the flow utility between leaseholds of different
maturity and freeholds. Instead, the price differences suggest a significant present value
attached by buyers to rents 100 or more years in the future, and, therefore, a relatively
low discount rate over those horizons.

2.4    Singapore Residential Housing Data
We obtained transaction-level price data for all private residential transactions in Sin-
gapore from the Urban Redevelopment Authority. We do not use transaction prices
for property sales by the Housing Development Board (HDB), which usually happen
at below-market value (see Appendix A.2). We observe approximately 380,000 private
market transactions between 1995 and 2013. For each transaction there is information on
the transaction price and date, the lease terms, property characteristics and the precise
location of the property. Table 3 provides an overview of the transaction sample used in
the regressions. There are between 10,000 and 40,000 transactions per year. Between 30%
and 60% of all transactions each year are of freehold properties. We observe substantial
dispersion in the lease length remaining at the time of sale. Figure 2 plots the remaining
lease length at sale for leaseholds with initially 99 years (left panel) and initially 999 years
   6 Valuersat most look at about 200 transactions scattered over a number of years, 10 or more, and often
use subjective judgment and exponential discounting to fill in gaps in the valuations.

                                                   10
(right panel). There are no transactions of leaseholds with 100 to 800 years remaining on
the lease, and very few transactions with lease lengths less than 70 years.
    For Singapore we observe fewer hedonic characteristics than for the U.K.; the primary
characteristics are property size, development size and property age. Conditional on our
geographic and time fixed effects there is no systematic difference in property charac-
teristics by lease length remaining, except that older properties, unsurprisingly, tend to
transact with fewer years remaining on the lease (see Appendix Figure A.28).

2.5    Price Variation by Lease Length Remaining in Singapore
To analyze the relative price paid for leaseholds and freeholds we run regression (2) be-
low. The unit of observation is a property i of type g (e.g., apartment, condominium,
detached house, executive condominium, semi-detached house and terrace house), of ti-
tle type s (either “strata” or “land”),7 in geography h, sold at time t. For leaseholds the
variable Ti captures the number of years remaining on the lease at the time of sale. We
split the 99-year leases into five buckets with different groups of lease length remaining
(50-70 years, 71-85 years, 86-90 years, 91-95 years and 96-100 years). We also include a
dummy variable for all 999-year leases, all of which have at least 800 years remaining
when we observe the transaction. The excluded category are the freeholds. The key de-
pendent variable is the log of the price paid in the transaction.

                                               6
                   ln ( Price)i,h,s,g,t = α + ∑ β j 1{Ti,t ∈ MaturityGroup j } + γControlsi,t +             (2)
                                             j =1

                                          + ξ h × ρs × φg × ψt + ei,h,s,g,t

The results from this regression are shown in Table 4. In column (1) we control for 5-
digit postcode (ξ h ) by title type (ρs ) by property type (φg ) by transaction quarter (ψt ) fixed
effects. Beyond these 94, 700 fixed effects, our other control variables include property
age, size and type, as well as the total number of units in a development. Standard errors
are double clustered by 5-digit postcode and by year.
    The results are consistent with our findings for the U.K.: the price paid for freeholds
and otherwise similar leaseholds with more than 800 years remaining is economically and
statistically identical. Leases with durations of 100 years or less sell at a significant dis-
count to otherwise identical freeholds. For example, a lease with 96-100 years remaining
   7 Residential properties in Singapore are classified into land or strata titles. Land title properties occupy
land that is exclusive to the owner (e.g., a detached house), whereas a strata title comprises units in cluster
housing (e.g., an apartment). Owners of strata properties enjoy exclusive title only to the airspace of their
individual unit. The land that the development is built on is shared by all the owners of the project, based
on the share of the strata title unit owned by each owner. See Appendix A.2 for details.


                                                       11
maturity trades at an 11.8% discount, a lease with 71-85 years remaining maturity trades
at a 24% discount.8 In column (2) we control for the transaction month rather than the
transaction quarter. In column (3) we restrict transactions to those where the buyer is not
the HDB. The results are essentially unchanged, suggesting that sales to the HDB gen-
erally happen at market value. In column (4), rather than controlling for the age of the
property directly, we only focus on the sale of newly-built properties. The estimates for
95-99 year leases are unaffected. For leases with shorter maturities the estimates of the
discount increase somewhat. However, since most leases get topped up to 99 years when
the property gets rebuilt, there are few observations to estimate the discount of new prop-
erties with 80 years lease length remaining. In column (5) we restrict our analysis to strata
properties, which comprises the majority of all title types; in column (6) we restrict the
analysis to land titles. 999 year leaseholds and freeholds trade at the same price. There
are very few land title properties trading on 99 year leases, making it hard to estimate
the lower end of the term structure of leasehold discounts. Nevertheless, while the esti-
mates are very noisy (and there are not sufficient data to estimate every bucket), the point
estimates for the land title and strata regressions are similar.

3     Frictions and Leasehold Discounts
In Section 2 we estimated significant price differences between 100 year leaseholds and
otherwise similar freeholds or leaseholds with longer maturity. In Sections 5 and 6 we will
argue that these leasehold discounts are informative about very long-run discount rates.
Before discussing the interpretation of our results in terms of discount rates, however,
we explore several ex-ante plausible alternative interpretations of the estimated price dis-
counts, all of which involve the flow utility being different across the different contracts:
(i) the presence of unobserved structural heterogeneity in the properties sold, (ii) the im-
pact of leasehold covenants, (iii) differential liquidity of leasehold and freehold proper-
ties, (iv) a different clientele for these contracts, (v) financing frictions for short leaseholds,
(vi) the impact of taxation, or (vii) hold-up problems at lease extension. Overall, there is
no evidence that the flow utility from owning leasehold and freehold properties differs
across leaseholds of different maturity and freeholds. In terms of the model in the in-
troduction, we argue that conditional on our observable control variables, D is the same
across all properties. This will allow us to interpret the estimated discounts in terms of
    8 The regression has a high adjusted R2 of above 95%. This suggests that there remains no significant
variation in prices that is not explained by our control variables, and that our discounts are thus unlikely
to be driven by unobserved heterogeneity between freehold and leasehold properties. The adjusted R2
remains at 95% if we exclude those instances where we only observe one transaction for a particular fixed
effect, in which the fixed effects perfectly explains the transaction price. This is consistent with properties
in Singapore being very homogeneous, in particular conditional on our tight geographic fixed effects.

                                                      12
net discount rates (r − g).


3.1    Unobserved Structural Heterogeneity
Even after controlling for all observed differences across properties (such as property
size), there potentially remains unobserved structural heterogeneity that could vary sys-
tematically by lease length. While an econometrician is unable to observe all character-
istics that might affect the flow utility from a property, to the extent that these character-
istics affect the relative prices paid for leaseholds and freeholds they should also affect
the annual market rents for these properties. Conversely, if our controls correctly capture
all fundamental sources of systematic heterogeneity across properties, rents should not
differ systematically between freeholds and leaseholds of different maturity.
     To test this, Rightmove.co.uk has provided us with a sample of around 29,000 rental
listing prices for flats with a full set of property characteristics listed in London during
2011 and 2012. The top panel of Figure 3 shows the price discounts in “for sale” transac-
tions for our full sample as well as the subsample for which we observe rental prices; this
regression is identical to Column (1) in Table 2. Price discounts are very similar in both
samples, suggesting our sample is representative on this important dimension.
     In Columns (1) - (3) of Table 5, we estimate different specifications of regression (1)
using the log of annual rents as the dependent variable. There is no significant and sys-
tematic difference between rental rates of freeholds and leaseholds of different maturity.
The bottom panel of Figure 3 shows the rental discounts graphically. These results pro-
vide support to the assumption that our controls are correctly capturing the main het-
erogeneity across properties. This is consistent with the observation that, conditional on
geography, observable characteristics did not very significantly across leasehold matu-
rity (see Appendix Figures A.27 and A.28). Finally, an additional piece of evidence that
our hedonic regression allows us to control for all important structural differences is that
there is no observed price difference between 700+ year leaseholds and freeholds.

3.2    Leasehold Covenants or Contract Structure
A second alternative interpretation of the results is that buyers might perceive an intrinsic
difference between owning a leasehold and owning a freehold (for example, because of
restrictions on leaseholders or pure psychological preference for freehold ownership). To
show that this is not the case, we show that the price discounts remain the same when we
exclude freeholds and use the longest leaseholds as the excluded category (700+ years).9
   9 See Appendix Table A.3 and Figure A.29.
                                           We conduct a similar analysis for Singapore, using the 99 year
leasehold as excluded category. See Appendix Table A.4 and the bottom panel of Appendix Figure A.29.


                                                   13
     This analysis, however, does not yet rule out that covenants or other contract charac-
teristics might be more restrictive only on shorter leases, which could affect the relative
valuation of leaseholds of different remaining maturity. Ideally, we would like to estimate
the price differences between leaseholds with different remaining maturity at the time
of transaction, controlling for the initial lease length, which would capture differential
covenants attached to contracts with different initial maturity. In practice, this is compli-
cated by the high degree of collinearity between initial and remaining lease length.10
     To deal with this collinearity we conduct a number of empirical tests, none of which
suggest that our results are explained by covenants that vary systematically with initial
lease length. In a first test, we run regression (1) while including fixed effects for the 10
most common initial lease lengths (which represent 92% of all transactions).11 Table 6
shows the results. The inclusion of these fixed effects does not significantly affect the es-
timated price discounts. The discount for leaseholds with 80-99 years remaining relative
to freeholds drops from about 16% to 13%: a small part of the initial 16% discount is now
attributed to the fixed effects for contracts with 99 years initial maturity. In addition, the
coefficients on the initial lease-length fixed effects do not systematically vary with con-
tract maturity. Overall, we find no evidence that differential covenants are an important
explanation for the estimated discounts.
     Since we only observe significant variation in initial lease for the group of transactions
with 80-99 years remaining, we analyze this group in more detail in Table 7. Columns (1)
and (2) show results from a simple variant of regression (1) where the price discount
for this group is allowed to differ between contracts with initial lease length above or
below 99 years. Consistent with Table 6 we only find a small difference between the
two groups of initial lease length.12 A different specification, presented in columns 5
and 6, restricts the sample to transactions of leaseholds with 80-99 years remaining, and
includes initial lease length fixed effects for the 8 most common initial lease lengths in this
window. This avoids having to estimate the level of the price discount, and only looks at
the differential prices of different contracts that all trade with roughly the same number of
  10 The identification of the initial lease length effects – separate from the effect of the years remaining at
the time of transaction – relies on observing transactions with approximately the same number of years
remaining (say, 125-150) but very different initial lease length. Unfortunately, for all buckets except 80-99
years, there are very few transactions of contracts with higher initial lease length. For example, only 3% of
the properties trading with 125-150 years remaining have an initial lease length of above 150 years.
  11 We include fixed effects for initial lease lengths of 99, 120, 125, 150, 155, 199, 200, 250, 800 and 999

years. Results are robust to also including fixed effects for the 10 next most common initial lease lengths.
In addition to the controls in Table 2, we also include an indicator for whether transactions occur as a new
contract is started.
  12 Columns 3 and 4 show that, in addition, there is essentially no difference in discounts for leaseholds

with 100-124 years remaining between contracts with original lease length below or above 125 (though only
2% of the transactions are in the latter group).


                                                      14
years remaining. There is no systematic pattern in discounts across initial lease lengths.
     Overall, the analysis in Tables 6 and 7 suggests that even after controlling, to the extent
possible, for the initial lease length, the discounts related to the years remaining on the
leasehold are large and significant. In addition, the term structure of leasehold discounts
we estimate for Singapore between 50 and 99 years (see Appendix Table A.4) keeps the
initial length constant (all are 99 year contracts), and thus cannot be explained by differ-
ential initial lease length effects. Two additional pieces of evidence suggest that leasehold
covenants are unlikely to have a significant confounding impact on our analysis. First,
to the extent that restrictive covenants affect the flow utility from the property (for ex-
ample, because they require a certain configuration of the flat), these restrictions should
be passed onto renters of the property. The absence of differential rents across leases
of different maturity makes it unlikely that there are significant differences in restrictive
covenants. Second, a manual inspection of covenants on 801 leasehold properties with
different lease lengths in postcode E16 (East London) suggests that the type of covenants
included is independent of lease length (see Appendix A.1.7.1).

3.3   Differential Market Liquidity
Leasehold and freehold properties could potentially be differentially liquid in the resale
market, in which case our estimated price differences might capture a liquidity discount
that increases as lease length declines. To test whether this hypothesis explains the esti-
mated price discounts, Rightmove provided us with for-sale listing information for about
2.4 million transactions of flats and houses. For these transactions we calculate the time
between first listing and sale, i.e. the time on the market (see Appendix Figure A.30 for the
distribution), which provides a proxy for the liquidity of the asset (see Piazzesi, Schneider
and Stroebel, 2013).
     To test whether liquidity differs by duration of the lease, Columns (4) to (6) of Table 5
repeat the analysis of regression (1) using time on the market as the dependent variable.
The results show that leaseholds tend to stay a modest 3-6% longer on the market than
freeholds, relative to a mean of about 160 days. Importantly, there is no pattern between
remaining lease length and time on market that could explain the significant discounts
we found in comparing short and long leases. The highest time on market is observed
for leaseholds of 150-300 years remaining, followed by the groups 125-149, 80-99, 100-124
and 700+. Differences in liquidity are therefore unlikely to explain our results.




                                              15
3.4    Market Segmentation
We observe no characteristics of the buyers or sellers in our transaction sample. Conse-
quently, there might be a concern that the clientele for leasehold and freehold properties is
different, which could explain the price differences that we observe. To address this con-
cern, we analyze data from the Survey of English Housing, an annual household-level
survey conducted between 1994 and 2008 that allows us to compare characteristics of
owners of freeholds and leaseholds. We focus on the sample of 201,933 owner-occupiers.
    Table 8 presents the results of a variant of regression (1) using each individual char-
acteristic as a dependent variable. The coefficients on the leasehold indicator then repre-
sent the average difference in each characteristic between leaseholders and freeholders,
controlling for property type by region fixed effects (columns 4 and 5) and property char-
acteristics (column 5).13 Households owning freeholds and leaseholds are very similar.
For example, the weekly income of households owning leasehold properties is between
£3 less and £8 more than the income of households owning freeholds; this difference is in-
significant and small relative to a sample mean and standard deviation of £350 and £450,
respectively. The lack of major differences across buyers conditional on our observables
makes it unlikely that our results are driven by clientele effects related to, for example,
differential bequest motives.

3.5    Financing Frictions
Financing frictions have the potential to affect the relative valuation of leaseholds and
freeholds. Leaseholds, in particular short dated ones, require lower upfront payments to
take ownership of a property. If households have high future income that they cannot
borrow against, these shorter leaseholds are more attractive than longer leaseholds or
freeholds. This credit constraint makes shorter leaseholds more desirable, increasing their
valuation relative to a frictionless benchmark.
    On the other hand, short maturity leaseholds are harder to finance than long maturity
ones. For example, U.K. mortgage lenders typically require 30 years unexpired lease term
to remain at the end of the mortgage (Council of Mortgage Lenders, 2013). This means
that leasehold purchases have to be financed with shorter duration mortgages once the
lease length falls below 55 or 60 years. The loss in “collateral value” for these leaseholds
could contribute to the large estimated discounts for leaseholds with maturities around
80 years. However, in Appendix A.4.1 we calibrate a version of the simple valuation
  13 Geographic controls here are more coarse than in previous sections because the Survey of English Hous-

ing only reports 354 unique local authority codes. Property controls are those observed in both the SEH and
the transaction dataset, such as the number of rooms and the property age.



                                                    16
model from the introduction to show that even under extreme assumptions for the col-
lateral value of the house, financing frictions cannot explain discounts for leases of long
maturities. Intuitively, a lease with 200 years remaining will only incur direct losses to its
collateral value in 140 years, when the lease will have 60 years left. Any losses that occur
so far into the future have little impact on present values at conventional discount rates.

3.6   Taxation and the Stamp Duty
Purchases of property in the U.K. are subject to a transaction tax (stamp duty). The tax
applies equally to freehold or leasehold purchases. The tax schedule is progressive: for
example, a purchase of a property up to £125,000 is tax exempt, while a purchase of a
property between £125,001 and £250,000 is taxed at 1% of the total purchase price (see
Appendix A.1.3). This tax schedule potentially makes shorter term leases more attrac-
tive because for similar properties a shorter, and thus cheaper, leasehold might avoid
incurring the higher tax bracket. This would bias against finding significant leasehold
discounts; however, only buyers of properties that are very close to the boundaries of the
tax bracket would be affected, and since the brackets are relatively large the effect on the
average discount is unlikely to be quantitatively important.

3.7   Hold-Up at Lease Extension
One friction that might contribute to explaining our results relates to hold-up problems
during lease extensions, whereby a freeholder might charge unreasonably high premia
and administrative expenses for the purchase of extra years on the lease. These concerns
could potentially make leasehold contracts less attractive and therefore contribute to ex-
plaining the leasehold price discounts that we estimate in the data.
    In recent years, however, U.K. legislation and court practice have systematically al-
leviated this concern. Legislation passed in 1993, well before the beginning of our sam-
ple, has granted virtually all leaseholders who have lived in a property for more than
two years the statutory right to seek a lease extension by 90 years in return for paying
a premium (see Appendix A.1.5). If a reasonable premium cannot be negotiated with
the freeholder, the leaseholder can refer the matter to tribunals that will establish the
payable premium. Badarinza and Ramadorai (2014) recently pointed out that court en-
forced settlements have occurred at estimated discounts favorable to leaseholders com-
pared to those estimated based on market values in this paper. While the court decisions
are somewhat infrequent and subject to legal and advisory costs that can run in the “tens
of thousands of pounds" (Westminster City Council, 2013), they alleviate the concern that



                                             17
our discounts could simply be due to the hold-up problem.14


4     Housing Risk and Returns, and Rent Growth Rates
As discussed in the introduction, interpreting the price discounts estimated in the previ-
ous sections requires information about the rate of return on housing and the growth rate
of rents (r and g, respectively). In this section we discuss empirical estimates of r and g as
well as historical evidence on the riskiness of housing.
     We estimate the expected return to housing and the growth rate of rents using several
methodologies and sample periods. We summarize our findings in Table 9 and leave
the details of the methodologies to Appendix A.3. The top panel presents the estimated
average housing returns for the U.K. and Singapore, as well as the U.S.15 These are real
net returns to housing because they account for maintenance, depreciation, taxes and
inflation. Average real net returns for the period considered are in the range 8 − 10% for
all three countries. To be conservative, we choose a baseline estimate of r = 6.5%, almost
two percentage points below the lowest return observed in any country in our sample.
This benchmark is consistent with estimates for the U.S. in Flavin and Yamashita (2002),
who find a real return to housing of 6.6%, and Favilukis, Ludvigson and Nieuwerburgh
(2010), who find a real return of 9-10% before depreciation and property taxes. The bottom
panel of Table 9 shows that average real rental growth rates are approximately 0.5% in all
three countries. To be conservative, we choose a baseline estimate g = 0.7% which is the
maximum observed value in the data.16
     Our estimates of average returns to housing imply a positive housing risk premium.
  14 The possibility of favorable tribunal decisions, and potentially cheaper extensions outside the court

system as an indirect effect, would increase the ex-ante valuation of leaseholds if prospective buyers were to
anticipate lower future costs of extensions. To the extent that buyers take this into account, this mechanism
would generate a bias against finding large discounts for leaseholds relative to freeholds. There are several
reasons why buyers may discount the ex-ante value of this potential advantage: transaction costs related to
the extension process can be significant, bargaining times are long (6-18 months), there is uncertainty about
the outcome (which may involve going to court twice), and there is general low awareness by buyers about
the details of the extension process. See Appendix A.1.5 for more details.
  15 U.S. housing returns, while not the focus of this paper, provide a useful benchmark because they have

been the subject of an extensive literature (Gyourko and Keim, 1992; Flavin and Yamashita, 2002; Lustig
and Van Nieuwerburgh, 2005; Piazzesi, Schneider and Tuzel, 2007).
  16 Overall, our estimates are consistent with the notion that average real house price growth and real rent

growth over long periods of time are relatively low and the key driver of real housing returns is the high
rental yield (see Shiller, 2006). Our estimated average capital gains are positive but still relatively small
despite focusing on samples and countries that are often regarded as having experienced major growth
in house prices. Over longer horizons, we expect capital gains to be smaller than those estimated in this
sample. Even though this does not necessarily imply lower total returns (since lower price growth also
produces higher rental yields), our preferred calibration chooses a conservatively low value for r. For more
evidence on low average real house price appreciation and low real rent growth rates see Appendix A.3.3.



                                                     18
Intuitively, houses are risky because they have low payoffs during bad states of the world
such as wars, financial crises, natural disasters, and epidemics. We formalize this intu-
ition by analyzing how house prices react during such events, as well as estimating their
average correlation with consumption and personal disposable income.
     The top panel of Figure 4 shows the average reaction of house prices to financial crises.
The analysis is based on dates of financial crises in Schularick and Taylor (2012), Reinhart
and Rogoff (2009) and Bordo et al. (2001) for 20 countries for the period 1870-2013 and
on our own dataset of historical house price indices for these countries.17 House prices
rise on average in the 3 years before the crisis, achieve their highest level just before the
crisis (here normalized as time zero and a house price level of 1), and then fall by as
much as 7% in real terms in the 3 years that follow the onset of the crisis. The fall in
house prices during crises contributes to making housing a risky asset. Similarly, the
bottom panel of Figure 4 shows the average behavior of house prices during the rare
disasters of Barro (2006) and Barro and Ursua (2008). The blue dotted line tracks the
level of consumption: consumption falls for 3 years ahead of achieving its lowest point
(the trough in consumption is normalized here to be time zero) and then recovers in the
subsequent 3 years. The green solid line tracks the house price level: house prices fall
together with consumption in the first 3 years of the disaster but then fail to recover, as
consumption does, during the following 3 years. The fall in house prices during these
rare disasters contributes to the riskiness of housing.18
     We also investigate the average correlation between consumption and house prices
over the entire sample rather than just during crisis periods. Table 10 reports the correla-
tion, over the entire sample and for each country, of house prices changes with consump-
tion changes. The correlation is always positive for all 20 countries, except for France
(-0.05), and often above 0.5. The estimated positive correlation between house prices and
consumption reinforces the evidence that housing is a risky asset: it has low payoff in
states of the world where consumption is low and marginal utility is high.19
     While we analyze the risk characteristics of properties, which consist of both the struc-
ture and the land, there is evidence that land prices are, if anything, more volatile than
the prices of structures. For example, Davis and Heathcote (2007) estimate that swings in
  17 Appendix   A.3.3 provides details and sources for the crises dates and the house price series. The closest
paper is Reinhart and Rogoff (2008) who analyze real estate prices for 16 countries for 18 crises occurring
in the period 1974-2008. We analyze real estate prices in 20 countries for 44 crises and 16 rare disasters
occurring in the period 1870-2013.
  18 In Appendix A.3.4 we show that this pattern of house price decline during crises is also observed for

the U.K. and Singapore, and provide further evidence that house prices collapse during crises and wars.
  19 Appendix A.3.4 provides a similar analysis with a balanced panel of 22 countries for the period 1975-

2012 focusing on the correlation between house price changes and changes in personal disposable income.
We find all estimated correlations to be positive.


                                                      19
residential land prices accounted for most of the variation in house prices over 1975-2006
for the U.S. (see also Bostic, Longhofer and Redfearn, 2007; Davis and Palumbo, 2008;
Nichols, Oliner and Mulhall, 2013). If one conjectures that the claim to the freehold in
the very long-run is primarily a claim to the land, this evidence suggests that this claim
would be even more risky than the composite of land and structure analyzed here.
    Despite extensive efforts to collect a comprehensive database, our results are still lim-
ited by the relatively small number of crises for which house price data are available and
by the lower quality of house price time series before 1950. Nevertheless, our results
suggest that housing is an asset with risks broadly consistent with its estimated expected
return.20 We summarize our results in the following stylized facts: (i) housing is a risky
asset that performs poorly during bad economic events, (ii) correspondingly it has ex-
pected returns of at least 6.5% per year; (iii) real rent growth rates are low, at about 0.5%
per year.


5       Discussion and Interpretation
Section 2 presented new facts about the relative pricing of freeholds and leaseholds of
different maturities. Leaseholds with over 700 years of maturity trade at the same price
as freeholds for otherwise identical properties. For leaseholds with shorter maturities the
price discounts range from 10-15% at 80-100 years remaining to 5-8% at 125-150 years.
    In this section we introduce a simple pricing model with constant discount rates to
rationalize these price differences. This basic model illustrates that the main challenge our
empirical results present for economic theory is to jointly match the significant leasehold
discounts and the high average return to housing estimated in Section 4. We generalize
this result by deriving a simple formula that relates the price discounts to risk-adjusted
long-run discount factors and the expected appreciation of the freehold over the maturity
of the leasehold. We use this formula together with our estimates of long-run rent growth
and information from the U.K. real gilts yield curve to relate the leasehold discounts to
long-run risk premia. The data are consistent with low long-run risk-free rates and low
long-run risk premia.
    20 In
       fact, our results are likely to underestimate the riskiness of housing because of three effects: index
smoothing, declining rents during bad times, and destruction of the housing stock during wars and natural
disasters. (1) House price indices are generally smoothed and therefore underestimate the true variation
in house prices. (2) We only analyzed the behavior of house price changes (capital gains) and have not
considered the behavior of rents (dividends). For the two countries for which high-quality long-history
time series of rental indices are available, France for the period 1949-2010 and Australia for the period 1880-
2013, we find rent growth to be positively correlated with consumption growth (0.36 and 0.15 respectively).
(3) A substantial part of the housing stock tends to also be destroyed during wars. Therefore, the return
to a representative investment in housing would be lower than the fall in index prices because it would
incorporate the physical loss of part of the asset.


                                                      20
5.1    Constant Discount Rates and Leasehold Discounts
We start by considering the simple constant-discount-rate extension of the classic valua-
tion model of Gordon (1982) that we discussed in the introduction. We assume that rents
(cash flows) arising in each future period are discounted at a constant rate r, so that the
t-period discount function is e−rt . We also assume that rents are expected to grow at a
constant rate g, so that expected rents follow: Et [ Dt+s ] = Dt e gs .21 In this model, a claim
to the rents for T periods, the T-maturity leasehold, is valued at:
                              Z t+ T
                                                                    Dt
                      PtT =            e−r(s−t) Dt e g(s−t) ds =       (1 − e−(r− g)T ).                  (3)
                               t                                   r−g

Correspondingly, the infinite maturity claim, the freehold, is valued at: Pt = limT →∞ PtT =
 Dt
r − g . The price discount for a T-maturity leasehold with respect to the freehold is:


                                                  PtT
                                       DisctT ≡       − 1 = −e−(r− g)T .                                  (4)
                                                  Pt

For any given maturity, the price discount decreases (in absolute value) the higher the
discount rate r and the lower the growth rate of rents g. The first effect occurs because
a higher discount rate reduces the present value of rents occurring far into the future.
The second effect occurs because a higher growth rate of rents increases the actual rents
occurring in the future.
    At the estimated benchmark values of r = 6.5% and g = 0.7%, the constant-discount-
rate model implies a leasehold discount at 100 years of Disc100 = −e−0.058∗100 = −0.3%.
In other words, the 100-year leasehold would be valued only 0.3% less than the freehold.
The discount we find in the data is 10-15%, orders of magnitude higher. More generally,
the white bars in Figure 5 compare the logarithmic discounts obtained under our baseline
calibration for different leasehold maturities with those observed in the data for the U.K.
and Singapore (data is in black bars). The 700+ year leaseholds are valued at essentially a
0% discount to freeholds both in the data and in the model. However, the model cannot
match the discounts observed for leaseholds with maturities of 300 years or less. Intu-
itively, a model of exponential discounting assigns essentially zero present value to cash
flows occurring 100 or more years into the future when discounting at a net rate (r − g)
of 6% or more. This intuition is robust to even more conservative calibrations of r and g.
We evaluate a “high rent growth rate” scenario by setting g = 2%,22 and a “low expected
  21 Technically,g is the sum of the expected growth rate of rents and a Jensen inequality term. Given the
low variance of rent growth and in the interest of intuitive results, we ignore the latter term and refer to g
as the expected growth rate of rents.
  22 Rents are unlikely to grow at a faster rate than consumption in the long run, since this would imply



                                                       21
returns” scenario with r = 5.5%, significantly less than our lowest estimate. Figure 5
shows that the discounts increase only modestly even under these conservative scenarios
and that the model cannot match the data, especially at longer horizons.
    Long-run discounts could be matched by an (unrealistic) calibration with a constant
net discount rate of r − g = 1.9%. This calibration would not be consistent with the high
average return to housing and the low growth rate of rents observed in the data. The
simple constant-discount-rates model thus highlights the challenge for economic theory
posed by our results: to jointly rationalize both a high expected return to housing and
the low long-run discount rates necessary to match the observed price discounts for long-
dated leaseholds relative to freeholds.

5.2    General Formula for Leasehold Discounts
We now derive a more general formula that links the price differences between freeholds
and leaseholds to risk-free discount rates, risk premia, and the expected capital apprecia-
tion of the freehold. Intuitively, the price difference between a freehold and a T-maturity
leasehold is the present value at time t of a freehold starting at time T. We can compute
                                                                         E [P ]
this present value by applying a simple valuation formula: Pt − PtT = Rtt,t+TT , where Rt,t+T
is the total discount rate. We obtain percentage discounts by dividing both sides by Pt :

                                           Et [ PT ]/Pt       Et [ PT ]/Pt
                             Disc T = −                 =− f               ,                                 (5)
                                             Rt,t+T       Rt,t+T + RPt,t+T

           f
where Rt,t+T is the discount rate appropriate for a risk-free claim and RPt,t+T is the risk-
premium adjustment due to the riskiness of rental income. This shows that the leasehold
discounts estimated in Section 2 are related to two basic forces: the expected capital ap-
preciation of the freehold (the numerator), and the discount factor (the denominator).
The discounts are bigger the more households expect the price of the freehold to increase
over the length of the leasehold. This is because the leaseholder does not benefit from
these capital gains while the freeholder does. The discounts are also bigger the lower the
that over time a larger and larger fraction of consumption expenditures would be devoted to housing.
One might conjecture that “super-star” cities like Singapore or London might experience even higher rent
growth in the future (Gyourko, Mayer and Sinai, 2013). However, the past low growth rate of rents occurred
in a period when London and Singapore were already major capitals of the world. This makes it unlikely
that the observed discounts could be explained by the possibility of sufficiently high rent growth to induce
g to be very close to r for a long period of time (Pástor and Veronesi, n.d.). In addition, Section 2 showed that
leasehold discounts for the U.K. are very similar outside of London. Finally, even if rent growth increased
significantly, since prices and rents are cointegrated, in the long run the higher rent growth rates would
correspond to higher capital gains, leaving r − g unaffected.




                                                       22
discount factor, since this attaches higher present value to future rents.23
     To interpret Equation (5), we combine our estimates of the leasehold discounts Disc T
from Section 2 with estimates of long-run capital gains on housing (Et [ PT ]/Pt ) from Sec-
                                                               f
tion 4 and estimates of long-run risk-free discount rates (Rt,t+T ) from the real U.K. gilts
yield curve. The real yield curve is flat on average for maturities between 1 and 25 years
with an average real yield of 1.4% for the period 1998-2013. The Bank of England also
made available a 40 year real yield for the period 2006-2013; the average 40 year real yield
during this period was 0.4%.24 This latter estimate should be interpreted with caution not
only because of liquidity concerns but also because the period is dominated by the global
financial crisis and the European sovereign debt crisis.25 We conclude that the UK real
yield curve is approximately flat on average for maturities between 1 and 25 years with
a real yield of 1.4% and that there is some evidence for a mild downward slope at longer
maturities with an an average 40 year yield below 1%.26 Using a calibrated value of 1.4%
across the term structure of risk-free discount rates, we can decompose the total discount
                                                                               f
rate needed to match the leasehold discounts into the risk-free component Rt,t+T and the
risk premium RPt,t+T . For example, if rents grow at a rate of 0.7% per year and prices
in the long run grow at the same rate, the annualized risk premium for a 100-year claim
ln( RPt,t+T )
     T        will be just above 2%.
     Without further structural assumptions on the rent process we cannot divide the
risk premium, RPt,t+T , into components that capture the asset-specific quantity and the
economy-wide price of long-run risk. However, since rents and consumption are likely
to be cointegrated in the long run, claims to long-run rents should be as risky as claims
to long-run consumption. For example, Jeske, Krueger and Mitman (2011) show that the
share of consumption expenditures on housing in total consumption in the U.S has been
remarkably constant at 14.1% over the past 40 years.27 Long-run rents in cities such as
  23 Notice  that we can recover the discounts implied by the Gordon growth model in equation (4) by
                                                           f
substituting the model’s assumptions in equation (5): Rt,t+T + RPt,t+T = e−rT ; Et [ PT ]/Pt = e gT .
   24 The real yield curve is computed by the Bank of England and is available at http://www.

bankofengland.co.uk/statistics/Pages/yieldcurve/archive.aspx. We are grateful to Zhu-
oshi Liu at the Bank of England for making the long-maturity average yield available to us.
   25 Appendix Figure A.37 plots the average shape of the real U.K. gilts curve for the period 1998-2013, as

well as for two sub-periods: 1998-2007 and 2007-2013. The level of the yield curve shifted down during this
latter period and the yield curve became hump-shaped.
   26 Our estimates of long-run discount rates provide further support for the volatility bounds on the per-

manent component of pricing kernels derived by Alvarez and Jermann (2005) not only via the direct obser-
vation of low U.K. 40-year real yields, but mostly by observing the discount rates for assets very far into
the future, 100 or more years. Since housing is a risky asset, our estimated total discount rates provide an
upper bound for the risk-free discount rates that Alvarez and Jermann (2005) are directly interested in.
   27 This evidence pertains to total rents including growth in the housing stock and size/quality adjust-

ments. Since the housing stock grows and people over time live in bigger and better houses, the growth
rate of rents for a typical property is below the growth rate of consumption. However, the quality/quantity


                                                    23
London or Singapore also carry substantial systematic risk, since they load heavily on the
performance of the global economy; this is consistent with the high average returns to
housing estimated in Section 4. This suggests the presence of substantial long-run risk
for rents, and hence a relatively low price of risk is required to match our relatively low
estimated risk premium.


6     Implications of the Findings
6.1    Matching Returns and Leasehold Discounts in Reduced-Form
We find our estimates to be consistent with a downward sloping term structure of total
discount rates. Discount rates have to be sufficiently high in the short to medium run to
contribute to high average expected returns on housing, but also sufficiently low in the
long run to match the observed discounts applied to long-run cash flows. A convenient
analytical functional form to match the downward sloping term structure of total discount
rates is a mix of hyperbolic and exponential discounting. It is beyond the scope of this
paper to provide a full model explaining where such a discounting function might be
coming from; here it is simply taken as exogenous.
                                                              −ρt
    We assume that the discount function follows: R0,t = 1e+κt , where ρ > 0 is the subjec-
tive discount rate associated with exponential discounting, and κ > 0 is the hyperbolic
parameter. For κ = 0 we recover exponential discounting at e−ρt , while for ρ = 0 we
recover hyperbolic discounting at 1+1κt . This mixed form of discounting tends to behave
like hyperbolic discounting in the short run and like exponential discounting in the long
run. The parameters ρ and κ should not be interpreted as deep primitives, but simply as
convenient mathematical representations.28 Since we are not aiming to decompose the
total discount rate into risk-free and risky subcomponents, we resume our assumption
from Section 5.1 that rents grow at constant rate g.
                                                                  R T −(ρ−g)s
    In this set-up, the T-maturity leasehold is valued at: P0T = 0 e 1+κs D0 ds. Appendix
A.4.5 derives analytic expressions for the resulting value, as well as for the value of the
freehold. The top panels of Figure 6 shows the leasehold discounts implied by a calibra-
tion of this reduced-form hyperbolic-exponential model that at the same time matches
the observed discounts of leaseholds of different maturities and the average return to
housing. The calibration is obtained by setting κ to 12% and ρ to 1.42%.
    This calibration implies higher discount rates for short term than for long term cash
adjustment is less likely to affect the stochastic properties (covariance risk) of rents.
  28 That is, we are not assuming that agents have either hyperbolic or exponential discounting, but simply

that, whatever the underlying true model might be, the equilibrium discount rates can be summarized by
the assumed functional form.


                                                    24
flows. To illustrate this property, we analyze the evolution of the per-period equivalent
                                  ln(1+κT )
constant discount rate: r T ≡ ρ +     T     . For each maturity T, r T is the constant discount
rate that produces a total discount R0,T identical to the hyperbolic-exponential model.
The bottom left panel of Figure 6 plots r T , illustrating the term structure of discount rates
that general equilibrium models would have to generate to match the data. The very
short-run discount rate is ρ + κ = 13.42%, the term structure is downward sloping, and
the long-run per-period discount rate approaches ρ = 1.42%.

6.2    General Equilibrium Asset Pricing
A number of general equilibrium models of asset pricing tend to produce term structure
of discount rates for risky cash-flows that are either flat or upward sloping. We review
this theoretical feature by focusing on three leading general-equilibrium models of asset
pricing: the external habit formation model of Campbell and Cochrane (1999), the long-
run risk model of Bansal and Yaron (2004), and the rare disaster model of Barro (2006)
and Gabaix (2012). These models were not specifically set up to understand the term
structure of risky assets; our intent is only to review their predictions for our data to set
the base for future research.29 In the next section we briefly discuss a number of promising
modifications to the existing general equilibrium models that could help to accommodate
our new stylized facts.
    In the long-run risk model of Bansal and Yaron (2004) agents have a preference for
early resolution of uncertainty and are concerned about shocks that persistently affect
the growth rate of consumption. Therefore, agents dislike claims to very long-term cash
flows that are exposed to these long-run risks. The model can match the expected return
to housing if housing is sufficiently exposed to long-run risks. The model also implies
that leaseholds with longer maturity are more exposed to long-run risks and command
higher risk premia, thus contributing to generating an upward sloping term structure of
discount rates for claims to rents.
    In the external habit model of Campbell and Cochrane (1999) agents care about their
surplus consumption relative to a habit level, which itself depends on the history of ag-
gregate consumption. Negative shocks to consumption, with which rents are correlated,
increase risk premia because they bring current consumption closer to the habit level.
Long-term claims, due to their high duration, are particularly exposed to these discount-
rate shocks and are therefore particularly risky. The model implies an upward sloping
term structure of discount rates.
    In the rare disasters model of Barro (2006) and Gabaix (2012) consumption growth
  29 Appendix     A.4.3 discusses each of these models, their calibration, and their implications for our results
in more detail.

                                                        25
is subject to rare but large negative shocks, the disasters. Agents dislike assets that are
exposed to these disasters. While the presence of rare disasters increases risk premia,
it does so uniformly across maturities because claims to cash flows at all horizons are
equally exposed to the disaster risk. Therefore, discount rates will be the same at all
horizons generating a constant term structure.

6.2.1      Directions for Further Research

We now discuss recent avenues of theoretical research that could generate new classes of
general equilibrium asset pricing models that rationalize the findings of this paper.
     A first family of models focuses on mean-reversion in cash flows and stochastic dis-
count factors that mostly price near-term shocks. Lettau and Wachter (2007) propose a
reduced-form model in which the only priced shock is the unexpected one period inno-
vation in rents (dividends). In the model, unexpected rent growth today is negatively
correlated with future rent growth. Therefore, long-term claims to future rents are safer
than short-term claims because short-term claims do not benefit as much from the future
increase in rent growth that follows a negative shock. The top panels of Figure 6 show that
this model is able to match the magnitudes of the discounts at different horizons, since
long-term claims in the model are safer and therefore command lower discount rates; the
higher short-term discount rates, as high as 12% for one-year rents, allow us to increase
the expected returns of freeholds (up to 4% in this calibration).30 Notice that the model
generates a flat term structure of risk-free discount rates consistent with the one observed
for U.K. real gilts. In the spirit of partial reversion in the cash-flow process, Nakamura
et al. (2013) extend the rare disaster model to allow for (an empirically estimated) increase
in expected growth following a disaster.31 This pick-up in growth after a disaster makes
long-run consumption safer than short-run consumption thus generating a downward
sloping term-structure of discount rates for risky claims.
     A second promising avenue is to expand on the reduced-form hyperbolic-exponential
framework illustrated above. The models of Laibson (1997) and Luttmer and Mariotti
  30 See the original reference for model details. In calibrating the model, we aimed to 1) match the ob-
served leasehold discounts, while at the same time 2) retaining plausible estimates of short-term discount
rates, and 3) obtaining a high expected return for the freehold. In particular, to obtain plausible short-term
discount rates, we constrain the short-term (one-year) discount rates to not be larger than 12%, the dis-
count rates estimated for dividend strips by Binsbergen, Brandt and Koijen (2012). The calibration of the
model that gets closest to achieving all three objectives uses an average log rent growth g of 0.3% per year,
a volatility of rents of 0.04 per quarter and a persistence of rents shocks φz of 0.865 per quarter. This cal-
ibration implies an expected return of housing 4%, relatively close to the target of 6.5%. Note that Lettau
and Wachter (2007) exogenously set the level of the real yield to be 2%; this value is sufficiently close to the
1.4% observed in the U.K. data that we left it unchanged in our parametrization of their model.
  31 For a related empirical estimation of consumption dynamics in a large panel of countries see Nakamura,

Sergeyev and Steinsson (2012).


                                                      26
(2003) consider the possibility that agents attach higher subjective discounts to short-term
cash flows than they do to long-term ones. While this approach has had widespread suc-
cess in describing individual behavior in disaggregated environments, it has proven diffi-
cult at the macroeconomic level due to problems of time inconsistency as well as the coun-
tervailing equilibrium consequences that generate flat term structures of discount rates
even in the presence of agents with hyperbolic time preference (Barro, 1999; Luttmer and
Mariotti, 2003). Therefore, it remains an open question whether a micro-founded general-
equilibrium time-consistent model that generates a discount function similar to the one
postulated in Section 6.1 can be designed. In ongoing work Eisenbach and Schmalz (2013)
provide an intriguing avenue of research by making the risk-aversion coefficient, rather
than the rate of time-preference, dependent on the horizon.

6.3    Environmental Policy
           Any consideration of the costs of meeting climate objectives requires confronting
       one of the thorniest issues in all climate-change economics: how should we compare
       present and future costs and benefits? [...] A full appreciation of the economics of
       climate change cannot proceed without dealing with discounting. (Nordhaus, 2013)

The literature on the economics of climate change, starting with Nordhaus (1973), has
focused on the importance of discounting for evaluating the tradeoff between the imme-
diate costs of climate change mitigation policy and its uncertain benefits that occur very
far in the future.32 An empirical literature has tried to infer the appropriate discount rates
from the realized returns of traded assets such as private capital, equity, bonds, and real
estate. For example, the dynamic integrated climate-economy (DICE) model of Nordhaus
and Boyer (2000) and Nordhaus (2008) features a constant rate of discounting, calibrated
to 4% to reflect the authors’ preferred estimate of the average return to capital.33
     In this section we discuss the implications of our findings for evaluating very long-run
investments in climate change mitigation. The appropriate inference from our estimates
about the relevant discount rate depends both on the horizon of the investment and on the
relative risk properties of housing compared to investments in climate change mitigation.
     The horizon of the investment matters because estimates of expected returns of assets
capture only their average return, which might not reveal the appropriate discount rates
  32 See  also: Arrow et al. (1996); Weitzman (1998); Groom et al. (2005); Gollier (2006); Nordhaus (2007);
Weitzman (2007); Pindyck (2013).
   33 Stern (2007) argues for 0% discount rate on ethical grounds that require the present generation to not

discount the welfare of future generations. Nordhaus (2007) points out that a 0% discount rate cannot be
reconciled with economic theory because it would imply an enormous burden on the current generation by
attaching infinite values to many investments that are routinely available in private markets at finite prices.


                                                      27
for long-run claims. For example, our estimates in Table 9 suggest that the average returns
to residential housing are above 8%, and even our conservative estimate assumed a rate
of return of 6.5%. However, the relevant estimates to evaluate climate policy are the
discount rates for cash-flows very far into the future. We found such discount rates to be
much lower than those implied by average returns and of the order of 2.6% for 100-year
claims on housing.34
     As Barro (2013) points out, the relative risk properties of climate change investments
are important, in particular when the price of long-run risk is high. In such an environ-
ment, investments in climate change abatement are desirable if they hedge the risk of
bad climatic outcomes, in which case they carry a negative risk premium RPt,t+T < 0,
but less attractive if such investments are risky. There is an open debate over the risk
characteristics of investments in climate change abatement.
     Some researchers put forward that the costs of climate change depend positively on
economic growth because CO2 emissions are a by-product of production. Therefore, car-
bon emissions will be high in future states of the world when consumption is also high,
and low otherwise. This makes climate change a hedge and investments that aim to re-
duce climate change are risky. Along these lines Gollier (2012) simulates the DICE model
of Nordhaus (2008) and Nordhaus and Boyer (2000) and finds a β > 1 for investments in
climate change abatement technology.35
     Other researchers point out that there could be disastrous climatic outcomes that lead
to low consumption via feedback loops. In this view, climate change is similar to a rare
disaster and, consequently, investments that aim to reduce climate change are very safe.
Weitzman (2012) builds a model where climate change abatement investments have a tail-
hedge property because they pay a positive amount in states of the world when consump-
tion is low. In this environment the associated term structure of risk premia is downward
sloping because riskiness of the investment declines with the horizon.
     Our empirical results provide a broader message of a downward sloping term struc-
ture of discount rates not just for long-run hedges but also for long-run risky assets. Since
our estimates of long-run discount rates suggest that the long-run price of risk is low,
the desirability of investments in climate change abatement is less sensitive to their risk
properties. This is reassuring given the reasonable disagreement over the risk properties
  34 Our  empirical estimates of discount rates are consistent with the decreasing term structure of discount
rates suggested by Weitzman (1998, 2001). Weitzman (2001) generates a downward slope in an environment
where a number of experts, who are assumed to have a constant discount rate, are polled regarding the
appropriate level of the discount rate for environmental policy.
   35 The model, in its benchmark parametrization, produces a downward sloping term structure of risk-

free discount rates, but an upward sloping term structure of risk premia. The second effect dominates for
investments that are sufficiently risky, thus generating an upward sloping term structure of total discount
rates for climate change investments in Gollier’s parametrization.


                                                     28
of climate change discussed above. Our results suggest that agents have a high willing-
ness to invest in climate change abatement investments that reduce for sure the future cost
of climate change because we find low long-run yields for risk-free cash flows. On the
other had, compared to environments with high long-run prices of risk, our results also
suggest that investments that only reduce the risk of adverse future climatic events are
less attractive.


7    Conclusions
We provide novel estimates of very long-run discount rates by exploring unique features
of the U.K. and Singapore housing markets where properties trade as either freeholds
(infinite maturity ownership) or leaseholds of various maturities. We find low long-run
discount rates. Given estimates of the riskiness of housing, our results imply that both
long-run risk-free rates and risk premia are low. Such implications pose an interesting
challenge for future research in asset pricing as well as provide guidance to the debate
on climate change policy. Finally, the institutional context we present in this paper lends
itself to a direct test for the existence of infinitely-lived rational bubbles, which we pursue
in a related paper (Giglio, Maggiori and Stroebel, 2014).


References
Ai, Hengjie, Mariano M. Croce, Anthony M. Diercks, and Kai Li. 2012. “Production-
  Based Term Structure of Equity Returns.” Social Science Research Network Working Paper
  Series.
Alvarez, Fernando, and Urban J. Jermann. 2005. “Using Asset Prices to Measure the
  Persistence of the Marginal Utility of Wealth.” Econometrica, 73(6): 1977–2016.
Arrow, K. J., W. Cline, K. G. Maler, M. Munasinghe, R. Squitieri, and J. Stiglitz. 1996.
  Intertemporal Equity, Discounting, and Economic Efficiency, in "Climate Change 1995: Eco-
  nomic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change". Cambridge University Press.
Badarinza, Cristian, and Tarun Ramadorai. 2014. “Long-Run Discounting: Evidence
  from the UK Leasehold Valuation Tribunal.” Social Science Research Network Working
  Paper Series.
Bansal, Ravi, and Amir Yaron. 2004. “Risks for the long run: A potential resolution of
  asset pricing puzzles.” Journal of Finance, 59(4): 1481–1509.
Barro, Robert J. 1999. “Ramsey meets Laibson in the neoclassical growth model.” Quar-
  terly Journal of Economics, 114(4): 1125–1152.
Barro, Robert J. 2006. “Rare disasters and asset markets in the twentieth century.” Quar-
  terly Journal of Economics, 121(3): 823–866.
Barro, Robert J. 2013. “Environmental Protection, Rare Disasters, and Discount Rates.”
  National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 19258.
Barro, Robert J., and Jose F. Ursua. 2008. “Macroeconomic Crises since 1870.” Brookings
  Papers on Economic Activity, 39(1 (Spring): 255–350.
Belo, Frederico, Pierre Collin-Dufresne, and Robert S. Goldstein. 2012. “Endogenous
  Dividend Dynamics and the Term Structure of Dividend Strips.” National Bureau of
  Economic Research Working Paper 18450.
Binsbergen, Jules van, Michael Brandt, and Ralph Koijen. 2012. “On the Timing and
  Pricing of Dividends.” American Economic Review, 102(4): 1596–1618.
Binsbergen, Jules van, Wouter Hueskes, Ralph Koijen, and Evert Vrugt. 2013. “Equity
  yields.” Journal of Financial Economics, 110(3): 503 – 519.
Boguth, Oliver, Murray Carlson, Adlai J. Fisher, and Mikhail Simutin. 2011. “Leverage
  and the Limits of Arbitrage Pricing: Implications for Dividend Strips and the Term
  Structure of Equity Risk Premia.” Social Science Research Network Working Paper Series.
Bordo, Michael, Barry Eichengreen, Daniela Klingebiel, and Maria Soledad Martinez-
  Peria. 2001. “Is the crisis problem growing more severe?” Economic policy, 16(32): 51–82.
Bostic, Raphael W., Stanley D. Longhofer, and Christian L Redfearn. 2007. “Land lever-
  age: decomposing home price dynamics.” Real Estate Economics, 35(2): 183–208.
Burn, Edward Hector, John Cartwright, and Geoffrey C. Cheshire. 2011. Cheshire and
  Burn’s Modern Law of Real Property. Oxford University Press.
Campbell, John Y., and John H. Cochrane. 1999. “By Force of Habit: A Consumption
  Based Explanation of Aggregate Stock Market Behavior.” Journal of Political Economy,
  107(2): 205–251.
Cochrane, John H. 2011. “Presidential address: Discount rates.” Journal of Finance,
  66(4): 1047–1108.
Council of Mortgage Lenders. 2013. “What minimum unexpired lease term does the
  lender accept?” CLM Lender’s Handbook.
Davis, Morris A., and Jonathan Heathcote. 2007. “The price and quantity of residential
  land in the United States.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 54(8): 2595–2620.
Davis, Morris A., and Michael G. Palumbo. 2008. “The price of residential land in large
  US cities.” Journal of Urban Economics, 63(1): 352–384.
Eisenbach, Thomas M., and Martin C. Schmalz. 2013. “Up close it feels dangerous: ’anx-
  iety’ in the face of risk.” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports 610.
Favilukis, Jack, Sydney C. Ludvigson, and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh. 2010. “The
  Macroeconomic Effects of Housing Wealth, Housing Finance, and Limited Risk-Sharing
  in General Equilibrium.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 15988.
Flavin, Marjorie, and Takashi Yamashita. 2002. “Owner-occupied housing and the com-
  position of the household portfolio.” American Economic Review, 92(1): 345–362.
Gabaix, Xavier. 2012. “Variable rare disasters: An exactly solved framework for ten puz-
  zles in macro-finance.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(2): 645–700.
Giglio, Stefano, Matteo Maggiori, and Johannes Stroebel. 2014. “No-Bubble Condition:
  Model-Free Tests in Housing Markets.” Unpublished Manuscript New York University, and
  University of Chicago.
Gollier, Christian. 2006. “An Evaluation of Stern’s Report on the Economics of Climate
  Change.” Institut d’Économie Industrielle (IDEI), Toulouse IDEI Working Papers 464.
Gollier, Christian. 2012. “Evaluation of long-dated investments under uncertain growth
  trend, volatility and catastrophes.” Toulouse School of Economics (TSE) TSE Working
  Papers 12-361.
Gordon, Myron J. 1982. The investment, financing, and valuation of the corporation. Green-
  wood Press.
Groom, Ben, Cameron Hepburn, Phoebe Koundouri, and David Pearce. 2005. “Declin-
  ing discount rates: the long and the short of it.” Environmental and Resource Economics,
  32(4): 445–493.
Gyourko, Joseph, and Donald B. Keim. 1992. “What does the stock market tell us about
  real estate returns?” Real Estate Economics, 20(3): 457–485.
Gyourko, Joseph, Christopher Mayer, and Todd Sinai. 2013. “Superstar Cities.” Ameri-
  can Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 5(4): 167–99.
Jeske, Karsten, Dirk Krueger, and Kurt Mitman. 2011. “Housing and the Macroecon-
  omy: The Role of Bailout Guarantees for Government Sponsored Enterprises.” Na-
  tional Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 17537.
Laibson, David. 1997. “Golden eggs and hyperbolic discounting.” Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 112(2): 443–478.
Leigh, Wilhelmina A. 1980. “Economic depreciation of the residential housing stock of
  the United States, 1950-1970.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 62(2): 200–206.
Lettau, Martin, and Jessica A. Wachter. 2007. “Why Is Long-Horizon Equity Less Risky?
  A Duration-Based Explanation of the Value Premium.” Journal of Finance, 62(1): 55–92.
Lustig, Hanno N., and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh. 2005. “Housing collateral, consumption
  insurance, and risk premia: An empirical perspective.” Journal of Finance, 60(3): 1167–
  1219.
Luttmer, Erzo G., and Thomas Mariotti. 2003. “Subjective discounting in an exchange
  economy.” Journal of Political Economy, 111(5): 959–989.
Nakamura, Emi, Dmitriy Sergeyev, and Jon Steinsson. 2012. “Growth-rate and uncer-
  tainty shocks in consumption: Cross-country evidence.” National Bureau of Economic
  Research.
Nakamura, Emi, Jón Steinsson, Robert Barro, and José Ursúa. 2013. “Crises and Re-
  coveries in an Empirical Model of Consumption Disasters.” American Economic Journal:
  Macroeconomics, 5(3): 35–74.
Nichols, Joseph B., Stephen D. Oliner, and Michael R. Mulhall. 2013. “Swings in com-
  mercial and residential land prices in the United States.” Journal of Urban Economics,
  73(1): 57–76.
Nordhaus, William D. 1973. “The Allocation of Energy Resources.” Brookings Papers on
  Economic Activity, 4(3): 529–576.
Nordhaus, William D. 2007. “A Review of the Stern Review on the Economics of Climate
  Change.” Journal of Economic Literature, 45: 686–702.
Nordhaus, William D. 2008. A question of balance: Weighing the options on global warming
  policies. Yale University Press.
Nordhaus, William D. 2013. The Climate Casino: Risk, Uncertainty, and Economics for a
  Warming World. Yale University Press.
Nordhaus, William D., and Joseph Boyer. 2000. Warming the world: economic models of
  global warming. MIT press.
Pástor, L’uboš, and Pietro Veronesi. n.d..
Petersen, Mitchell A. 2009. “Estimating standard errors in finance panel data sets: Com-
  paring approaches.” Review of Financial Studies, 22(1): 435.
Piazzesi, Monika, Martin Schneider, and Johannes Stroebel. 2013. “Segmented Housing
  Search.” Working Paper, Stanford University.
Piazzesi, Monika, Martin Schneider, and Selale Tuzel. 2007. “Housing, consumption
  and asset pricing.” Journal of Financial Economics, 83(3): 531–569.
Pindyck, Robert. 2013. “Climate Change Policy: What Do the Models Tell Us?” Journal of
  Economic Literature, 51(3): 860–872.
Reinhart, Carmen M., and Kenneth S. Rogoff. 2008. “Is the 2007 US Sub-Prime Finan-
  cial Crisis so Different? An International Historical Comparison.” American Economic
  Review: Papers and Proceedings, 98(2): 339–344.
Reinhart, Carmen M., and Kenneth S. Rogoff. 2009. This time is different: Eight centuries
  of financial folly. Princeton University Press.
Rosen, Sherwin. 1974. “Hedonic Prices and Implicit Markets: Product Differentiation in
  Pure Competition.” Journal of Political Economy, 82(1): 34–55.
Schularick, Moritz, and Alan M. Taylor. 2012. “Credit Booms Gone Bust: Monetary
  Policy, Leverage Cycles, and Financial Crises, 18702008.” American Economic Review,
  102(2): 1029–1061.
Shiller, Robert J. 2006. “Long-Term Perspectives on the Current Boom in Home Prices.”
  The Economists’ Voice, 3(4): 1–11.
Stern, Nicholas. 2007. “The economics of climate change: the Stern report.” Cambridge,
  UK.
Weitzman, Martin L. 1998. “Why the Far-Distant Future Should Be Discounted at Its
  Lowest Possible Rate.” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 36(3): 201 –
  208.
Weitzman, Martin L. 2001. “Gamma Discounting.” American Economic Review, 91(1): 260–
  271.
Weitzman, Martin L. 2007. “A Review of the Stern Review on the Economics of Climate
  Change.” Journal of Economic Literature, 45(3): 703–724.
Weitzman, Martin L. 2012. “Rare Disasters, Tail-Hedged Investments, and Risk-Adjusted
  Discount Rates.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 18496.
Weitzman, Martin L. 2013. “Tail-Hedge Discounting and the Social Cost of Carbon.” Jour-
  nal of Economic Literature, 51(3): 873–882.
Westminster City Council. 2013. “Homing in on the Issues: Perspectives on the housing
  crisis.”
                                                                  Figure 1:   U.K. Flats - Sample and Price Discounts




                                                                                                           150k
              300k
   Number of Observations




                                                                                                Number of Observations
                                                                                                              100k
    100k         200k




                                                                                                 50k
                            50   100      150      200      250                          300                             700     800             900      1000
                                   Years Remaining on Lease                                                                    Years Remaining on Lease


                                                                        (a) Histogram of Remaining Lease Length

                                                                            Leasehold Discounts - Log(Price)
                                                  0
                                   Average Discount to Freehold
                                   -.15       -.1 -.2    -.05




                                                                    80-99      100-124      125-149        150-300                     > 700
                                                                                     Lease Length Remaining


                                                                      (b) Price Discount by Remaining Lease Length

Note: The top panel shows the distribution of years remaining on the lease at the point of sale for leasehold
transactions for flats in our U.K. transaction sample. The bottom panel plots β j coefficients from regression
(1). The dependent variable is log price, for flats sold in England and Wales between 2004 and 2013. The price
discounts of each of the groups of remaining lease length are relative to freehold properties, and correspond
to column (1) in Table 2. We include 3-digit postcode by transaction month fixed effects. We also control
for the size, number of bedrooms, bathrooms, property age, property condition, whether there is parking,
and the type of heating. The bars indicate the 95% confidence interval of the estimate using standard errors
double clustered by 3-digit postcode and by year.
                                                                           Figure 2:      Singapore Sample and Price Discounts
                 50,000




                                                                                                                           5,000
   10,000 20,000 30,000 40,000




                                                                                                                                     4,000
        Number of Observations




                                                                                                                Number of Observations
                                                                                                           1,000   2,000   3,000
                                 50   60        70       80       90                             100                                         800    850       900          950   1000
                                           Years Remaining on Lease                                                                                  Years Remaining on Lease


                                                                                    (a) Histogram of Remaining Lease Length
                                                           .2
                                            Average Discount to Freehold
                                             -.4        -.2-.6       0




                                                                            50-69        70-84     85-89       90-94                               95-100     >800
                                                                                                 Lease Length Remaining


                                                                               (b) Price Discount by Remaining Lease Length

Note: The top panel of this figure shows the distribution of years remaining on the lease at the point of sale
for the leasehold transactions in our Singapore transaction sample. The bottom panel shows β j coefficients
from regression (2). Price discounts are relative to freeholds. The dependent variable is the log price paid for
properties sold by private parties in Singapore between 1995 and 2013, corresponding to Column (2) in Table
4. We include fixed effects for the 5-digit postcode by property type (apartment, condominium, detached
house, executive condominium, semi-detached house and terrace house) by title type (strata or land) by
transaction month. We control for the age of the property (by including a dummy variable for every possible
age in years), the size of the property (by including a dummy for each of 40 equally sized groups capturing
property size) and the total number of units in the property. The bars indicate the 95% confidence interval
of the estimate using standard errors double clustered by 5-digit postcode and by year.
                                                                Figure 3:    Rental Data Analysis




                                    0
                 Average Discount to Freehold
                 -.15       -.1       -.05
                                    -.2




                                                        80-99      100-124      125-149      150-300         700+

                                                                 Full Data          Data with Rental Observation


                (a) Price Discount by Remaining Lease Length, Properties with Rental Data

                                                                Leasehold Discounts - Log(Rent)
                                    0.10        0.05
                     Average Discount to Freehold
                 -0.15 -0.10 -0.05  -0.20 0




                                                       80-99      100-124      125-149        150-300         > 700
                                                                        Lease Length Remaining

                                                          (b) Rental Discount by Remaining Lease Length

Note: The top panel of this figure shows β j coefficients from regression (1) as in Column (1) of Table 2,
allowing for a different coefficient for properties for which we observe rental data (second bar). The bottom
panel shows β j coefficients from regression (1), where the dependent variable are monthly rents. The sample
is of flats listed in London in 2011 and 2012. The figure uses the same controls as in our baseline regression,
Column (1) in Table 2. The bars indicate the 95% confidence interval of the estimate using standard errors
double clustered by 3-digit postcode and by year.
                      1.02                                                            Figure 4:         House Price Riskiness




                                                                                                                           1.05 1.1 1.15 1.2 1.25 1.3
                                                                                                                     Real House Prices and Consumption
                                       1
   Real House Prices relative to Crisis
        .92   .94     .96     .98




                                                                                                                      1
 .9




                                                                                                                                      .95
                                                                                                                                                         -3     -2          -1            0          1        2            3
                      .88




                                                                                                                                                                       Years Relative to Consumption Trough
                                           -3       -2       -1          0              1       2         3
                                                               Years Relative to Crisis                                                                               Real House Prices            Real Consumption



                                                         (a) Financial Crises                                                                                   (b) Consumption Disasters

Note: The left panel shows average real house price movements relative to financial crises in Schularick and
Taylor (2012), Bordo et al. (2001) and Reinhart and Rogoff (2009). The right panel shows average real house
price movements and average real consumption relative to the trough of consumption disasters identified by
Barro and Ursua (2008). House prices and consumption volumes during the reference year are normalized
to 1. See Appendix A.3.3 for a description of the countries included and the data series and crises considered
here.




                                           Figure 5:        Constant Discount Gordon Growth Model: Model-Implied Discounts vs. Data

                                                0                                                                                                        0

                                    −0.02                                                                                     −0.05
                                    −0.04
                                                                                                                                        −0.1
                                    −0.06
                                                                                                                              −0.15
                                    −0.08
         Discount




                                                                                                               Discount




                                                                                                                                        −0.2
                                           −0.1

                                    −0.12                                                                                     −0.25

                                    −0.14                                                                                               −0.3
                                                                              Baseline                                                                                                    Baseline
                                    −0.16                                     High Rent Growth                                                                                            High Rent Growth
                                                                                                                              −0.35
                                                                              Low Expected Returns                                                                                        Low Expected Returns
                                    −0.18                                     High Rent Growth + Low Returns                                                                              High Rent Growth + Low Returns
                                                                              Data                                                      −0.4                                              Data
                                           −0.2
                                                    80−99    100−124 125−149 150−300            700+                                                          50−70    71−85    86−90    91−95 96−100         800+
                                                                  Leasehold maturity                                                                                           Leasehold maturity

                                                                  (a) U.K.                                                                                                (b) Singapore

Note: The figure shows the discounts for leaseholds observed in the U.K. (left panel) and Singapore (right
panel) together with discounts predicted by a number of parameterizations of the constant discount model.
The baseline calibration has r = 6.5% and g = 0.7%. A “low expected return” calibration takes r = 5.5%,
while a “high rent growth” calibration takes g = 2%.
                        Figure 6:    Hyperbolic-Exponential Discounting and Lettau and Wachter (2007)

                    0                                                                             0

               −0.02                                                                         −0.05
               −0.04
                                                                                              −0.1
               −0.06
                                                                                             −0.15
               −0.08
    Discount




                                                                                  Discount
                                                                                              −0.2
                −0.1

               −0.12                                                                         −0.25

               −0.14                                                                          −0.3

               −0.16
                                                                                             −0.35
                                                               Lettau−Wachter                                                                     Lettau−Wachter
               −0.18                                           HE model                                                                           HE model
                                                               Data                           −0.4                                                Data
                −0.2
                           80−99   100−124 125−149 150−300          700+                              80−99   100−124 125−149 150−300      700+      80−99
                                        Leasehold maturity                                                            Leasehold maturity

                                      (a) U.K.                                                                   (b) Singapore

     0.14                                                                         0.12


     0.12
                                                                                   0.1

          0.1
                                                                                  0.08

     0.08
                                                                                                                               Per−period total discount rate
                                               Per−period total discount rate     0.06                                         Rf yield
                                                                                                                               Risk premium
     0.06

                                                                                  0.04
     0.04

                                                                                  0.02
     0.02


               0                                                                             0
                0          200       400         600          800          1000               0       200          400          600           800            1000

                           (c) Hyperbolic-Exponential                                             (d) Lettau and Wachter (2007) model

Note: The top row of the figure shows the discounts for leaseholds observed in U.K. (top left) and Singapore
(top right) together with the discounts implied by a parameterizations of hyperbolic-exponential discounting
reduced-form models and the Lettau and Wachter (2007) model discussed in Section 6.1. The bottom row
shows the total per-period discount rates for the hyperbolic-exponential discounting reduced-form model,
and the total per period discount rates, risk-free yields, and risk premia for the Lettau and Wachter (2007)
model.
                                       Table 1: U.K.: Sample Overview

                                                        S HARE OF T RANSACTIONS BY C ONTRACT
 Flats            N            80-99            100-124            125-149       150-300    700+         Freehold
 2004          183,599          0.19             0.37               0.08          0.05       0.28           0.03
 2005          168,435          0.16             0.39               0.09          0.07       0.27           0.03
 2006          212,734          0.14             0.39               0.10          0.08       0.27           0.03
 2007          219,402          0.13             0.40               0.11          0.08       0.25           0.03
 2008          116,048          0.12             0.41               0.11          0.10       0.24           0.03
 2009          93,861           0.11             0.42               0.10          0.08       0.26           0.03
 2010          99,663           0.13             0.41               0.09          0.08       0.27           0.02
 2011          97,733           0.13             0.40               0.09          0.08       0.27           0.02
 2012          98,464           0.14             0.39               0.09          0.08       0.29           0.02
 2013          83,444           0.15             0.37               0.09          0.09       0.28           0.02
 Total        1,373,383         0.14             0.39               0.09          0.08       0.27           0.03




                                                           S HARE OF T RANSACTIONS BY C ONTRACT
 Houses                  N             80-99              100-124            125-200       700+          Freehold
 2004               955,112             0.005              0.005              0.002        0.05             0.94
 2005               803,983             0.005              0.005              0.002        0.05             0.94
 2006              1,000,714            0.004              0.005              0.002        0.04             0.94
 2007               942,575             0.004              0.006              0.002        0.05             0.94
 2008               470,987             0.005              0.007              0.003        0.04             0.94
 2009               480,827             0.004              0.005              0.002        0.04             0.95
 2010               510,342             0.003              0.005              0.002        0.04             0.95
 2011               513,179             0.004              0.004              0.002        0.04             0.95
 2012               511,817             0.002              0.003              0.002        0.04             0.96
 2013               438,598             0.002              0.003              0.002        0.03             0.96
 Total             6,628,134            0.004              0.005              0.002        0.04             0.95

Note: This table shows the data sample for the U.K. analysis. The top panel is for flats, the bottom panel is for
houses. For each year we show the number of transactions (N), as well as the share of transactions in each bucket by
remaining lease length at the point of transaction.
                          Table 2: U.K.: Impact of Lease Type on Prices - Flats

                         (1)           (2)            (3)           (4)             (5)            (6)           (7)

Lease Length Remaining

   80-99 Years        -0.176∗∗∗     -0.178∗∗∗      -0.179∗∗∗     -0.178∗∗∗      -0.170∗∗∗       -0.157∗∗∗     -0.175∗∗∗
                       (0.008)       (0.008)        (0.008)       (0.008)        (0.007)         (0.008)       (0.013)

   100-124 Years      -0.110∗∗∗     -0.109∗∗∗      -0.106∗∗∗     -0.110∗∗∗      -0.105∗∗∗       -0.111∗∗∗     -0.073∗∗∗
                       (0.008)       (0.007)        (0.007)       (0.007)        (0.007)         (0.008)       (0.008)

   125-149 Years      -0.089∗∗∗     -0.088∗∗∗      -0.086∗∗∗     -0.090∗∗∗      -0.083∗∗∗       -0.086∗∗∗     -0.060∗∗∗
                       (0.008)       (0.008)        (0.008)       (0.008)        (0.008)         (0.009)       (0.009)

   150-300 Years      -0.033∗∗∗     -0.035∗∗∗      -0.034∗∗∗     -0.034∗∗∗      -0.028∗∗∗       -0.027∗∗∗      -0.012
                       (0.011)       (0.010)        (0.010)       (0.0011)       (0.011)         (0.010)       (0.012)

   > 700 Years          -0.003        -0.005         -0.005        -0.005          -0.005         -0.012        -0.004
                       (0.007)       (0.006)        (0.006)       (0.007)         (0.007)        (0.008)       (0.007)

Fixed Effects         PC × M         PC × Q        PC × Y         PC × M         PC × M         PC × M        PC × M

Controls                  X             X             X          X, × year          X              X              X
Restrictions              ·              ·             ·              ·         Winsorize      Nonmiss.       Exclude
                                                                                  Price        Hedonics       London

R-squared               0.729         0.721         0.712          0.731          0.738          0.776          0.616
N                     1,373,383     1,373,383     1,373,383      1,373,383      1,373,383       953,660       1,028,031

Note: This table shows results from regression (1) estimated for flats. The dependent variable is log price, for flats
sold in England and Wales between 2004 and 2013. To convert into percentage discounts for leasehold properties,
compute e β j − 1. We include 3-digit postcode by transaction time fixed effects. In columns (2) and (3) the transaction
time is the transaction quarter and year, respectively, in the other columns the transaction month. In column (4) we
interact the controls with the transaction year. In column (5) we winsorize the price at the 1st and 99th percentile,
in column (6) we only include properties for which characteristics are not missing, and in column (7) we exclude
transactions in London. We control for the size, number of bedrooms, bathrooms, property age, property condition,
whether there is parking, and the type of heating. Standard errors are double clustered by 3-digit postcode and by
year. Significance levels: ∗ (p<0.10), ∗∗ (p<0.05), ∗∗∗ (p<0.01).
                                     Table 3: Singapore: Data Sample

                                                  S HARE OF T RANSACTIONS BY C ONTRACT
                N           50-70       71-85        86-90        91-95       96-100        800+        Freehold
 1995         12,412        0.001       0.034        0.029        0.004        0.270        0.087         0.575
 1996         18,434        0.001       0.024        0.020        0.025        0.298        0.140         0.492
 1997         12,534        0.001       0.045        0.003        0.023        0.453        0.073         0.402
 1998         13,095        0.001       0.029        0.002        0.029        0.576        0.052         0.311
 1999         23,500        0.002       0.044        0.002        0.064        0.304        0.082         0.503
 2000         12,615        0.007       0.049        0.004        0.092        0.273        0.084         0.490
 2001         11,577        0.005       0.036        0.015        0.107        0.406        0.040         0.392
 2002         17,618        0.003       0.033        0.013        0.133        0.337        0.060         0.421
 2003          9,807        0.006       0.055        0.035        0.140        0.262        0.061         0.441
 2004         11,231        0.006       0.049        0.050        0.123        0.192        0.058         0.522
 2005         16,771        0.014       0.039        0.057        0.111        0.134        0.070         0.575
 2006         24,261        0.008       0.038        0.074        0.101        0.132        0.061         0.587
 2007         39,203        0.013       0.040        0.126        0.083        0.138        0.079         0.521
 2008         13,919        0.015       0.056        0.159        0.084        0.138        0.073         0.475
 2009         32,967        0.011       0.056        0.106        0.064        0.194        0.078         0.490
 2010         34,481        0.011       0.083        0.097        0.051        0.225        0.066         0.466
 2011         25,236        0.009       0.083        0.070        0.040        0.370        0.049         0.378
 2012         36,652        0.016       0.085        0.039        0.040        0.444        0.047         0.329
 2013         15,215        0.014       0.067        0.026        0.049        0.535        0.042         0.267
 Total       381,528        0.009       0.053        0.059        0.068        0.285        0.069         0.457

Note: This table shows the data sample for the Singapore analysis. For each year we show the number of transactions
(N), as well as the share of transactions in each bucket by remaining lease length at the point of transaction.
                            Table 4: Singapore: Impact of Lease Type on Prices

                          (1)               (2)              (3)               (4)              (5)               (6)
Lease Length Remaining

   50-70 Years         -0.409∗∗∗        -0.426∗∗∗         -0.464∗∗∗        -0.487∗∗∗         -0.424∗∗∗           NA
                        (0.067)          (0.078)           (0.030)          (0.089)           (0.074)

   71-85 Years         -0.275∗∗∗        -0.264∗∗∗         -0.469∗∗∗        -0.273∗∗∗         -0.262∗∗∗         -0.328∗∗
                        (0.058)          (0.064)           (0.050)          (0.077)           (0.060)           (0.134)

   86-90 Years         -0.215∗∗∗        -0.212∗∗∗         -0.111∗∗         -0.216∗∗∗         -0.210∗∗∗           NA
                        (0.038)          (0.042)           (0.048)          (0.048)           (0.039)

   91-95 Years         -0.148∗∗∗        -0.142∗∗∗         -0.169∗∗∗        -0.146∗∗∗         -0.142∗∗∗          -0.179
                        (0.038)          (0.043)           (0.049)          (0.048)           (0.040)           (0.529)

   96-100 Years        -0.125∗∗∗        -0.127∗∗∗         -0.127∗∗         -0.132∗∗∗         -0.129∗∗∗          -0.213
                        (0.040)          (0.046)           (0.059)          (0.049)           (0.043)           (0.631)

   > 800 Years          -0.010           -0.007             0.019            -0.002            -0.008            0.006
                        (0.032)          (0.036)           (0.052)           (0.041)          (0.035)           (0.126)

Fixed Effects          PC × Q           PC × M            PC × M          PC × M ×           PC × M            PC × M
                     × Prop Type      × Prop Type       × Prop Type      × Prop Type       × Prop Type       × Prop Type
                     × Title Type     ×Title Type       × Title Type     × Title Type

Controls                  X                 X                X                 X                 X                X

Restrictions               ·                 ·           New Only           Private         Strata Only       No Strata
                                                                            Buyer
R-squared               0.977             0.979             0.981            0.978             0.977            0.985
N                      378,768           378,768           223,810          220,044           333,684           45,084

Note: This table shows results from regression (2). To convert into percentage discounts for leasehold properties
relative to freeholds, construct e β j − 1. The dependent variable is the price paid for properties sold by private parties
in Singapore between 1995 and 2013. We include fixed effect at the 5-digit postcode by property type (apartment,
condominium, detached house, executive condominium, semi-detached house and terrace house) by title type (Strata
or Land) by transaction date. In column (1), the transaction date interaction is for the transaction quarter, in columns
(2) - (6) the transaction month. We control for the age of the property (by including a dummy variable for every
possible age in years), the size of the property (by including a dummy for each of 40 equally sized groups capturing
property size), and the total number of units in the property. In column (3) we only focus on properties that were
built within the last 3 years of our transaction date; in column (4) we only focus on properties that were bought by a
private individual (and not the HDB). In columns (5) and (6) we conduct the analysis for Strata and non-Strata titles
separately. Standard errors are double clustered by 5-digit postcode and by year. Significance levels: ∗ (p<0.10), ∗∗
(p<0.05), ∗∗∗ (p<0.01).
                               Table 5: Rents and Time on Market analysis

Dependent variable:                     L OG (R ENT )                                 L OG (T IME ON M ARKET )
                             (1)           (2)              (3)                 (4)               (5)          (6)

Lease Length Remaining

   80-99 Years             -0.021         0.001            0.008             0.059∗∗∗         0.060∗∗∗      0.047∗∗∗
                           (0.028)       (0.023)          (0.018)             (0.014)          (0.005)       (0.016)
   100-124 Years           -0.024         -0.004           0.003             0.048∗∗∗         0.048∗∗∗       0.022∗
                           (0.028)       (0.024)          (0.019)             (0.011)          (0.005)       (0.013)
   125-149 Years           -0.005         0.007            0.014             0.063∗∗∗         0.060∗∗∗      0.059∗∗∗
                           (0.030)       (0.026)          (0.021)             (0.013)          (0.009)       (0.020)
   150-300 Years           -0.020         -0.001           0.009             0.080∗∗∗         0.076∗∗∗      0.071∗∗∗
                           (0.033)       (0.030)          (0.024)             (0.011)          (0.009)       (0.021)
   > 700 Years              0.037        0.051∗∗          0.057∗∗∗           0.028∗∗∗         0.028∗∗∗      0.017∗∗∗
                           (0.029)       (0.025)           (0.018)            (0.006)          (0.003)       (0.006)

Fixed Effects            PC and M       PC × M            PC × M            PC × M ×        PC × M ×       PC × M ×
                                                                            Prop Type       Prop Type      Prop Type

Controls                     X              X                X                  X            X, × year         X
Restrictions             Nonmiss.       Nonmiss.         Nonmiss.                ·               ·          Nonmiss.
                         Hedonics       Hedonics        Hed, Winsor.                                        Hedonics

R-squared                   0.674         0.746             0.766              0.070           0.092          0.073
N                          29,020        29,020            29,020            2,409,181       2,409,181      1,290,825

Note: This table shows results from regression (1) where the dependent variable is the log of monthly rents in columns
(1) to (3) and the log of time on market between listing and sale in days in columns (4) to (6). The sample for rent
data is the universe of London flats for which rent and hedonics data is available on Rightmove.co.uk during 2011
and 2012. The sample for the time on market analysis is restricted to the sales of properties (both houses and flats)
for which Rightmove.co.uk observes a for-sale listing. Controls are the same as in Table 2. Standard errors are double
clustered by 3-digit postcode and by year. Significance levels: ∗ (p<0.10), ∗∗ (p<0.05), ∗∗∗ (p<0.01).
                            Table 6: Analysis with contract type fixed effects

                            (1)              (2)             (3)               (4)              (5)              (6)
Lease Length Remaining
   80-99 Years           -0.123***        -0.124***       -0.123***         -0.126***        -0.118***        -0.120***
                          (0.010)          (0.011)         (0.011)           (0.003)          (0.010)          (0.013)
   100-124 Years         -0.096***        -0.098***       -0.100***         -0.095***        -0.105***        -0.070***
                          (0.009)          (0.010)         (0.011)           (0.002)          (0.009)          (0.011)
   125-149 Years         -0.083***        -0.086***       -0.088***         -0.083***        -0.089***        -0.069***
                          (0.011)          (0.010)         (0.010)           (0.003)          (0.009)          (0.013)
   150-300 Years         -0.055***        -0.054***       -0.053***         -0.057***        -0.051***        -0.049***
                          (0.011)          (0.011)         (0.011)           (0.003)          (0.009)          (0.014)
   > 700 Years              0.013           0.013           0.013           0.012***           -0.006           0.010
                          (0.019)          (0.020)         (0.023)           (0.003)          (0.012)          (0.010)
Contract Type - Initial Lease Length
   99 Years              -0.065***        -0.064***       -0.063***         -0.062***        -0.055***        -0.067***
                          (0.011)           (0.011)         (0.012)          (0.002)          (0.010)          (0.010)
   120 Years             -0.036***         -0.031**        -0.026**         -0.035***         -0.019*         -0.071***
                          (0.012)           (0.012)         (0.012)          (0.003)          (0.011)          (0.015)
   125 Years               -0.006            -0.008          -0.008         -0.008***          -0.003           -0.001
                          (0.009)           (0.010)         (0.011)          (0.002)          (0.009)          (0.011)
   150 Years             0.068***         0.070***         0.073***         0.066***         0.063***          0.070***
                          (0.010)           (0.010)         (0.010)          (0.002)          (0.008)          (0.010)
   155 Years             0.044***         0.047***         0.051***         0.044***         0.043***          0.051***
                          (0.015)           (0.015)         (0.015)          (0.003)          (0.013)          (0.017)
   199 Years              0.038*              0.035          0.032          0.039***            0.027           0.046*
                          (0.021)           (0.022)         (0.024)          (0.003)          (0.016)          (0.024)
   200 Years              0.039**           0.038**        0.038**          0.040***          0.036**           0.031*
                          (0.016)           (0.017)         (0.019)          (0.004)          (0.014)          (0.016)
   250 Years              0.035**           0.029*          0.028*          0.040***         0.042***          0.059***
                          (0.015)           (0.016)         (0.017)          (0.003)          (0.015)          (0.015)
   800 Years                0.111             0.070          0.067           0.103**          0.272**           0.137
                          (0.167)           (0.168)         (0.170)          (0.044)          (0.113)          (0.166)
   999 Years               -0.011            -0.011          -0.009         -0.012***          -0.005           -0.010
                          (0.018)           (0.019)         (0.021)          (0.003)          (0.010)          (0.009)
Fixed Effects            PC × Y           PC × Q           PC × M           PC × Y            PC × Y           PC × Y
Controls                    X                X                X            X, × year            X                 X
Restrictions                 ·                ·                ·                ·            Nonmiss.         Exclude
                                                                                             Hedonics         London
R-squared                 0.715            0.724            0.732            0.717             0.766            0.586
N                       1,373,383        1,373,383        1,373,383        1,373,383          953,660         1,028,031

Note: This table shows results from regression (1) estimated for flats, including fixed effects for the most common
initial lease lengths of the contracts. The dependent variable is log price, for properties sold in England and Wales
between 2004 and 2013. We include 3-digit postcode by transaction time fixed effects. In columns (2) and (3) the trans-
action time is the transaction quarter and month, respectively, in the other columns the transaction year. In column (4)
we interact the controls with the transaction year. In column (5) we only include properties for which characteristics
are not missing, and in column (6) we exclude transactions in London. We control for the size, number of bedrooms,
bathrooms, property age, property condition, whether there is parking, and the type of heating. Standard errors are
double clustered by 3-digit postcode and by year. Significance levels: ∗ (p<0.10), ∗∗ (p<0.05), ∗∗∗ (p<0.01).
                                              Table 7: Initial Lease Length Analysis

                                                   PANEL A                                                                     PANEL B
                              (1)            (2)             (3)             (4)                                      (5)                (6)
Contract Type                                                                                  Initial Lease Length
  80-99 years,             -0.133***      -0.133***       -0.133***       -0.133***                99 Years      -0.065***           -0.067***
  Init. Lease >99           (0.009)        (0.010)         (0.009)         (0.010)                                (0.012)             (0.017)
   80-99 years,            -0.185***      -0.183***       -0.185***       -0.183***                100 Years       -0.138***         -0.141***
   Init. Lease <=99         (0.011)        (0.010)         (0.011)         (0.010)                                  (0.021)           (0.026)
   100-124 years,                                         -0.096***       -0.097***                105 Years         0.025             0.054
   Init. Lease >125                                        (0.014)         (0.017)                                  (0.066)           (0.084)
   100-124 years,                                         -0.102***       -0.107***                120 Years       -0.052***          -0.037*
   Init. Lease <=125                                       (0.007)         (0.008)                                  (0.016)           (0.020)
   100-124 years           -0.102***      -0.107***                                                124 Years         0.013             0.003
                            (0.007)        (0.008)                                                                  (0.027)           (0.035)
   125-149 years           -0.056***      -0.060***       -0.056***       -0.060***                125 Years       -0.036**           -0.041*
                            (0.008)        (0.008)         (0.008)         (0.008)                                  (0.018)           (0.025)
   150-300 years           -0.024**        -0.023**       -0.024**        -0.023**                 126 Years       -0.074***         -0.088***
                            (0.011)         (0.011)        (0.011)         (0.011)                                  (0.025)           (0.034)
   700+ years                0.002          0.004           0.002           0.004                  130 Years         -0.025           -0.016
                            (0.006)        (0.007)         (0.006)         (0.007)                                  (0.023)           (0.032)
Fixed Effects              PC × Y         PC × M          PC × Y          PC × M                                   PC × Y            PC × M
Controls                      X               X              X               X                                        X                  X
Restrictions                   ·              ·               ·               ·                                      80-100 Years Remaining
R-squared                   0.714           0.731           0.714          0.731                                    0.772             0.787
N                         1,373,383       1,373,383       1,373,383      1,373,383                                 197,341           197,341

Note: Panel A of the table shows results from regression (1) estimated for flats, where the dummies for buckets of years remaining are interacted
with indicators of the initial lease length of the contract. Columns (1) and (2) interact only the indicator for the group of transactions with 80-99
years remaining with an indicator of whether the initial length of the leasehold transacted was below or above 99 years. Columns 3 and 4 also
interact the indicator for the group of transactions with 100-124 years remaining with an indicator of whether the contract had initial lease length
above or below 125 years. Panel B runs the same hedonic regression restricted to leaseholds that transact with 80-99 years remaining, and incldues
fixed effects for the 8 most common initial lease lengths. In all regressions, we include 3-digit postcode by transaction time fixed effects. In
columns (1), (3), (5) the transaction time is the transaction year, and in the other columns the transaction month. We control for the size, number of
bedrooms, bathrooms, property age, property condition, whether there is parking, and the type of heating. Standard errors are double clustered
by 3-digit postcode and by year. Significance levels: ∗ (p<0.10), ∗∗ (p<0.05), ∗∗∗ (p<0.01).
                Table 8: Characteristics of Buyers of Leaseholds and Freeholds: U.K.

                                                Sample                               Leasehold ∆
                                           Mean St. Dev.         Unconditional       Conditional I      Conditional II
                                            (1)      (2)             (3)                 (4)                (5)
Age Head of Household (years)              52.30      16.01            -2.68               -1.54              -1.30
                                                                                          (0.21)             (0.20)

Weekly Income (£)                          350.2      450.6           -48.07               -3.01              5.60
                                                                                          (4.56)             (4.45)

Number of people in household               2.53       1.27            -0.48               -0.03              0.02
                                                                                          (0.01)             (0.01)

Number of dependent children                0.55       0.94            -0.19               -0.01              0.02
                                                                                          (0.01)             (0.01)

Head of Household Married                   0.64       0.48            -0.21               -0.01              0.01
                                                                                          (0.01)             (0.01)

First Time Buyer                            0.40       0.48            0.11                -0.00              -0.01
                                                                                          (0.01)             (0.01)

Currently Has Mortgage                      0.59       0.49            0.03                0.02               0.02
                                                                                          (0.01)             (0.01)

Very Satisfied with Neighborhood            0.47       0.50            -0.06               0.00               0.00
                                                                                          (0.00)              0.00
Note: This table provides summary statistics on characteristics of owners of freeholds and leaseholds in the Sur-
vey of English Housing. The underlying contains information on 201,933 households in England surveyed between
1994 and 2008. The first two columns provide the sample means of the outcome variables. Column (3) provides
the unconditional average difference between leasehold owners and freehold owners (e.g., on average, heads of
household owning leasehold properties are 2.7 years younger than heads of households owning freehold proper-
ties). Columns (4) and (5) show the β coefficient of the following regression: Outcomei = α + βLeaseholdi + ξXi +
φPropertyType× Region + ε i . Column (4) does not include any additional controls in Xi , column (5) includes dummy vari-
ables for property age and the number of rooms (the control variables that overlap with the transaction dataset). In
other words, these columns show the difference between freehold and leasehold owning households, conditional on
living on the same property type (flat, semi-detached house, etc.) and living in the same local authority. Standard
errors are double clustered by local authority code and by year.
                              Table 9: Expected Returns and Rental Growth

                               United States                   Singapore                 United Kingdom
                         Balance Sheet Price/Rent      Balance Sheet Price/Rent      Balance Sheet Price/Rent
    Gross Return             10.3%        10.7%            10.4%         10.3%            12.5%         10.9%
       Rental Yield          8.3%         9.8%             6.1%          6.0%             9.7%          6.9%
       Capital Gain          2.0%         0.8%             4.3%          4.3%             2.8%           4%
    Depreciation             1.5%          1.5%            1.5%           1.5%            1.5%           1.5%
    Taxes                    0.67%        0.67%            0.5%           0.5%             0%             0%
    Net Return               8.1%          8.5%            8.4%           8.3%            11%            9.4%
    Sample                 1953-2012    1988-2012        1985-2012     1990-2012       1989-2012      1996-2012

    Real Rent Growth                       0.1%                           0.2%                           0.7%
    Sample                              1988-2012                      1990-2012                      1996-2012

   Note: This table shows our estimates for net real returns to housing and real rent growth in the U.S., the U.K.
   and in Singapore. See appendix A.3 for details.


                      Table 10: Time Series Properties of Real House Price Growth

                         Period            Real HP Growth                 Real Cons. Growth
                                         Mean        Std. Dev.           Mean        Std. Dev.           Correlation
 Australia             1901 - 2009       2.50%           12.1%           1.51%           5.00%              0.102
 Belgium               1975 - 2009       2.92%           6.00%           1.56%           1.49%              0.438
 Canada                1975 - 2009       2.38%           7.69%           1.64%           1.71%              0.433
 Denmark               1975 - 2009       2.00%           9.24%           1.03%           2.68%              0.538
 Finland               1975 - 2009       2.17%           8.70%           2.09%           2.75%              0.710
 France                1840 - 2009       2.06%           11.8%           1.53%           6.32%             -0.054
 Germany               1975 - 2009      -0.005%          2.33%           1.71%           1.56%              0.494
 Japan                 1975 - 2009       0.00%           4.45%           2.00%           1.59%              0.502
 Italy                 1975 - 2009       1.28%           8.10%           1.69%           2.12%              0.165
 Netherlands           1807 - 2009       2.78%           21.6%           1.46%           7.57%              0.090
 New Zealand           1975 - 2009       2.46%           8.01%           0.90%           2.34%              0.578
 Norway                1830 - 2009       1.82%           11.6%           1.78%           3.83%              0.243
 Singapore             1975 - 2009       7.18%           19.5%           3.37%           2.98%              0.348
 Spain                 1975 - 2009       3.15%           8.07%           1.54%           2.57%              0.593
 South Africa          1975 - 2009       1.13%           10.1%           0.90%           2.98%              0.707
 South Korea           1975 - 2009       0.60%           7.93%           4.58%           4.43%              0.370
 Sweden                1952 - 2009       1.55%           6.04%           1.66%           1.98%              0.537
 Switzerland           1937 - 2009       0.04%           7.17%           1.55%           3.85%              0.187
 U.K.                  1952 - 2009       2.89%           9.55%           2.22%           2.12%              0.700
 U.S                   1890 - 2009       0.04%           7.36%           1.80%           3.41%              0.148

Note: The table shows time series properties of annual growth rates of real house prices (as described in Appendix
A.3.3) and real consumption, as collected by Barro and Ursua (2008). Column (1) shows the sample considered.
Columns (2) and (3) show the mean and standard deviation of real house price growth. Columns (4) and (5) show
the mean and standard deviation of real consumption growth. Column (6) shows the correlation of real house price
growth and real consumption growth.
