                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        SOCIAL LEARNING AND COMMUNICATION

                                          Ariel BenYishay
                                        A. Mushfiq Mobarak

                                        Working Paper 20139
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20139


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2014




We gratefully acknowledge the support and cooperation of Readwell Musopole and many other staff
members of the Malawi Ministry of Agriculture, and of David Rohrbach and Olivier Durand of the
World Bank – Malawi Country Office. Maria Jones managed all aspects of fieldwork extremely well.
Niall Kelleher, Sylvan Herskowitz, Cristina Valverde and the IPA-Malawi country office provided
invaluable support for data collection. Andrew Carter, Tetyana Zelenska, Johann Burnett and Imogen
Halstead provided excellent research assistance. The World Bank Gender and Agriculture Program,
World Bank Development Impact Evaluation Initiative (DIME), the Millennium Challenge Corporation,
Yale Center for Business and Environment, and the Macmillan Center at Yale University provided
financial support. We thank Chris Udry, Florian Ederer, Jonathan Feinstein, Arthur Campbell, Ken
Gillingham, Florence Kondylis, Arik Levinson, Mark Rosenzweig, and seminar participants at Yale
University, Brown University, Boston University, Boston College, Georgetown, Vassar College, the
University of Sydney, Monash University, University of Queensland, the University of New South
Wales, Stanford University SITE, NEUDC at Harvard, and the 24th BREAD conference for comments.
All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Ariel BenYishay and A. Mushfiq Mobarak. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Social Learning and Communication
Ariel BenYishay and A. Mushfiq Mobarak
NBER Working Paper No. 20139
May 2014
JEL No. O13,O33,Q16

                                             ABSTRACT

Low adoption of agricultural technologies holds large productivity consequences for developing countries.
Agricultural extension services counter information failures by deploying external agents to communicate
with farmers. However, social networks are recognized as the most credible source of information
about new technologies. We incorporate social learning in extension policy using a large-scale field
experiment in which we communicate to farmers using different members of social networks. We
show that communicator effort is susceptible to small performance incentives, and the social identity
of the communicator influences learning and adoption. Farmers find communicators who face agricultural
conditions and constraints most comparable to themselves to be the most persuasive. Incorporating
communication dynamics can take the influential social learning literature in a more policy-relevant
direction.


Ariel BenYishay
School of Economics
Sydney NSW 2052
Australia
a.benyishay@unsw.edu.au

A. Mushfiq Mobarak
Yale School of Management
135 Prospect Street
Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520
and NBER
ahmed.mobarak@yale.edu
1. Introduction

Many agricultural technologies with demonstrated productivity gains, such as timely fertilizer

application, improved seed varieties, organic composting, and reduced tillage planting

techniques, have not been widely adopted in developing countries, and in Sub-Saharan Africa in

particular (Duflo, Kremer and Robinson 2011, Udry 2010). The 2008 World Development

Report vividly documents the associated costs – agricultural yields and productivity have

remained low and flat in sub-Saharan Africa over the last 40 years (World Bank 2008). Investing

in new technologies is risky, and lack of reliable and persuasive sources of information about

new technologies, their relevance to local agronomic conditions, and details on how to apply

them, are potential deterrents to adoption. 1 Farmers care about the expected performance of the

technology at their own plot of land, and the social proximity, relevance and credibility of the

source of the information may therefore matter.

         The economics and sociology literatures have long recognized the importance of social

learning from peers in overcoming such “information failures” in both developed (Griliches

1957, Rogers 1962) and developing (Foster and Rosenzweig 1995, Bandiera and Rasul 2006,

Conley and Udry 2010) countries. This literature has largely focused on documenting the

existence of social learning using careful empirical strategies. 2 These models explore a ‘passive’

form of social learning, implicitly assuming that farmers costlessly observe the field trials of their

neighbors with little friction in the flow of information, and then update their expectations about

the technology’s profitability.

         While the existence of social learning has been well established in the literature, a natural

next question is whether policies to promote new technologies can be improved by leveraging

the power of social influence. This paper explores such strategies using a randomized controlled


1 Other deterrents examined by the literature recently include imperfections in credit markets (Croppenstedt,

Demeke and Meschi 2003, Crepon et al 2011), insurance markets (Cole, Giné and Vickery 2013, Bryan, Chowdhury
and Mobarak 2014, Karlan et al 2012), land rights (Goldstein and Udry 2008, Ali, Deininger, and Goldstein 2011),
and output markets (Ashraf, Giné, and Karlan 2009). Jack (2013) offers a careful review of this literature.
2 Distinguishing peer effects from incidental correlations in the behavior of social contacts has been the perennial

empirical challenge with which this literature has grappled (Manski 1993).

                                                                                                                  1
trial (RCT) in which we vary the dissemination method for two new agricultural technologies

across 168 villages in Malawi. We assign, in turn, the role of main communicator about the new

technology to (a) government-employed extension workers, or (b) ‘lead farmers’ who are

educated and able to sustain experimentation costs, or (c) ‘peer farmers’ who are more

representative of the general population and whose experiences may be more applicable to the

average recipient farmer’s own conditions. Random subsets of these communicators are offered

performance-based incentives in the experimental design.

        We first document that providing incentives to communicators affects the flow of

information in these villages. This implies that when we try to use social influence to promote

new technologies, the transmission of information from one farmer to another ceases to be

automatic. Communicating with others and convincing them to adopt may require costly effort,

while the benefits are external.     Existing models of passive social learning (Foster and

Rosenzweig 1995, Bardhan and Udry 1999, Munshi 2004) ignore communication (since agents

automatically observe neighbors’ actions), but taking the literature in this policy-relevant

direction requires us to explore communication dynamics. We therefore present a framework

with communication embedded in the standard target-input model to clarify the contribution of

this RCT to that literature.

        The experimental design and data allow us to delve deeper into the questions of which

types of communicators are optimal to incentivize, whether their effort or their credibility are

affected by incentives, and the types of target farmers that are persuaded to adopt by each

communicator type. We find that without incentives, peer farmers (PFs) do not bother to learn

about the technologies themselves or put any effort into disseminating (and therefore others in

the village do not learn or adopt), but when a small performance-based incentive (a bag of seeds)

is added, PFs represent the most effective strategy to convince other farmers to adopt new

technologies.   Peer farmers are thus more responsive to incentives than lead farmers, as

predicted by the framework we present. The effectiveness of PFs could stem from their greater



                                                                                               2
social proximity, credibility, or physical proximity, but our data indicate that “comparability” is

what matters. Peer farmers whose farm sizes and input use are the most similar to those of the

recipient farmers are the most persuasive. In other words, farmers appear to be most convinced

by the advice of others who face agricultural conditions that are comparable to the conditions

they face themselves. This is consistent with results from both psychology (Briñol and Petty

2009, Fleming and Petty 2000) and economics (Munshi 2004) on the role of similarity between

senders and receivers of information in persuading the latter to adopt specific behaviors.

       We do not attempt to influence specific actions by peer farmers, but we document

strategies they use. In addition to communication effort, incentives induce peer farmers to adopt

the technology themselves, and this has a demonstration effect, similar to the existing social

learning literature. Adoption subsequently increases yields, and the magnitudes suggest that

implementing the incentive-based communication strategies was cost-effective.

       This work is related to a growing literature that shows that social relationships are an

important vector for the spread of information in a variety of contexts, including educational

choices (Garlick 2012; Bobonis and Finan 2009; Carrell and Hoekstra 2010; de Giorgi et al 2010;

Duflo, Dupas, and Kremer 2011), financial decisions (Burzstyn et al 2014; Banerjee et al. 2013;

Beshears et al, 2011; Duflo and Saez 2003), job information (Beaman 2012; Magruder 2010),

health inputs (Kremer and Miguel 2007, Godlonton and Thornton 2012, Oster and Thornton

2012; Miller and Mobarak 2014), energy choices (Alcott 2011) and doctors prescribing drugs

(Coleman et al. 1957, Iyengar et al 2011). Recognizing the potential for peer-based promotion

implied by these networks, other projects have also introduced ‘ambassadors’ and ‘injection

points’ to promote new products, similar to the design of our program (e.g., Kremer et al 2011,

Ashraf, Bandiera and Jack 2012). The medical literature has also studied the use of opinion

leaders and documented the differential role of local as opposed to external leaders (Doumit et al

2007, Keating et al 2007, Kuo et al 1998, Locock et al 2001). Our nuanced empirical findings

on communication with and without incentives help explain why many of these studies



                                                                                                 3
document peer influence, while others—notably Duflo, Kremer and Robinson (2011)—find

little evidence of social learning.

        Our work also relates to the theoretical literature on incentives for communication of

non-verifiable information (beginning with Crawford and Sobel 1982) and verifiable information

requiring effort on the part of senders and receivers (Dewatripont and Tirole 2005). Our

experiment varies types of senders who have different effort costs, and introduces incentives that

change the sender’s stake in the communication. There is a lengthy literature on the effects of

performance-based incentives in the production of public goods, reviewed by Bowles and

Polania-Reyes (2012). The marketing literature also explores conditions under which incentives

stimulate word-of-mouth referrals (Biyalogorsky, Gerstner, and Libai 2001; Kornish and Li 2010)

        For policy, the results suggest that social learning can be harnessed to cost-effectively

improve public agricultural extension services. As many as 400,000 extension workers are

currently employed in developing countries, and Anderson and Feder (2007) note that this “may

well be the largest institutional development effort the world has ever known.” The impact of

these efforts has been disappointing in many respects: the use of modern varieties of seeds and

other agricultural inputs have remained low and relatively stagnant in sub-Saharan Africa (Udry

2010). In Ethiopia, Krishnan and Patnam (2013) find weak effects of extension agents on

improved seeds and fertilizer take-up, and stronger effects of social learning from neighbors.

        The deficiencies in government extension programs can often be traced back to a lack of

qualified personnel and insufficient resources, which suggests that leveraging social networks

may be an effective way to address these failures. Approximately 50% of government extension

positions remain unfilled in Malawi, and each extension worker in our sample is responsible for

2450 households on average. The shortage of staff means that much of the rural population has

little or no contact with government extension workers. According to the 2006/2007 Malawi

National Agricultural and Livestock Census, only 18% of farmers report participating in any type

of extension activity. Thus, extending the reach of existing personnel in a cost-effective manner



                                                                                                 4
- by having them partner with nodes in social networks who may be able to communicate more

frequently and more effectively with their own neighbors - may be a promising approach.

          We made experimental design choices to remain policy-relevant for ministries of

agriculture around the world, and the different communication arms (peer versus lead farmers)

and incentive sizes were chosen to be budget-neutral from the perspective of the agricultural

extension department. In the process, we compare five “average-looking” peer farmers to one

wealthy, atypical lead farmer across experimental cells. Peer farmers are therefore most effective

per dollar spent (the policy relevant metric for the ministry) rather than per agent. This implies

that multiple mechanisms could explain the differing performance of peer farmers – their

identity, differing scale of the task, or the need for coordination across communicators. Using

variation in village size and social network data on relationships between communicators and

target farmers, we explore each of these mechanisms in turn, and find that the data are most

consistent with communicator identity – insofar as it affects the agronomic relevance of the

information being transmitted to target farmers - playing a central role. Even in the subset of

villages where we can hold ‘communicators per capita’ constant, incentivized peer farmers (PFs)

out-perform all other comparison groups. Furthermore, the incentive effects (comparing PFs

with and without incentives) are not subject to any such concerns about multiple mechanisms.

          This paper is structured as follows: Section 2 describes the context and experimental

design.     Section 3 presents a social learning model with an endogenous communication

component. The data are described in Section 4 and empirical results presented in Section 5. In

Sections 6, 7, and 8, we test for alternative mechanisms underlying our results. We study the

impacts on target farmers’ yields and inputs in Section 9, and offer concluding remarks about

policy implications in Section 10.




                                                                                                5
2. Context and Experimental Design

Our experiment takes place in eight districts across Malawi. Approximately 80% of Malawi’s

population lives in rural areas, and agriculture accounts for 31% of Malawi’s GDP (World Bank

2011). Agricultural production and policy is dominated by maize. 3 More than 60% of the

population’s calorie consumption derives from maize, 97% of farmers grow maize, and over half

of households grow no other crop (Lea and Hanmer 2009). The maize harvest is thus central to

the welfare of the country’s population, and has been subject to extensive policy attention.

         The existing agricultural extension system in Malawi relies on government workers who

both work with individual farmers and conduct village-wide field days. These Agricultural

Extension Development Officers (AEDOs) are employed by the Ministry of Agriculture and

Food Security (MoAFS). These workers are notionally responsible for one agricultural extension

section each, typically covering 15-25 villages (although given the large number of vacancies,

AEDOs are often in fact responsible for multiple sections). Section coverage information

provided by MoAFS in July of 2009 indicated that 56% of the AEDO positions in Malawi were

unfilled.

         Partly in response to this shortage, MoAFS had begun developing a “Lead Farmer”

extension model, in which AEDOs would be encouraged to select and partner with one lead

farmer in each village. The aim was to have these lead farmers reduce AEDO workload by

training other farmers in some of the technologies and topics for which AEDOs would

otherwise be responsible. We incorporate this lead farmer model in our experimental design.

         No formal MoAFS guidance existed on the use of other types of partner farmers to

extend an AEDO’s reach (or reduce his workload). We introduce a new extension model: the

AEDO collaborating with a group of five peer farmers in each village, who are selected via a village

focus group and are intended to be representative of the average village member in their wealth

level and geographically dispersed throughout the village.


3 While there has been some recent diversification, the area under maize cultivation is still approximately equivalent
to that of all other crops combined (Lea and Hanmer 2009).

                                                                                                                         6
2.1. Experimental Variation in Types of Communicators

We designed a multi-arm study involving two cross-cutting sets of treatments: (1) communicator

type, and (2) incentives for dissemination. We randomized assignment into these treatments at

the village level. Each village was randomly assigned to one type of communication strategy:

   (a) AEDO only

   (b) Lead Farmer (LF) - supported by AEDO

   (c) Peer Farmers (PFs) - supported by AEDO

       In all three arms, the AEDO responsible for each sampled village was invited to attend a

3-day training on a targeted technology relevant for their district (discussed below). In each of

the two farmer-led treatments, the AEDO was then to train the designated LF or PFs on the

specific technology, mobilize them to formulate workplans with the community, supervise the

workplans, and distribute technical resource materials (leaflets, posters, and booklets). Appendix

A1 provides some additional details.

Guidance given to AEDOs specified that LFs selected should have the following characteristics:

   (A) Identified by the community as a “leader”

   (B) Early adopter of technology

   (C) Literate

   (D) May have more resources at his/her disposal to aid technology adoption (oxcart, access

       to chemical fertilizers or pesticides, more land)

The selection process involved the AEDO convoking a meeting with community members to

identify a short list of potential lead farmers. The AEDO selects one of the farmers on the short

list to be the lead farmer, in consultation with village leaders, and was then asked to announce his

choice to the village, to ensure that the community endorses the new lead farmer.

Guidance given to AEDOs specified that PFs selected should have the following characteristics:

   (A) Thought of by the community as ordinary, average farmer

   (B) Must be willing to try the new technology, but is not necessarily a progressive farmer



                                                                                                  7
    (C) Not necessarily literate

    (D) Similar to average farmers in the village in terms of access to resources.

The selection process for PFs again involved the AEDO convoking and facilitating a meeting

with village members. The first step was to identify the important social groups in the village.

The directions given included (a) the meetings must be well attended (including by those who

may work with the extension agent most often), and (b) there should be representatives from all

the different social groups in the village (males, females, elders, adolescents, people from

different clubs or church groups, etc). Meeting participants from each group nominated one

representative, and the list was pared down to five in consultation with AEDOs and village

leaders. The nominated peer farmers had to state that they understood their role and

responsibilities. They were then presented to the village for endorsement.

        Selecting both lead and peer farmers involved village meetings, consultation with leaders

etc, and the approaches followed were not fundamentally different from each other.

Furthermore, both lead and peer farmers were identified in all villages using the selection

processes described above. However, in only the villages randomly assigned to the LF (PF)

treatment arm, was the selected LF (set of PFs) trained by the AEDO on the specific technology

and given the responsibility to spread information about the technology and carry out the

prescribed workplan. Therefore, our experimental design only varied the actual assignment of

lead and peer farmers to specific tasks, holding the selection process constant in all villages. This

strategy has the additional advantage of identifying “shadow” PFs and LFs in all villages – i.e. we

know the (counterfactual) identities of individuals who would have been chosen as PFs or LFs in all

villages, had the PF or LF treatment arm been assigned to this village. This creates an

experimental comparison group for the actual PFs and LFs, and allows us to report pure

experimental effects of the treatments on an intermediate step in the flow of information (from

AEDOs to partner communicators), on the effort expended by these communicators, and their

own adoption.



                                                                                                   8
         We collected baseline data on all communicators to assess how the characteristics of

chosen LFs and PFs differed. Table 1 compares lead and peer farmers to each other and to the

rest of our sample (of non-communicator maize farmers who are the ‘recipients’ or targets of the

messages). Lead farmers are indeed better educated and cultivate more land than both the

general population and those chosen as peer farmers (differences in their housing quality and

incomes are also substantial but not statistically significant). Generally, peer farmers fall between

LFs and the general population in all of these dimensions, and they are slightly better off than

the general population. The data therefore verifies proper implementation of the experimental

design, and motivates a key aspect of the theoretical setup: that PFs are more similar to the target

farmers than are LFs.

         The PF-target farmer similarity can be an advantage to communication in multiple ways:

it could lead to greater social proximity, greater physical proximity or greater comparability in

other dimensions. To investigate, Table 2 examines how LFs and PFs are perceived by, and

related to, other farmers at baseline. Social proximity does not appear to be the advantage that

PFs possess: Using first-order links for analysis, it turns out that LFs are more central in social

networks than the average peer farmer. Respondents are significantly more likely to be related to

LFs and to talk more regularly with LFs than to PFs. The five peer farmers in a village will

jointly have more links than the one lead farmer, but a one-to-one comparison suggests that LFs

possess more links. Villagers also perceive LFs more favorably: they are more highly rated in

terms of trustworthiness and farming skills. 4

         PFs do appear to have a distinct advantage in a different dimension: the average

respondent considers them to be more comparable (to themselves) in terms of farm size and

input use. At baseline, 42.7% of respondents consider the average PF in their village to have a

farm size similar to their own (compared to 33.9% for LFs), while 27.7% consider the average

PF uses the same or fewer inputs on her farm (23.1% for LF). Thus, LFs have somewhat greater

4
  These perception questions were not asked at baseline, so we rely on comparisons in our control sample to
estimate differences in these characteristics.

                                                                                                              9
social stature than do PFs, but—partly as a result—have agricultural experiences that are further

from those of the average respondent.

2.2. Experimental Variation in Incentives for Communicators

        In addition to the random variation in communicator type, we also introduced

performance incentives for a random subset of communicators in a cross-cutting experiment.

Half of all communicators in each of the three treatment types were provided incentives

conditional on performance. Performance was defined on the basis of “output” – i.e. effects on

other, recipient farmers in the village. The ministry expected recipient farmers to hear about the

new technologies by the end of the first year (or first agricultural season), and make actual

adoption decisions only by the end of the second year. Therefore, in the first year of the

program, each communicator in the incentive treatment was told he would receive an in-kind

reward if the average knowledge score among sampled respondents in his targeted village rose by 20

percentage points. For the second year of the program, the threshold level was set as a 20

percentage point increase in adoption rates of the designated technology. We measured knowledge

by giving randomly chosen farmers in each village exams that tested whether they had retained

various details of the technologies. Appendix A2 details the exam questions and acceptable

answers for each technology. We measured adoption by sending a skilled enumerator to directly

observe practices on the farm at the right time during the agricultural season. The technologies

we promote, described below, leave physical trails that are easily verifiable.

        The training of AEDOs was conducted in August of 2009, using a three-day curriculum

involving both in-class and direct observation of the technologies. In September of 2009,

AEDOs who were assigned to work with LFs or PFs were to conduct the partner farmer

trainings.   Incentive-based performance awards were provided shortly after the survey and

monitoring data (described below) became available.             Figure 1 provides a calendar of

intervention and data collection activities along with an agricultural calendar.




                                                                                               10
        Figure 2 describes the six treatment arms, and sample sizes allocated to each treatment.

We added a seventh group of 48 control villages, where we did not disseminate any information

about the new technologies at all. The control group was randomly selected from the same

sampling frame (i.e., the subset of villages which were staffed by an AEDO) in order to preserve

comparability to the treatment villages. The AEDOs continued to operate as they normally

would in these pure control villages, but received no additional training on the two new

technologies introduced by the project.

        Appendix A3 presents tests of balance in key baseline characteristics across our

treatment arms. To control for district-level variation, these tests include district fixed effects

and cluster standard errors at the village level. In 3 out of 99 tests, we find differences that are

significant at the 5% level, consistent with standard sampling differences; we find no significant

differences across in baseline adoption rates across any of our treatment arms.

2.3. Dimensions of Variation across Treatment Groups

        Each of the treatment arms represents a “bundle” of characteristics. The identity of the

communicator varies across PF and LF treatments, but so does the number of communicators (5

vs 1). The treatment effects we report will be the joint effect of communicator identity and

number. We present these experimental results first, before using variation in village size and in

social network relationships to unpack the likely mechanisms at play. The data ultimately

strongly support identity playing a central role, and the framework we present in section 3

highlights the role of identity in generating variation in performance across treatment cells.

        The three different communication strategies were designed to be budget neutral from

the perspective of the Ministry of Agriculture, so that the communication bundles represent

useful comparisons, irrespective of the specific mechanisms at play. The AEDO receives the

same salary across all arms. For the incentive treatments, each communicator type was to

receive a specific award type (AEDOs received bicycles, lead farmers received a large bag of

fertilizer, and peer farmers each received a package of legume seeds), but the maximum total


                                                                                                 11
value of awards for each village was specified as 12,000 MWK (roughly US$80). In other words,

we held the total size of the incentive roughly constant across treatment (communicator) types,

even though the peer farmer treatment involved more partner farmers.                The incentive

experiment across communicator treatments was therefore also budget-neutral from the

Ministry’s perspective. Finally, the incentive effects we document (comparing PFs with and

without incentives or LFs with and without incentives) represent clean experimental estimates

where the questions about multiple potential mechanisms are not relevant.

       The key tradeoff underlying our experimental design is that while the LF and PF

treatments engage additional agents (potentially) performing the task of dissemination, they also

introduce additional layers in the communication process.         AEDOs are simply asked to

disseminate via these partner farmers in these treatments, while in the status-quo AEDO

treatment, the AEDO may or may already employ some version of such communication

strategies. The marginal costs induced by this project are the village meetings required to

identify PFs and LF, and training the AEDO to disseminate via these partners.

       The PF- versus LF-based communication also embodies an important trade-off:

Individuals designated as lead farmers generally command higher social status and respect, while

peer farmers may enjoy greater credibility because they are closer to other villagers in social,

financial, or agricultural technology space. It is therefore not obvious ex-ante which of the three

strategies would perform best. Both the theory and the treatment effects we estimate suggest

“similarity” between communicators and target farmers is a key mechanism at play, and our

network data allows us to delve deeper to explore the dimensions in which identity and similarity

are most relevant.

2.4. Technologies Disseminated

       The project promoted two technologies to improve maize yields: pit planting and

“Chinese composting”. Pit planting involves planting seeds in a shallow pit in the ground, in




                                                                                                12
order to retain greater moisture for the plant in an arid environment, while minimizing soil

disturbance. Appendix A2 describes the technique specifications as disseminated.

         Ridging had been the conventional method of land preparation in Malawi, but it has been

shown to deplete soil fertility and decrease agricultural productivity over time (Derpsch 2001,

2004). Studies of pit planting in southern Africa have found returns of 50-100 percent for maize

production (Haggblade and Tembo 2003) within the first year of production. However, pit

planting involves some additional costs. First, only a small portion of the surface is tilled with pit

planting, and hand weeding or herbicide requirements may therefore increase. Second, digging

pits is a labor-intensive task with potentially large up-front costs. However, land preparation

becomes easier over time, since pits should be excavated in the same places each year, and

estimates suggest that land preparation time falls by 50% within 5 years (Haggblade and Tembo

2003). We collect data to directly examine these costs and changes in input use.

         Chinese composting is the other technology that this project promoted in a different set

of districts. 5 Chinese composting is primarily a post-harvest activity. Once maize crops are

harvested, crop residues can serve as useful composting material (described in further detail in

Appendix A2). Sub-Saharan Africa has experienced large declines in soil mineral content over

the past three decades: estimates suggest losses in excess of 22 kg of nitrogen (N), 2.5 kg of

phosphorus (P) and 15 kg of potassium (K) per hectare of cultivated land annually due to soil

mining (Sanchez 2002). In Malawi, over 30 kg per hectare of N are reported to be depleted

annually (Stoorvogel, Smaling and Janssen 1993). Studies of compost application in Malawi

indicate soil fertility improvements and substantial returns on maize plots (Mwato et al 1999,

Nyirongo et al 1999, Nkhuzenje 2003).




5 The profitability of pit planting and Chinese composting vary substantially with agro-climactic factors: pit planting
is appropriate in drier areas and composting in areas with greater water availability. Thus, the intervention we study
saw each technology promoted in the four study districts in which it was most relevant. Pit planting was promoted
in the arid districts of Balaka, Chikwawa, Neno, and Rumphi, while Chinese composting was promoted in Dedza,
Mchinji, Mzimba, and Zomba. Any one village in our sample therefore received information on only one of the two
technologies.


                                                                                                                    13
        The baseline levels of awareness and adoption of pit planting were quite limited in our

sample. Pit planting is a relatively new technology in Malawi, and only 12% of respondents in

our control villages had heard of the technology at baseline. Most of the farmers who had heard

of pit planting were not actually familiar with the details of the technology, or how to implement

it. Only 2% of the respondents in control villages knew the recommended dimensions of the

pits (allowing for a margin of error of +/- 25%), and only 1% had ever used pit planting.

        Moreover, lack of knowledge of pit planting was the most frequently cited reason for

non-adoption. Eighty five percent of non-adopters cited information as the primary reason for

not having used the technology. By comparison, the next most cited constraint—lack of time—

was mentioned by only 5% of non-adopters.

        Farmers were generally more familiar with composting than pit planting, since the

general idea behind compost heaps has a much longer history: 54% of respondents had heard of

some type of composting at baseline. However, the specific type of composting promoted in

this study (Chinese composting) was far less commonly known—only 7% of respondents in

control villages had head of this composting technology.             Again, knowledge of the

recommended specifications for Chinese compost was low: Only 21% of respondents who had

heard of this type of compost could list at least three recommended materials, and similarly low

shares could recall other relevant details.

        We observe baseline adoption of any type of compost as 19% in our baseline sample,

although virtually none of this was adoption of Chinese composting. Adoption of Chinese

composting was not statistically different from zero at baseline.


3. Framework Motivating the Experiments

In this section we provide a simple conceptual framework to clarify how the experiments

contribute to and extend the existing literature on social learning. We embed a model of

communication between “informed” farmers and others in an otherwise standard target input

model used in several prominent papers in the development economics literature on learning and

                                                                                               14
technology adoption, reviewed in Bardhan and Udry (1999). In this type of model, the basic

form of the technology is known, but one random parameter (the ‘target’) remains unknown. 6

In our context, the closest interpretation of this parameter is the suitability of each technology

for an individual farmer. Pit planting imposes labor and pesticide costs, composting imposes

capital costs (and ox-cart has to be rented to transfer compost heaps), while benefits depend on

the rainfall realized on each farm. Net benefits are therefore farmer-specific, and unknown ex-

ante.

         We assume that there is a continuum of farmers normally distributed on a line, with

mean zero and variance one. They can produce a good using either a “traditional” technology

with known profit 𝑞 , or a “new” technology for which the optimal amount of input, 𝑘 ∗ , is

unknown. Namely, if farmer θ uses input 𝑘𝜃 with the new technology, his profit is 𝑞𝜃 = 1 −

(𝑘𝜃 − 𝑘 ∗ )2. 7

         There is a common prior belief regarding the optimal amount of input needed for the

new technology, which is normally distributed with mean 0 and variance 𝜎 2 . We can think of

1⁄𝜎 2 , the precision with which farmers know this information, as his/her innate ability.

Therefore, if the farmers use the technology, they have expected payoff 1−𝜎 2 . We assume that

with no further information, the farmers would not use the new technology, that is, 𝑞 > 1 − 𝜎 2 .

         The “communicator” or “sender” is an informed farmer located at x, and s/he knows 𝑘 ∗.

It is costly for the communicator to transmit this information about the target input level. The

communicator can choose to send a signal with precision 𝜌 ∈ [0, ∞), by bearing a cost 𝑐(𝜌) which

is increasing in the precision or quality of the signal sent.



6
  An input target is not the most natural way to model a technology like pit planting (where the decision is to either
do it or not), but prominent papers in this literature (Foster and Rosenzweig 1995, Munshi 2004, Bandiera and Rasul
2005) use this framework to model analogous choices, like the decision to adopt and improved seed variety. We
therefore stick with this framework because we would like to be clear about the key differences that emerge when
we add communication dynamics to this ‘standard’ model, without conflating differences due to other modeling
choices. This approach helps to clearly identify the contribution of this experiment to the literature. Furthermore,
the key intuition on communication that we derive is not dependent on this modeling choice.
7 Following the literature, we are abstracting from the farmer’s profit maximization problem and assuming a

quadratic loss function increasing in deviations from the optimal level of the target input, k*.

                                                                                                                   15
         This is where our model differs from existing models in the social learning literature, and

helps to delineate the specific contribution of this paper. In existing papers, all other farmers

automatically observe (possibly with some error) any one farmer’s input choice, and they

therefore automatically benefit from others’ experimentation. In contrast, the decision to

communicate is endogenous in this model, and this motivates the study of communication and

agricultural extension services.

         We assume that if farmer x sends the signal, farmer θ receives a noisy message, and the

noise is a function of the distance between x and θ:

              |𝑥−𝜃|
𝑠𝑥𝜃 = 𝑘 ∗ +      𝜌
                                                                                           (1)

Proximity between two farmers can be interpreted in different ways: the distance between their

farms, their social status, or how well they know each other, etc. Given the way |𝑥 − 𝜃| enters in

the model, it is most sensible to interpret it as how relevant the communicator x’s signal is to θ’s

agricultural decision-making. In other words, it should signify proximity between x and θ in

terms of similarity in agricultural practices, so that the signal from x is a more precise and

meaningful indicator for θ’s profits.

         Farmer θ updates his beliefs about 𝑘 ∗ after receiving the signal 𝑠𝑥𝜃 , and the posterior

mean and variance are given by:

                      𝜎 2 𝜌2 𝑠
E[𝑘 ∗ |𝑠𝑥𝜃 , 𝜌] = 𝜎2 𝜌2 +(𝑥−𝜃)
                           𝑥𝜃
                               2                                                            (2)
                            1
𝑉𝐴𝑅[𝑘 ∗ |𝑠𝑥𝜃 , 𝜌] =    1   𝜌2
                                                                                            (3)
                         +
                      𝜎2 (𝑥−𝜃)2


Note that the ex-post variance of 𝑘 ∗ is increasing in 𝜎 2 and in distance from communicator (x-

θ)2, and decreasing in 𝜌2 . This leads to a proposition with clear implications for the experiment

and the data:


Proposition 1. The farmer’s expected payoff of using the new technology increases in his innate
ability, proximity to the sender, and the precision of the signal received:
                       1
𝐸[𝑞𝜃 |𝑠𝑥𝜃 ] = 1 − 1 𝜌2                                                                  (4)
                        +
                      𝜎2 (𝑥−𝜃)2




                                                                                                  16
Proposition 1 implies that all farmers close enough to the sender will adopt the new technology,

and that distance threshold for adoption is given by:

              𝜌2
(𝑥 − 𝜃)2 ≤    1   1                                                                            (5)
                −
             1−𝑞 𝜎2


Given the assumption 𝑞 > 1 − 𝜎 2 , at least a few farmers will benefit from this signal for an

arbitrary small but positive 𝜌.

3.1. Incentives for Communicators

We now consider how the interventions in the experiment would affect communicator and other

(recipient) farmer behavior in this model, in order to generate empirical predictions for the

randomized controlled trial. We introduce “target incentives” for the sender, where farmer x

(the informed communicator) receives a payoff if a certain mass of farmers adopt the new

technology. The incentives in our experiment were exactly of this form.

        The incentive provides a reason for the sender to incur the cost of acquiring and

transmitting information. Given our assumption of a normal distribution of farmers, only

senders sufficiently close to the mean location would respond to the incentive of a given size,

because equation (5) implies that senders in the most populated, dense part of the distribution

will find it cheaper to convince a sufficient number of farmers to win the incentive:


Proposition 2. If the distribution of farmers is symmetric and single-peaked (such as the
normal distribution), then there is a threshold 𝑥 ∗ such that senders located at 𝑥 ∈ [−𝑥 ∗ , 𝑥 ∗ ] send
a message with precision 𝜌(𝑥) in response to the incentive. x* is increasing in the size of the
incentive.

        If the target for incentives becomes more demanding, it becomes more costly for the

sender to fulfill the requirements. Fewer senders will then find it profitable to send the message.

In summary, senders who are most “similar” to target farmers (i.e. in the dense part of the

distribution of farmers) are most likely to react to the incentive.

        As 𝜎 2 gets smaller (maintaining 𝑞 > 1 − 𝜎 2 ), more recipient farmers are pre-disposed

towards the new technology. So, it requires less precision from the sender to convince the

farmers to adopt the new technology. As a consequence, the threshold 𝑥 ∗ increases with the

                                                                                                     17
recipient farmers’ innate ability. We should observe communicators spending more effort on

those who are already pre-disposed.

       Given the target (threshold) structure of the incentive (rather than linear incentives that

are increasing in the share of recipient farmers convinced to adopt), the precision of the signal

sent by the communicator will vary inversely with the mass of communicators who are induced

by the incentive to send a signal. For example, the precision sent is “U-shaped” symmetrically

around 0, since senders in the most populated part of the distribution do not have to put in

much effort to convince the target number of farmers (required to win the incentive payment) to

adopt. When recipients’ innate ability increases (lower 𝜎 2 ), the signal precision decreases for

every communicator who had been convinced by the incentive to acquire and transmit

information.

3.2. Empirical Implications and Mapping to the Experiment and Data

We have collected data on a variety of activities and actions of both the communicators and the

target farmers in our experiment, so that we have a mapping of all the key theoretical concepts to

our data. In the model, communicators have to first decide whether to incur the cost of

acquiring information and sending the signal. For the experiment, we collected data on each

communicator’s willingness to learn about the technology himself as the empirical counterpart

for this concept. Identifying and collecting data on the actions of “shadow” communicators in

non-treated villages – farmers who would have been assigned the roles of LF or PF, had that

intervention been implemented in this village - was therefore critical for us to be able to report

experimental results on the effects of the treatment on communicators’ first-stage decisions to

acquire and retain information. For this analysis, we compare the actions of the lead or peer

farmers to these shadow communicators. We also collected information on all actual and

shadow communicators’ own technology adoption decisions.

       Second, the precision of the signal that the communicator chooses to transmit in the

model is proxied in our experiment using measures of the effort that communicators expend to


                                                                                               18
teach others about the new technology. We obtained reports from all sample farmers as to

whether the communicator held any activities, such as demonstration days or group trainings.

We also tracked how often the communicators interacted with individual recipient farmers –

whether the PF or LF walked by their house more often, or had individual conversations.

        Finally, the information recipient’s decision to adopt is measured in the first year using

farmers’ knowledge gains and retention of the details of the information presented to them on

how to apply the new agricultural technologies. In the second year of the experiment, we move

beyond knowledge gains and focus more on actual adoption of the new technologies by the

target farmers.    This closely parallels the way in which our incentive payments in the

experimental design were structured.

        Given this mapping of theoretical concepts to the data, the model yields the following

predictions for our empirical setting:

    1. Incentives increase communicators’ own willingness to learn about the technology (i.e.

        acquire and send the signal 𝑠𝑥𝜃 )

    2. Communicators most “centrally located” (i.e. there are many others in the village similar

        to him) are most likely to respond to incentives and learn about technology themselves.

        This follows directly from Proposition 2. Given our method for selecting partner (lead or

        peer) farmers, this implies that peer farmers, who are much closer to the majority of

        other farmers in the village in resource access, technology or relevance space, should

        respond most strongly to incentives.

    3. The technology adoption rate by recipient farmers should also be most responsive to

        incentives in the peer farmer villages, since peer farmers were explicitly chosen to be, on

        average, closer to target farmers. This implication follows directly from Proposition 1.

        It is important to note that there are mechanisms outside our model that may lead to a

reversal in prediction 3. For example, receiving a payment may undermine the credibility of

communicators. Their message about the positive attributes of the new technology may be less



                                                                                                   19
persuasive once recipient farmers realize that the communicator is being paid an incentive to

deliver that message. We collected data on recipient farmers’ perceptions of the credibility and

honesty of communicators to directly test this mechanism.


4. Data

We collected primary data using household surveys and direct observation of farm practices in a

rolling sample of farming households. In September and October of 2009, we conducted a

baseline survey interviewing the heads of 25 randomly selected households in each of the 168

sample villages, in addition to surveys of the actual and shadow LFs and PFs in these villages (a

total sample of 5,208 respondents). We do not rely solely on respondent self-reports regarding

technology adoption: we subsequently conducted on-farm monitoring of pit planting and

composting practices in the 2009-2010 agricultural season, where enumerators trained in the

maize farming process visited the farms of 1,400 households to directly observe land preparation

and any evidence of composting. 8 At the conclusion of the 2009-2010 season, we conducted a

second round of surveying which we called a midline. Both the primary decision-maker on

agriculture and his or her spouse were interviewed (separately) during the midline survey.

           During the on-farm-monitoring and the midline, we rotated the set of households within

the village who were sampled, so that there is not a perfect overlap of households across survey

rounds. Not surveying the same households across rounds is a costly strategy, but it lessens any

biases from intensive monitoring, and also makes it more difficult for the communicators to

target a minority of households in order to win the incentive payment. Furthermore, our sample

of control villages included some villages that fall under the jurisdiction of the same AEDOs in

charge of a few of the treatment villages, so that we can study whether there was any

displacement of AEDO effort in favor of treatment villages (where they could win incentives), at

the expense of control villages where they also should have been spending some time.



8
    Budget constraints prevented us from conducting this monitoring on all sample farms.

                                                                                              20
            The following year, we conducted another round of on-farm monitoring of PP practices

in 34 villages during the 2010-2011 season. At the end of that season, we conducted a second

follow-up survey (called an endline) in July-October 2011, again interviewing the primary

agricultural decision-maker and spouse in 25 households in the village, plus all the actual and

shadow LF and PF households.                    The endline survey collected careful information on all

agricultural outputs, revenues, inputs and costs with sufficient detail to be able to compute

farming yields, input use and profits. The endline survey also included on-farm verification of

reported compost heaps.

            During the first year, adoption is measured primarily using knowledge gains.

Knowledge is measured using a score capturing each respondent’s accuracy in specifying the key

features of the relevant technology promoted in her district. For pit planting, this score captures

accuracy of the respondent’s knowledge regarding the length, width, and depth of each pit

(allowing for a ±25% error bound), the number of seeds to be planted in each pit, the quantity

of manure to be applied in the pit, and the optimal use of maize stalks after harvest. For

composting, this score captures the optimal materials, time to maturity, heap location, moistness

level and application timing (see Appendix A2 for the specific questions). Many respondents

reported never having heard of these technologies; and these respondents were therefore

assigned a knowledge score of 0.

            The primary measures of adoption for the second year are the use of pit planting on at

least one household plot 9 or the existence of at least one compost heap prepared by the

household. We directly observe the use of PP during on-farm monitoring, and the monitoring

results are consistent with, and largely validate, the survey responses. Summary statistics on our

sample are presented in Table 3.


5. Empirical Results

5.1 Incentives and communicator retention of knowledge

9
    Malawian farmers typically prepare the land for an entire plot in using a uniform method (e.g. pit planting, ridging).

                                                                                                                       21
The theory predicts that performance incentives increase communicators’ own willingness to

acquire the information presented, and relay the signal (𝑠𝑥𝜃 ) to their neighbors. To examine this

prediction empirically, we test all communicators during the first follow-up survey on how well

they retained information on the technologies they were trained on. The dependent variable is a

knowledge score based on communicators’ performance in these tests (see Appendix A2).

         We created these scores for both the actual communicators who were assigned the task

of transmitting information (the peer farmers in the PF treatment village and the lead farmer in

the LF treatment), as well as “shadow” peer farmers and shadow lead farmers who were chosen

using the same process as the communicators, but not officially assigned any task. The shadow

PFs and LF are the correct counterfactual comparison group. Appendix A4 verifies that the

actual and shadow communicators are statistically similar in terms of their baseline demographic

and economic characteristics. 10

         We regress communicator knowledge scores on (actual versus shadow) communicator

status using the following specification:

𝑘𝑛𝑜𝑤𝑙𝑒𝑑𝑔𝑒𝑐𝑣𝑑 = 𝛼 + 𝛽1 𝑠ℎ𝑎𝑑𝑜𝑤 𝐿𝐹𝑐𝑣𝑑 + 𝛽2 𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑢𝑎𝑙 𝐿𝐹𝑐𝑣𝑑 + 𝛽3 𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑢𝑎𝑙 𝑃𝐹𝑐𝑣𝑑 + 𝑍𝑐𝑣𝑑 Γ + 𝐷𝑑 + 𝜖𝑐𝑣𝑑

The subscripts denote communicator c residing in village v in district d, 𝑍𝑐𝑣𝑑 is a matrix of

individual -level controls and 𝐷𝑑 denote district fixed effects. In this specification, our reference

group are shadow PFs. For ease of exposition, we run this regression separately for the two sub-

samples of villages where incentives were or were not offered (results look the same when

samples are combined and interaction terms between communicator type and incentives are

used). In Table 4 we report results with and without individual controls and district fixed effects.

         Those chosen as lead farmers (who are richer and more educated, as we have seen)

generally perform better on the tests compared to those chosen as peer farmers. Without

incentives, actual peer farmers (who are trained by the AEDOs, and assigned the task of

communicating) do not perform as well as lead farmers without incentives, and their

10
   The shadow communicators are also statistically similar across treatment arms (e.g., shadow LFs in AEDO
treatment villages are similar to shadow LFs in PF and control villages); these results are available on request.

                                                                                                                    22
performance is more comparable to shadow lead farmers who are not directly trained by

AEDOs. It is even difficult to statistically distinguish their exam performance from that of

shadow peer farmers. In summary, peer farmers do not appear to retain knowledge about new

technologies when they are not provided incentives.

       When incentives are introduced, we observe the strongest improvements in the

knowledge scores for peer farmers. With incentives, peer farmers are just as knowledgeable

about the technologies as the actual lead farmers with incentives. As Table 4 shows, incentives

improve PFs’ knowledge scores by about 19-20 percentage points, which represents a doubling

of knowledge scores relative to shadow PFs. This incentive effect for peer farmers is both

quantitatively and statistically significant (with a p-value of 0.0375, comparing columns 2 and 4).

Incentives also increase lead farmer knowledge scores by about 7 percentage points, but this is

not a statistically significant increase. In summary, incentives increase communicators’ own

willingness to learn about the technology (i.e. acquire and send a signal), especially for peer

farmers. The overall increase and the larger increase for PFs (who are on average ‘closer’ to the

target farmers), are both consistent with the theoretical model.

5.2 Incentives and communicator effort

       Next, we test whether communicators undertake costly effort to adjust the precision of

the signal sent (ρ) in response to the offer of incentives. Our dependent variable now indicates

whether the assigned communicator in the village held at least one activity to train others

(typically either a group training or a demonstration plot). This variable is drawn from the

midline household survey and captures the share of households in the village who responded

that the assigned communicator held such an activity. We use the following specification:

           𝑒𝑓𝑓𝑜𝑟𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑑 = 𝛽1 𝐴𝐸𝐷𝑂𝑖𝑣𝑑 + 𝛽2 𝐿𝐹𝑖𝑣𝑑 + 𝛽3 𝑃𝐹𝑖𝑣𝑑 + 𝑍𝑖𝑣𝑑 Γ + 𝐷𝑑 + 𝜖𝑖𝑣𝑑

where 𝑂𝑖𝑣𝑑 , 𝐿𝐹𝑖𝑣𝑑 , and 𝑃𝐹𝑖𝑣𝑑 now denote the communicator treatment assignment and i

indexes the household respondents. We estimate this specification using OLS regressions with

standard errors clustered by village, again both unconditionally and conditional on respondent


                                                                                                23
household characteristics and district dummies. As the survey question references the assigned

communicator, control villages (where no communicator was assigned) are omitted from this

regression. The regression output in Table 5 omits the constant term, so that coefficients 𝛽1, 𝛽2,

and 𝛽3 can be interpreted as the mean effort levels for each communicator type. We report the

results separately for villages without communicator incentives (columns 1 and 2), and those

provided incentives (columns 3 and 4).

         In the sample without incentives, AEDO and LF effort are statistically comparable.

However, AEDOs are significantly more likely to hold activities than were PFs (between 10 and

12 pp more so, statistically significant with 90% confidence). In contrast, when incentives are

provided (columns 3 and 4), PFs are the communicators most likely to hold activities. Both PFs

and LFs put substantially (and statistically significantly) more effort with incentives, but the

effect is largest for peer farmers, and is significantly larger than it is for other communicators. 11

PF effort levels more than double when incentives are added. 75% of all respondents attend a

dissemination activity when PFs with incentives are the assigned extension partner. This effort is

also significantly greater than that incurred by AEDOs (p-value=0.108 in column 4) or lead

farmers (p-value=0.084). The analyses in both sections 5.2 and 5.3 suggest that communicators

who are most “centrally located” (i.e. there are many others in the village similar to him or close

to him in social or geographic space) respond most strongly to incentives.

5.3 Technology adoption by recipient farmers

We now move beyond communicator actions, and study technology adoption by the ‘target’

(recipient) farmers as a function of the randomized treatments. We proxy take-up at the end of

the first season with the knowledge scores described above – i.e. whether recipient farmers

retained the details about how to apply the technologies in the field. With the second year of

data we study actual adoption – by measuring technology use in the field. In Table 6, we show

results from estimating the knowledge equation using midline data on the sample of
11
  Statistically significant at 95% (90%) when compared to the incentive effect for LFs (AEDOs). These confidence
levels are based on regressions (omitted for brevity) using the full sample of all villages (including both villages with
incentives and without), where incentive treatment is interacted with communicator type.

                                                                                                                       24
target/recipient (i.e. non-communicator) households, where the targets’ knowledge retention

(rather than the communicators’) is now the dependent variable:

           𝑘𝑛𝑜𝑤𝑙𝑒𝑑𝑔𝑒𝑖𝑣𝑑 = 𝛼 + 𝛽1 𝐴𝐸𝐷𝑂𝑖𝑣𝑑 + 𝛽2 𝐿𝐹𝑖𝑣𝑑 + 𝛽3 𝑃𝐹𝑖𝑣𝑑 + 𝑍𝑖𝑣𝑑 Γ + 𝐷𝑑 + 𝜖𝑖𝑣𝑑

         In villages without incentives (columns 1 and 2) compared to pure control villages,

recipient households exhibit knowledge scores that are 18-20 pp higher in AEDO villages, 7-9

pp higher in the LF villages, and 3 pp higher (but not statistically different from zero) in PF

villages. When incentives are provided (columns 3 and 4), however, we find that knowledge

scores are 6, 8, and 12 pp higher in AEDO, LF, and PF villages than in the controls, which are

large relative to the mean score of 0.09 in the pure control villages. 12 There is no apparent

incentive effect in LF villages, but knowledge scores in PF villages are significantly larger (p-

value = 0.02) when the peer farmers are provided incentives. The extra effort expended by peer

farmers in incentive villages (that we documented earlier) results in greater knowledge

transmission, and this is all consistent with the theoretical framework. The lack of knowledge

retention by recipient farmers in PF villages without incentives is not at all surprising, since we

have already observed (in table 4) that the PF communicators themselves do not retain any of

the information without incentives, and therefore really have nothing to pass on.

         Next, we study actual adoption by the target farmers, or the use of the technologies in

the field measured two years after the (randomized) communication treatments were introduced

in these villages. Our dependent variables are now the use of pit planting on at least one

household plot, or the production of at least one compost heap, pile, or pit by the household

during the 2010/11 agricultural season. We use the following specification:

            𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑏(𝑎𝑑𝑜𝑝𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑑 ) = Φ(𝛼 + 𝛽1 𝐴𝐸𝐷𝑂𝑖𝑣𝑑 + 𝛽2 𝐿𝐹𝑖𝑣𝑑 + 𝛽3 𝑃𝐹𝑖𝑣𝑑 + 𝑍𝑖𝑣𝑑 Γ + 𝐷𝑑 )

where Φ is the cumulative normal distribution function. We estimate this specification using

probit separately for the two different technologies (and separately for incentive and non-

incentive villages), because adoption rates for the two technologies were very different at

12 The larger effects in the AEDO villages without incentives are both surprising and statistically significant at the

1% level. However, this counter-intuitive effect does not generally persist when we examine adoption decisions
after two years (which we will report next).

                                                                                                                         25
baseline. For pit planting villages, we report results for both self-reported adoption in the

endline survey, and directly observed adoption for the subsample of 34 villages where on-farm

monitoring was conducted, recognizing that the smaller sample size may weaken precision in the

latter case. Direct observation monitoring was conducted for the full composting village sample.

        Table 7 reports marginal effects from the Probit estimation.            In villages without

communicator incentives, self-reported adoption of pit planting is 2.2 pp higher in AEDO

villages than in the controls, and very close to and statistically indistinguishable from zero in the

LF and PF villages (column 1). When incentives are added, adoption is 5.5, 6.3, and 10.2 pp

higher in AEDO, LF, and PF villages, respectively, than in the controls (column 2). These are

large effects relative to mean adoption in pure control (0.01) or in AEDO villages (0.03). The

incentive effect in PF villages (the move from 1.7 to 10.2 pp) is both statistically significant (p-

value = 0.02) and dramatically larger than the effect of incentives among the other

communicators.

        In the directly observed (on-farm monitoring) subsample (columns 3 and 4), we see a

similar pattern: usage of pit planting is highest in the incentivized PF treatment (13.6 pp), and

this adoption rate is significantly greater than it is for other communicator types. The differential

response to incentives also exists when we assess target farmers’ plans for adoption in the

following season (columns 5 and 6). 17.6% of target farmers in PF villages planned to adopt the

following year.

        Only 1% of farmers in control villages practice pit planting, and only 1% of target

farmers in all treatment villages practiced pit planting at baseline. Adoption rates we observe

under the PF-incentive based dissemination strategy (of 10.2%, 13.6% and 17.6% through self-

reports, on-farm-monitoring, or future plans, respectively) all represent meaningful gains relative

to baseline and relative to the pure control group.

        Columns 7 and 8 of Table 7 report effects on composting adoption. Without incentives,

adoption rates are no different than in pure control villages where Chinese composting was not



                                                                                                  26
introduced by us at all. When incentives are provided, we observe large gains in the adoption of

composting across our communicator treatments. Adoption is 19.0, 14.4, and 26.1 pp higher in

AEDO, LF and PF villages with incentives, respectively, than in our control villages. 13 The

incentive effect in peer farmer villages (of 33.4 pp extra adoption among target farmers) is highly

statistically significant (p-value <0.000). The PF-incentive effect is also significantly larger than

the LF-incentive effect. These effects are also quite dramatic given baseline adoption levels of

any type of compost of only 19%. Parallel to the communicator knowledge retention and

communicator effort results, we see a differentially stronger response to incentives among peer

farmers, i.e. communicators who are “most like” the target farmers. This is true for both types

of technologies introduced to two different sets of districts.



6. Alternative Mechanisms underlying the Peer Farmer Performance

Apart from the difference in identity, the peer and lead farmer treatments vary in a few other

dimensions that could account for the differential response of PFs to the incentives. There are

five communicators rather than one, and the incentives are joint, with each communicator

receiving the incentive payment conditional on the joint performance of all PFs in the village.

These lead to several alternative hypotheses that could explain various portions of our results: (1)

scale effects from having five communicators rather than one; (2) non-linear effects of the

incentives; (3) the joint-ness of the incentives could induce PFs to coordinate, collaborate, or

otherwise influence one another to induce greater effort; (4) different wealth of LFs and PFs

could induce differential response to the incentives; and (5) differing product market

competition between LFs and PFs could similarly affect incentive-responsiveness. 14 We first


13
   It is reasonable to worry that the provision of incentives, if it became widely known, could undermine the
credibility of our extension partners, as recipients became less likely to listen to the advice of communicators who
are being paid to provide that advice. We ask all respondents to rate their assigned communicators’ honesty, skill
and agricultural knowledge in the midline survey. Using these data, Appendix A5 shows that incentives do not
undermine communicators’ credibility. Target farmers appreciate peer farmers’ extra effort in incentive villages, and
rate them as more knowledgeable and honest. Lead farmers, whose effort is not responsive to incentives, do not
receive similar recognition, but are not penalized either.
14
   These alternatives do not necessarily undermine what we learn from this experiment. The treatment arms were
designed to be budget-neutral, and the superior PF performance per dollar spent contains valuable policy lessons.

                                                                                                                  27
explore these alternatives – for which we do not find strong support in the data – before delving

deeper in the next section into the type of identity that matters most.

        First, we consider whether variation in the number of communicators across the LF and

PF arms can explain their relative performance. Any simple model that suggests that a larger

number of communicators increases total effort or the precision of the information transmitted

(a la Conley and Udry 2010) is unlikely to explain the data well, because PFs out-perform LFs in

the incentive sample, while the converse is true in the non-incentive sample. Nevertheless, we

can use natural variation in population size across our sample villages to directly control for such

scale effects. Moreover, the random assignment of LF and PF communicators to villages of

varying size creates an overlapping sub-sample where the communicators per capita are roughly

constant across LF and PF villages. We can compare LF and PF performance in this sub-sample,

holding scale constant.

        Table 8 compares the adoption rate amongst target farmers across LF and PF villages,

while directly controlling for scale effects using a measure of ‘communicators per capita’.

Communicators per capita does not have a significant effect on technology adoption, and our

main finding continues to hold: when incentives are provided, the peer farmer based

communication strategy leads to 18.4 percentage points greater technology adoption. Without

incentives, there is zero difference in adoption between LF and PF villages, controlling for scale.

        The last two columns re-examines these same questions for the subset of villages where

the communicators-per-capita across LF and PF treatments overlapped on a common support

(large PF villages combined with small LF villages). Incentivized PF villages experience 23

percentage point greater technology adoption than incentivized LF villages in this sub-sample.

There is again a zero difference in the sub-sample without incentives. Taken together, all these

results suggest that identity is a key mechanism underlying LF-PF differences even after

controlling for scale effects.




                                                                                                 28
         Figure 3 looks directly at the effects of scale separately in the LF and PF villages with and

without incentives, using variation in village size.               Throughout, we find only very weak

correlation of communicators per HH and adoption rates – and a negative correlation in the

incentivized PF arm, which is associated with the largest rates of adoption.

         Second, we consider whether non-linearities in our incentive offers could drive the

differential effort and adoption effects that PFs exhibit relative to LFs. Each incentivized PF

was eligible to receive a reward equal to 1/5 of that received by each incentivized LF, and it is

possible that aiming at 1/5 of the target for 1/5 of the reward was disproportionately attractive. 15

Recall that performance for purposes of our incentives was based on percentage point gains and

not levels, and thus was independent of village size. We can compare the adoption treatment

effects of LFs in relatively small villages to those of PFs in relatively large villages. In these

settings, each LF must communicate with the same number of households as each PF, but

would earn dramatically higher rewards for doing so. We show the results in columns 1-4 of

Table 9. Columns 1 and 2 show that incentives for LFs do not affect adoption in ‘small’ villages

with fewer than 65 households (the median in our sample) or even 50 households. In PF

villages, however, we observe sizable effects of incentives even in ‘large’ villages with greater

than 65 households (column 3) or 100 households (column 4).

         It is also possible that the joint-ness of the incentives for PFs could induce teamwork or

other peer effects among these groups. On the other hand, it could lead to free riding and other

collective action problems. However, in cases where groups are composed of individuals who

know each other well and who interact in other settings, joint incentives could lead individuals to

coordinate and monitor one another. To test whether such joint-ness is driving the differential

response of PFs, we compare villages where PFs were closely linked to one another at baseline to

villages where PFs were not closely linked. We estimate:

𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑏(𝑎𝑑𝑜𝑝𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑖𝑣𝑑 ) = 𝛼 + 𝛽1 𝐼𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒𝑠𝑣𝑑 + 𝛽2 𝑃𝐹 𝐿𝑖𝑛𝑘𝑠𝑣𝑑 + 𝛽3 𝐼𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒𝑠𝑣𝑑 ∗ 𝑃𝐹𝐿𝑖𝑛𝑘𝑠𝑣𝑑 + 𝜖𝑖𝑣𝑑


15
  Note that such an argument would run counter to the higher marginal utility typically associated with higher-
powered incentives.

                                                                                                                  29
The variable 𝑃𝐹 𝐿𝑖𝑛𝑘𝑠𝑣𝑑 in this equation represents three different measures of the average

likelihood that each PF is related to, in a group with, or talks daily with every other PF in the

same village. These measures capture the share of strong bilateral relationships between PFs. In

columns 5-7 of Table 9, we present the mean marginal effects of the incentive treatment at both

the 25th and 75th percentiles of the PF links measures. We find that the incentive effect is not

statistically distinguishable across any of these measures. Even in villages where PF are not

particularly well-connected at baseline, the presence of incentives dramatically improves

outcomes. These results suggest that the joint-ness of incentives is not likely to be driving the

differential response of PFs to these incentives.

        As another alternative explanation for the differential responses of LFs and PFs to the

incentives we provide, we consider whether the differences in wealth levels between LFs and

PFs (typically associated with differing marginal utility from additional payments) are related to

differing incentive-responsiveness.     To do so, we control for the assigned communicators’

housing conditions and educational attainment in estimating the effects of incentives on LFs and

PFs. The results, shown in Appendix A6, indicate that within both LF and PF treatment arms,

the effects of communicator wealth are larger in incentive villages rather than smaller. PFs

continue to differentially respond to incentives, even after we control for the interaction of

incentives and communicator wealth proxies. These results suggest differences in marginal

utility are unlikely to drive our main results.

        Finally, it is also possible that some communicators compete with target farmers in the

product market, and teaching others how to farm more maize might undermine the price that

the communicator receives in the market for his maize. If LFs and PFs sell maize to different

extents, their differential financial incentives could explain the differential performance of the

communication treatments. This turns out to be an unlikely explanation, because we see very

little sale of maize among any of our sample farmers at baseline. Fewer than 20% of households




                                                                                               30
sold any maize, and less than 10% of all maize harvested was sold. The share of harvests sold by

lead or peer farmers are not statistically different from each other.



7. What type of ‘proximity’ matters most?

        To summarize, the set of empirical results conform to the basic intuition derived from

our framework. Peer farmers, who are most ‘similar’ to the target farmers, respond most

strongly to the incentive treatment, in terms of their own retention of knowledge and effort

expended to communicate with and convince others. This in turn leads to greater technology

adoption among target farmers who reside in villages randomly assigned to PF communication.

        “Proximity” between PFs and recipient farmers rationalize these findings, but our model

is silent about the specific dimension of proximity that matters. We model farmers as being

distributed on a line, but do not specify the social or geographic definition of this line. Indeed,

Tables 1 and 2 show that PFs are closer to target farmers (relative to LFs) in a variety of

dimensions, including poverty, education, farm size.

        In this sub-section, we empirically explore which of these dimensions help to explain the

relative success and incentive-response of PFs. We do this in two ways. First, we run the

technology adoption regression using the sample of incentive villages, and add interaction terms

between the PF treatment and various household-PF characteristics (like similarity, geographic

and social proximity, or social interactions measured at baseline). This allows us to explore the

types of PFs (with incentives) that are most successful. Are PFs with wider social networks, or

ones with more frequent social interactions, or the PFs most comparable to target households in

terms of farm size and input use the most persuasive? These results are displayed in Table 10.

        As there are five PFs in each village, our respondent-level measure of proximity is

defined as the mean of the proximity to each of the PFs. The results are largely unchanged when

we use maximum values (i.e., the respondent’s relationship to the ‘closest’ PF), or median values.




                                                                                                 31
         The specifications in Table 10 control for each interaction term individually, and the last

column then jointly controls for all the different interaction terms representing each dimension

of “proximity”: family relationships, joint group memberships, and similarity in terms of income

and education. Target farmers are generally a little poorer (e.g. cultivate less land, have access to

less inputs, less income, less education) than peer farmers on average, so we use measures such

as “PF has smaller or similar farm” to proxy for comparability. 16 Whether we control for the

interaction terms individually or jointly, the factor that emerges as quantitatively and statistically

most significant is comparability in terms of land size. Peer farmers with incentives whose land

size is most comparable to others in their village are significantly (36 percentage points) more

likely to convince target farmers to adopt. Peer farmers with larger immediate or extended family

networks are not differentially more successful, and surprisingly, those with more frequent social

interactions at baseline (prior to the introduction of these interventions) actually perform worse.

Peer farmers who share group membership with higher numbers of other respondents (e.g. the

PF and the respondent belong to the same church group) perform better, but the statistical

significance of this variable disappears when all the interactions are added jointly. In summary,

agricultural comparability is the factor that appears most robust in explaining which peer farmers

are most successful.

         Second, we examine whether the incentive-response of the peer farmers varies across

different types of target farmer households. In other words, what types of target farmers are

most convinced by the PF, and amongst what types of targets do incentives play the biggest role

in enhancing the PFs success in persuasion? Table 11 shows results on the PF effect on

technology adoption amongst different types of targets separately for incentive and non-

incentive villages, and conducts a statistical test of differences across the two types of villages. 17



16
   This can be interpreted as the share of households who had larger farms than each PF, averaged over all of the
PFs in the village. The variable is constructed based on respondents’ perceived comparability with each PF. These
perceptions are well correlated with actual relative farm sizes of respondents and PFs, which we also measured.
17
   We pool both technologies, and run a Probit regression in PF villages: 𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑏(𝑎𝑑𝑜𝑝𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑑 ) = 𝛼 + 𝛽1𝐼𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒𝑠𝑣𝑑 +
𝛽2 𝑃𝐹 𝐶ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑠𝑣𝑑 + 𝛽3 𝐼𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒𝑠𝑣𝑑 ∗ 𝑃𝐹 𝐶ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑠𝑣𝑑 + 𝑍𝑖𝑣𝑑 Γ + 𝐷𝑑 + 𝜖𝑖𝑣𝑑 . 𝐼𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒𝑠𝑣𝑑 is an indicator of

                                                                                                                      32
         As before, similarity between target farmers and PFs is measured using the mean value of

proximity, averaged across all five peer farmers. 18 There are two notable sets of results that

emerge. The first, which is in some ways less interesting, is that immediate family members of

the PF adopt regardless of whether an incentive was offered (see column 3). The second result

is that the provision of incentives has a greater marginal effect on adoption amongst farmers who

are more comparable to the PF in terms of land size and use of agricultural inputs. The first two

columns show that when the PF is provided incentives and puts in more effort to convince

others, target farmers with agricultural conditions similar to the PFs are the ones most likely to

be persuaded.          These results, coupled with our model’s prediction on the types of

communicators expected to respond to incentives, imply that agricultural comparability and

relevance is a key determinant of success in communication.

         The other columns show that peer farmers provided incentives are no more persuasive

with their own extended family members, or those who are similar in terms of educational

attainment or wealth or other socio-economic characteristics. There is a differential incentive

response for group members, for whom the cost of communication might be lower. When we

include all these characteristics simultaneously in a single regression, farm size similarity is the

characteristic that retains statistical and quantitative significance.

         In summary, while our model does not provide specific guidance on the type of

proximity that lead peer farmers to respond most strongly to our incentive treatment, the data

suggest that agricultural comparability matters most. These findings are closely related to the

Munshi (2004) result that heterogeneity in agricultural conditions impedes social learning.

Munshi (2004) uses natural variation in rice growing conditions to derive this result, while we use

direct reports from farmers on their bilateral comparability with communicators.




incentive treatment in village v in district d, and 𝑃𝐹 𝐶ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑠𝑣𝑑 is a measure of the mean baseline characteristics,
averaged across the five peer farmers in the village.
18 As above, the results are qualitatively similar when considering the maximum values in linkages between a

respondent across any of the five PFs, rather than the mean across all PFs.

                                                                                                                        33
8. Communication or demonstration?

       We have shown that incentives induced peer farmers to put in more effort to

communicate with others. It could have also induced more experimentation by the PFs on their

own farms. This section explores whether PFs and LFs pursued such a ‘demonstration’ strategy,

and then, whether communication effort or demonstration was crucial to persuading others.

       Columns 1 and 6 of Table 12 show that the incentive treatment raised each

communicator’s propensity to adopt the assigned technology herself, and that this effect was

stronger for PFs. The other columns in the table explore whether the communicators’ use of the

technology is correlated with others’ use. We run OLS regressions (columns 2,3,7,8), and IV

regressions (columns 4,5,9,10) where the randomized incentive treatments. Instrument for

communicators’ won adoption We control for other types of communicator effort (which also

responded to incentives) directly in some specifications to check whether demonstration or

communication effort was more successful in convincing others.

       Lead farmers’ own adoption is not robustly associated with others’ adoption, especially

when other aspects of LF effort are controlled for. LF demonstration does not appear to be

important for the target farmers’ decisions. In contrast, peer farmers’ own experimentation with

the technology appears crucial for convincing others to try. In both OLS and IV specifications,

peer farmer demonstration has large and statistically significant effects on others’ adoption, even

after controlling for other dimensions of PF effort.

       It is impossible to convincingly disentangle the informational channels in our setup, but

these results are consistent with peer farmers not only relying on “soft” information to convince

target farmers, but instead transmitting key information via their own actions. This suggests that

PFs were not only teaching others about the methods to apply the technology, but also trying to

signal its profitability. Our results on dissemination and learning are therefore closely related to

the social learning literature (Foster and Rosenzweig 1995, Munshi 2004, Conley and Udry 2010)

even though we pursued an active intervention strategy rather than rely on passive learning.



                                                                                                 34
9. Effects of Technology Adoption on Yields and Input Use

We collect detailed data on yield, revenues, labor, materials and capital costs from all farmers to

calculate the effects of the technologies on productivity and input use and costs. This exercise

serves three important functions. First, our interventions induce farmers who are not technically

trained to communicate technical information. To properly evaluate the success of this method,

it is therefore important to verify that the way recipient farmers implement the new methods is

technically correct, and generate gains in yield. Second, the two technologies we promote are

relatively new, and their performance in the field with a large-scale trial is unknown. The

technologies may impose additional input and labor costs, and those need to be accounted for to

infer profitability. Third, measures of yield improvement are required to conduct a proper cost-

benefit analysis of the communication strategies that we introduced (that impose new incentive

and monitoring costs for the Malawi Ministry of Agriculture).

        The PF-incentive treatment led to a large increase in the adoption of both technologies,

and we use the random variation induced by this treatment to report the average effects of each

technology on maize yields, input use, and labor use recorded in the endline survey.              In

Appendix A7, we show these impacts on survey-based maize yields two seasons after the initial

training. To account for outliers, we winsorize maize yields by district at the 95% level (i.e.,

assign the top 5% of values the 95th percentile value). We also include district fixed effects to

account for district-specific shocks in yields. The intent-to-treat (ITT) effect of pit planting in

column 1 shows that the incentive assignment raises yields by 298 kg/ha, or 18% of the baseline

mean yield of 1678 kg/ha in this sample. In column 2, we further control for baseline yields and

find that these incentive treatment impact is 179 kg/ha, or 10.7% of the mean baseline yield.

Given differences in adoption of pit planting of 9.5% in response to PF incentives (see Table 7),

we estimate a treatment effect on the treated (TOT) of 113%. This estimate is very large and

indicates that pit planting dramatically improved yields in PF villages, and we cannot statistically

distinguish it from the range of estimates cited in the prior literature (50-100% gains). Finally, in

                                                                                                  35
column 3, we estimate an instrumental variables regression using the incentive treatment as an

instrument for each household’s adoption decision. We find that adoption of pit planting raises

yields by 5,020 kg/ha. This coefficient is not significantly different from zero, and we cannot

distinguish it from our aforementioned TOT estimate.

       Turning to composting, we find far weaker evidence of yield gains. In column 4 of

Appendix A7, we find an ITT of 66 kg/ha due to PF incentives that is not statistically significant

(7.4% increase in mean yields). Conditioning on baseline yields in column 5, we find even

smaller effects. Finally, our IV regressions again indicate only very small effects from the

production of compost in our sample.

       Appendix A8 examines whether pit planting affected farmers’ input use.          Farmers are

much more likely to use a tool for land preparation, herbicide to prevent weeds in the pits, and

to intercrop their maize plots with beans and other crops (practices recommended by MoAFS in

conjunction with pit planting). There are no significant effects on the use of manure, basal, or

top dress fertilizer. The herbicide use can raise production costs.

       In Appendix A9, we assess the impacts of pit planting on the total labor hours devoted

to land preparation, planting, fertilizer application, weeding, and harvesting. Our surveys very

carefully collect detailed data on labor hours, separately for paid and unpaid men, women, and

children, across all plots in the household. Again, we assess the ITT and TOT effects of

incentives in our PF villages, with district fixed effects included throughout. We find that pit

planting leads to significant reductions in hours devoted to land preparation, with an ITT of -6.5

hours. Pit planting was believed to require greater land preparation effort, but it turns out, it is

not as intensive as ridging, which is the traditional land preparation method. We also find small

reductions in fertilizer application and in harvesting, and no impacts on planting or weeding

hours due to incentives. In total, we find an ITT reduction of 14.4 hours across all labor

categories in the prior season. This reduction lowered production costs.




                                                                                                 36
         We find no evidence of any differential impacts on input use in the composting districts.

Of particular note, we find no differences in either basal or top dress fertiliser use across

incentive treatments. We also do not find any evidence of labor hour impacts from composting.

         Using these yield and cost measures, we develop a back-of-the-envelope cost

effectiveness calculation of our PF-incentive treatment, by conservatively assuming that the full

research and data collection costs we incurred is required to implement such a treatment.

Programmatic costs for the training of AEDOs, baseline, midline, and endline rounds of

knowledge and adoption monitoring data collection, two rounds of incentives, and paying local

support staff cost us US$1,843 per village treated (or US$ 17.07 per household). Given our

estimated adoption impacts of 10.2 pp for pit planting and 26.1 pp for composting, the program

costs are US$167 per household adopting pit planting and US$65 per household adopting

composting. Our estimated yield gains from pit planting adoption suggest that each treated

household gained US$77 (this is the ITT estimate of 298kg of maize, priced at 2011 harvest-

period maize prices and foreign exchange rates) in the first year alone. This yields a benefit/cost

ratio of 4.5 : 1. 19 Continued use of pit planting among adopting households—or even expansion

to additional households in these villages—would raise this ratio considerably.


10. Conclusions

Vast and important literatures across the social sciences have convincingly demonstrated that

social learning is an important mechanism for the transmission of information and behaviors.

Our experiment attempts to leverage these important insights for policy. In doing so, we

document that communication dynamics between agents are important determinants of

information dissemination.          Social learning models can likely be enriched by studying the

incentives that govern whether (and how) people communicate about new technologies with

their peers. Such an approach would also make the social learning and peer effects documented

by economists in a variety of contexts more policy-relevant. As this experiment shows,
19
  We focus on yields and revenues rather than profits, because the increase in herbicide cost associated with pit
planting is counter-balanced by the decrease in labor costs, and the cost side is awash.

                                                                                                                    37
agricultural extension services can be improved by incorporating social learning in

communication strategies.

        Leveraging the power of social interactions to improve development policy in this way is

likely highly cost-effective, because network-based communication and other forms of peer

effects are already present, and only need to be harvested. This idea has already been applied

successfully in joint-liability micro-credit group lending schemes. Put simply, extension partners

who are incentivized with a bag of seeds generate knowledge gains and adoption exceeding that

generated by professional agricultural extension staff working alone. The cost of these incentives

is certainly small relative to the cost of having an AEDO to regularly visit a village, especially in a

context where extension positions in remote, rural areas remain unfilled.

        Our results help reconcile divergent findings in the literature on the existence of social

learning (e.g. Conley and Udry 2010 versus Duflo, Kremer and Robinson 2011).                     Many

development, NGO and private sector marketing efforts rely on “opinion leader” based

dissemination strategies (Miller and Mobarak 2014), including “early adopter” models favored by

extension efforts, but these may result in lower levels of social learning and adoption than

making use of incentivized peer farmers whose constraints and access to resources are more

representative of other farmers in the village, making their advice more credible.

        Using recent developments in social network theory to further refine the communication

partner selection process would be a useful avenue for future research. For agricultural policy,

developing low-cost methods to identify extension partners who would be most influential

would provide policymakers with an improved tool to disseminate new technologies that can

raise yields and reduce pressure on scarce land and other ecological resources.




                                                                                                    38
References

Alcott, H. 2011. “Social Norms and Energy Conservation,” Journal of Public Economics 95: 1082-
   1095

Ali, D., K. Deininger and M. Goldstein 2011. “Environmental and Gender Impacts of Land
   Tenure Regularization in Africa Pilot evidence from Rwanda.” World Bank Policy Research
   Working Paper 5765.

Anderson, J, and G Feder (2007). “Agricultural Extension.” In Handbook of Agricultural Economics
  3, pp. 2343-2378.

Ashraf, Nava, Oriana Bandiera, and Kelsey Jack (2012). "No margin, no mission? A field
  experiment on incentives for pro-social tasks." Harvard University mimeo.

Ashraf, N., X. Giné, and D. Karlan. (2009). "Finding missing markets (and a disturbing
  epilogue): Evidence from an export crop adoption and marketing intervention in Kenya."
  American Journal of Agricultural Economics 91(4): 973-990.

Bandiera, O., & Rasul, I. (2006). “Social networks and technology adoption in northern
  Mozambique.” The Economic Journal, 116(514), 869-902.

Banerjee, A., Chandrasekhar, A. G., Duflo, E., & Jackson, M. O. (2013). “The Diffusion of
  Microfinance.” Science, 341(6144). doi: 10.1126/science.1236498

Bardhan, P. and C. Udry (1999). Development Microeconomics. Oxford University Press.

Beaman, L. (2012) “Social Networks and the Dynamics of Labor Market Outcomes: Evidence
  from Refugees Resettled in the U.S.” Review of Economic Studies, 79(1), pp. 128-161.

Beshears, John, James J. Choi, David Laibson, Brigitte C. Madrian, and Katherine L. Milkman
  (2011). “The Effect of Providing Peer Information on Retirement Savings Decisions,"
  NBER Working Paper 17345.

Biyalogorsky, E., Gerstner, E., & Libai, B. (2001). “Customer Referral Management: Optimal
   Reward Programs,” Marketing Science, 20(1), 82-95. doi: 10.2307/193223

Bobonis, G. and F. Finan (2009). “Neighborhood Peer Effects in Secondary School Enrollment
  Decisions,” Review of Economics and Statistics 91 (4): 695-716.

Bowles, Samuel, and Sandra Polania-Reyes. (2012). "Economic Incentives and Social
  Preferences: Substitutes or Complements?." Journal of Economic Literature, 50(2): 368-425.

Briñol, Pablo and R. E. Petty (2009). “Persuasion: Insights from the Self-Validation Hypothesis.”
   Advances in Experimental Social Psychology 41: 69-118.

Bryan, G., S. Chowdhury, and A. M. Mobarak (2014). “Under-Investment in a Profitable
   Technology: The Case of Seasonal Migration in Bangladesh,” Econometrica forthcoming.




                                                                                                 39
Bursztyn, L., F. Ederer, B. Ferman and N. Yuchtman (2013) “Understanding Mechanisms
  Underlying Peer Effects: Evidence from a Field Experiment on Financial Decisions,”
  Econometrica, Forthcoming.

Carrell, Scott E. and Mark L. Hoekstra, (2010). “Externalities in the Classroom: How Children
  Exposed to Domestic Violence Affect Everyone's Kids," American Economic Journal: Applied
  Economics, 2 (1), pp. 211-228.

Cole, S., X. Giné, and J. Vickery (2013). "Barriers to household risk management: Evidence from
  India." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 5(1), 104–135.

Coleman, James, Katz, Elihu, & Menzel, Herbert. (1957). The Diffusion of an Innovation
  Among Physicians. Sociometry, 20(4), 253-270.

Conley, T. and C. Udry (2010). “Learning about a New Technology.” American Economic Review,
  100(1), pp 35-69.

Crawford, Vincent and Joel Sobel. 1982. “Strategic Information Transmission,” Econometrica, 50
   (6): 1431-1451.
Crepon, B., F. Devoto, E. Duflo and W. Pariente (2011). "Impact of microcredit in rural areas of
   Morocco: Evidence from a randomized evaluation.” Working Paper.

Croppenstedt, A., M. Demeke and M. Meschi (2003). "Technology adoption in the presence of
  constraints: The case of fertilizer demand in Ethiopia." Review of Development Economics 7: 58-
  70.

De Giorgi, G., M. Pellizzari and Silvia Redaelli (2010). Identification of Social Interactions
  through Partially Overlapping Peer Groups, American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 2 (2),
  April.

Derpsch, R. (2001). “Conservation tillage, no-tillage and related technologies.” Conservation
  Agriculture, A Worldwide Challenge 1:161-170.

--------------. (2004). “History of Crop Production, With & Without Tillage.” Leading Edge. March:
    150–154.

Dewatripont, Mathias and Jean Tirole. 2005. “Modes of Communication.” Journal of Political
  Economy, 113(6): 1217-1238.
Doumit, G., M. Gattellari, J. Grimshaw, M. A. O’Brien (2007). “Local opinion leaders: Effects
  on professional practice and health care outcomes.” Cochrane Database Syst. Rev. 1 CD000125.
Duflo, E., P. Dupas, and M. Kremer (2011). “Peer Effects, Teacher Incentives, and the Impact
  of Tracking: Evidence from a Randomized Evaluation in Kenya," American Economic Review,
  101 (5), pp. 1739-1774.

Duflo, E., M. Kremer, and J. Robinson (2011). “Nudging Farmers to Use Fertilizer: Theory and
  Experimental Evidence from Kenya.” American Economic Review, 101(6), pp. 2350-90.

Duflo, Esther and Emmanuel Saez, (2003). “The Role of Information and Social Interactions in
  Retirement Plans Decisions: Evidence from a Randomized Experiment," Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 118 (3), pp. 815-842.

                                                                                                    40
Fleming, Monique and R. E. Petty (2000). “Identity and Persuasion: An Elaboration Likelihood
   Approach.” In: Attitudes, behavior, and social context: The role of norms and group membership, D.
   Terry and M. Hogg, eds. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Publishers, pp. 171-
   199.

Foster, Andrew and Mark Rosenzweig (1995). “Learning by Doing and Learning from Others:
  Human Capital and Technical Change in Agriculture”. Journal of Political Economy 103(6), pp.
  1176-1209.

Garlick, Robert (2012). “Academic Peer Effects with Different Group Assignment Policies.” U.
  of Michigan mimeo.

Godlonton, Susan and Rebecca Thornton (2012). “Peer Effects in Learning HIV Results,”
  Journal of Development Economics 97(1): 118–129.

Goldstein, M. and C. Udry (2008). "The profits of power: Land rights and agricultural
  investment in Ghana." Journal of Political Economy 116(6): 981-1022.

Grilliches, Zvi (1957). “Hybrid Corn: An Exploration in the Economics of Technical Change.”
  Econometrica 25(4), pp. 501-522.

Haggblade, S. and G. Tembo (2003). “Conservation Farming in Zambia.” International Food
  Policy Research Institute EPTD Discussion Paper #108.

Iyengar, R., Van den Bulte, C., & Valente, T. W. (2011). Opinion leadership and social contagion
   in new product diffusion. Marketing Science, 30(2), 195-212.

Jack, B. Kelsey. 2013. “Constraints on the adoption of agricultural technologies in developing
   countries.” Literature review, Agricultural Technology Adoption Initiative, J-PAL (MIT) and
   CEGA (UC Berkeley).

Karlan, D., R. Osei, I. Osei-Akoto and C. Udry (2012). “Agricultural decisions after relaxing
  credit and risk constraints.” NBER Working Paper No. 18463.

Keating, N. L., J. Z. Ayanian, P. D. Cleary, P. V. Marsden (2007). “Factors affecting inﬂuential
  discussions among physicians: A social network analysis of a primary care practice.” J. Gen.
  Intern. Med. 22(6): 794–798.

Kornish, L. J., & Li, Q. (2010). Optimal referral bonuses with asymmetric information: Firm-
  offered and interpersonal incentives. Marketing Science, 29(1), 108-121.

Kremer, M. and E. Miguel (2007). “The Illusion of Sustainability.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
  112(3), pp. 1007-1065

Kremer, M., E. Miguel, S. Mullainathan, C. Null and A. Zwane (2011). “Social Engineering:
  Evidence from a Suite of Take-up Experiments in Kenya” Mimeo, UC Berkeley.

Krishnan, Pramila and Patnam, Manasa (2013). “Neighbors and Extension Agents in Ethiopia:
  Who Matters More for Technology Adoption?” American Journal of Agricultural Economics
  95(4).


                                                                                                   41
Kuo, D., D. R. Gifford, M. D. Stein (1998). “Curbside consultation practices and attitudes
  among primary care physicians and medical subspecialists.” J. Amer. Med. Assoc. 280(10): 905–
  909.

Lea, N. and L. Hanmer (2009). “Constraints to Growth in Malawi”. World Bank Policy
  Research Working Paper No. 5097.

Locock, L., S. Dopson, D. Chambers, and J. Gabbay (2001). “Understanding the role of opinion
  leaders in improving clinical effectiveness.” Social Science & Medicine 53(6): 745-757.

Magruder, J. (2010) “Intergenerational Networks, Unemployment, and Inequality in South
  Africa.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2(1), pp 62‐85.

Manski, C. (1993). “Identification of Endogenous Social Effects: The Reflection Problem.” The
  Review of Economic Studies 60(3), pp. 531-542.

Miller, Grant and A. M. Mobarak (2014). “Learning about New Technologies through Opinion
   Leaders and Social Networks: Experimental Evidence on Non-Traditional Stoves in Rural
   Bangladesh.” Marketing Science forthcoming.

Munshi, K. (2004). “Social learning in a heterogeneous population: Technology diffusion in the
  Indian Green Revolution.” Journal of Development Economics, 73(1), pp 185-215.

Mwato, I.L., Mkandawire, A.B.C. and Mughogho, S.K. (1999). “Combined Inputs of Crop
  Residues and Fertilizer for Smallholder Maize Production in Southern Malawi.” African Crop
  Science Journal 7 (4): 365-373.

Nkhuzenje, H. (2003). “Contribution of promiscuous and specific soybean variety residues to
  soil fertility improvement and maize yield under smallholder farms in Zomba District,
  Southern Malawi.” Thesis submitted in partial fulfilment of the requirements of Master of
  Science degree in agronomy (Soil science).

Nyirongo, J., S. Mughogho, and J. Kumwenda (1999). “Soil Fertility Studies with Compost and
  Igneous Phosphate Rock Amendments in Malawi.” African Crop Science Journal, 7(4), pp. 415-
  422.

Oster, Emily and Rebecca Thornton (2012). “Determinants of Technology Adoption: Private
  Value and Peer Effects in Menstrual Cup Take-Up.” Journal of the European Economic Association
  10(6):1263-1293, December.

Rogers, E. M. (1962). Diffusion of Innovations. New York, NY: The Free Press.

Sanchez, P.A. (2002). Soil fertility and hunger in Africa. Science 295: 2019-2020.

Stoorvogel, J.J., Smaling, E.M.A. and Janssen, B.H. (1993) “Calculating soil nutrient balances in
   Africa at different scales. I. Supranational scale.” Fertilizer Research 35: 227-235.

Udry, Christopher (2010). “The Economics of Agriculture in Africa: Notes Toward a Research
  Program.” African Journal of Agricultural and Resource Economics forthcoming.



                                                                                               42
World Bank (2008). World Development Report 2008: Agriculture for Development. Washington, DC:
  The World Bank.

World Bank (2011). World Development Indicators. Washington, DC: World Bank.




                                                                                             43
                   Study Activities                                                                    Agricultural calendar
     Village sampling & assignment
                 Training of AEDOs
     LFs & PFs identified & trained
        Baseline household survey

                                                                                                2009
                                                                                                       Land preparation & planting


          On-farm monitoring on
          sub-sample for PP & NM



                                                                                                       Maize harvest
                                                                                                2010




        Midline household survey

                                                                                                       Land preparation & planting




           On-farm monitoring on
           sub-sample for PP

                                                                                                       Maize harvest
                                                                                                2011
                                                                                                                                     Figure 1: Intervention, Data Collection, and Agricultural Calendar




      Endline household survey &
      on-farm monitoring for NM
                                      J A S O N D J F M A M J J A S O N D J F M A M J J A S O




44
                                    Figure 2: Treatment Arms




      Extension                  Lead                     Peer
       worker                   farmer                   farmer
      (AEDO)                     (LF)                         (PF)


                                                                            Control
Incentive      No       Incentive      No        Incentive         No
            Incentive               Incentive                   Incentive

[13 vill]   [12 vill]   [25 vill]    [25 vill]    [23 vill]     [22 vill]   [48 vill]




                                                                                        45
                                                            Figure 3: Share of village adopting technology vs. communicators per household
                                                                                                       LF Villages

                                                                 Non-incentive villages
                                                                                                                                                                                   Incentive villages



                                        1




                                                                                                                                                1
                         Share of village HH adopting
                                                  .8




                                                                                                                                 Share of village HH adopting
                                                                                                                                                          .8
                                           .6




                                                                                                                                                   .6
                                  .4




                                                                                                                                          .4
                          .2




                                                                                                                                  .2
                                        0




                                                                                                                                                0
                                                        0      .01                  .02          .03                                                            .005   .01         .015          .02                 .025   .03
                                                                 Communicators per HH                                                                                            Communicators per HH
                                                              LF villages           Linear fit                                                                                LF villages           Linear fit




                                                                                                       PF Villages
                                                               Non-incentive villages                                                                                             Incentive villages




                                                                                                                             1
               1




                                                                                                              Share of village HH adopting
Share of village HH adopting




                                                                                                                                       .8
                         .8




                                                                                                                                .6
                  .6




                                                                                                                       .4
         .4




                                                                                                               .2
 .2




                                                                                                                             0
               0




                                          0                  .05                   .1            .15                                                    0                     .05                   .1                        .15
                                                               Communicators per HH                                                                                              Communicators per HH

                                                            PF villages           Linear fit                                                                                 PF villages                Linear fit




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    46
         Table 1: Differences in demographics between communicators and the general population
Characteristic
                                                                    Non-                                                           p-value LF =
                                                                               Peer Farmers                   Lead farmers
                                                                 communicators                                                          PF

Household head is male                                                   0.711                 0.760                0.928             0.000
                                                                       (0.0129)              (0.0253)             (0.0235)
Household head age                                                       42.10                 43.03                40.93             0.364
                                                                        (0.411)               (0.947)              (1.991)
Household head's highest level of education                              3.395                 3.811                4.322             0.007
completed (levels: 1-8)                                                (0.0700)               (0.121)              (0.239)
                                                                         0.466                 0.539                0.634             0.140
House walls are made of burnt bricks
                                                                       (0.0263)              (0.0402)             (0.0721)
                                                                         0.734                 0.654                0.560             0.264
House roof is made of grass
                                                                       (0.0209)              (0.0658)             (0.0400)
                                                                         1.394                 1.676                1.778             0.545
Number of animals owned by the household
                                                                       (0.0579)              (0.0901)              (0.190)
                                                                         4.791                 5.482                5.752             0.524
Number of assets owned by household
                                                                        (0.103)               (0.184)              (0.422)
                                                                         0.807                 0.831                0.902             0.312
Own farm is household's primary income source
                                                                       (0.0140)              (0.0387)             (0.0522)
                                                                         0.987                 1.065                1.336             0.024
Total household cultivated land 2008/09 (hectares)
                                                                       (0.0233)              (0.0456)              (0.123)
Standard errors clustered by village in parenthesis
          Table 2: Differences in social links, perceptions & comparability between communicators
Communicator                                                                                    LF             PF (mean)              LF - PF
                                                                                               0.515               0.475              0.040***
Related to respondent
                                                                                             (0.0237)            (0.0219)            (0.00822)
                                                                                               0.218               0.113              0.105***
Immediate family of respondent
                                                                                             (0.0146)           (0.00938)             (0.0121)
                                                                                               0.175               0.150              0.025***
Talk daily with respondent
                                                                                             (0.0156)            (0.0136)            (0.00614)
                                                                                               0.142               0.136                0.006
Group together with respondent
                                                                                             (0.0112)            (0.0107)            (0.00572)
                                                                                               0.231               0.277             -0.045***
Communicator uses same or fewer inputs than respondent
                                                                                             (0.0161)            (0.0136)             (0.0100)
                                                                                               0.339               0.427             -0.087***
Communicator's farm is same or smaller than respondent
                                                                                             (0.0198)            (0.0144)             (0.0141)
                                                                                                3.58                3.45              0.134***
Trustworthiness rating [1-4]ⱡ
                                                                                              (0.464)             (0.457)             (0.0587)
                                                                                                2.88                2.71              0.175***
Farming skill rating [1-4]ⱡ
                                                                                             (0.0798)            (0.0662)             (0.0600)
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. ⱡ denotes variables only available at midline, thus sample is limited to control villages. Based
on individual-level data, clustered at the village level.
                                  Table 3: Summary Statistics
Variable                                                        Mean    SD      Min Max    N
Technology knowledge and use
 Knowledge score on targeted technology at midline              0.155 0.273      0   1    4286
 Household used targeted technology at endline                  0.147 0.354      0   1    4787
 Only treatment villages
  Assigned communicator held at least one activity at midline   0.517 0.500      0   1    3177
 Only pit planting districts
  Household used pit planting at endline                        0.040 0.197      0   1    2604
 Only composting districts
  Household produced compost at endline                         0.295 0.456      0   1    2183

Household head characteristics
 Male                                                           0.711 0.453     0    1    4250
 Age                                                             42.1 16.6      19   81   3850
 Education level (1-8)                                          3.395 1.461      1    8   4237
Household wall material
 Mud and poles                                                  0.065   0.247    0   1    4276
 Unburned bricks                                                0.276   0.447    0   1    4276
 Compacted earth                                                0.155   0.362    0   1    4276
 Burned bricks                                                  0.466   0.499    0   1    4276
Household roof material
 Grass                                                          0.734 0.442      0   1    4276
 Iron                                                           0.233 0.423      0   1    4276
Primary water source in dry season
 River                                                          0.111   0.314    0   1    4276
 Unprotected well                                               0.066   0.249    0   1    4276
 Protected well                                                 0.143   0.350    0   1    4276
 Communal tap                                                   0.086   0.280    0   1    4276
 Borehole                                                       0.552   0.497    0   1    4276

Assets and income
 Number of animals owned by HH                                  1.394   1.137    0   7    4276
 Number of assets owned by HH                                   4.791   2.239    0   17   4276
 Own farm is primary source of income                           0.807   0.394    0   1    4276
 HH derives income from ganyu (paid labor on others' farms)     0.468   0.499    0   1    4276
 HH derives income from business                                0.431   0.495    0   1    4276
 HH member has taken out a loan                                 0.059   0.236    0   1    4276
 Table 4: Knowledge Retention by Communicators (Acquiring and Sending A Signal in the Model)
                                                       Dependent variable: Communicators' Knowledge scores
                                                Unincentivized communicators         Incentivized communicators
                                                   (1)                (2)               (3)                (4)
                                                 0.0731***               0.0865***              0.0729***                 0.0552
Shadow LF
                                                  (0.0414)                (0.0394)               (0.0357)                (0.0380)
Actual LF assigned to                             0.153***               0.154***               0.223***                 0.221***
Communication                                     (0.0685)                (0.0584)               (0.0561)                (0.0654)
Actual PF assigned to                              0.0517                0.0669***               0.201***                0.185***
communication                                     (0.0450)                (0.0377)               (0.0486)                (0.0474)
                                                 0.319***                0.337***                0.361***                  0.160
Pit planting district
                                                 (0.0397)                 (0.101)                (0.0341)                 (0.113)
District FE                                          N                       Y                       N                       Y
Additional baseline controls                         N                       Y                       N                       Y
Observations                                        571                     534                     562                     515
R-squared                                          0.236                   0.371                   0.349                   0.392
 p-values for
Actual LF = Actual PF                              0.213                   0.196                   0.757                   0.649
Actual LF = Shadow LF                              0.336                   0.332                  0.0288                  0.0343
Incentivized actual = Non-incentivized actual

Mean of Dep. Var. for Shadow PFs                   0.219                   0.209                   0.200                   0.191
p-value for incentive = non-incentive
  Actual LF                                         0.451
  Actual PF                                        0.0375
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Standard errors clustered by village in parentheses. Excluded group is shadow PF. Additional baseline
controls in columns 2 and 4 include household head gender, education and age, household wall and roof construction materials and primary
source of water in dry and wet seasons, staple food consumed by household, number of animals and assets owned by household, primary
sources of farming income (own farm, others’ farm, own business), and whether anyone in the household had taken a loan in the preceding
12 months. Dependent variable includes zero scores for respondents who answered that they were not aware of the technology.
                                                Table 5: Communicator Effort
                                                Dependent variable: Designated communicator held at least one activity
                                                Unincentivized communicators          Incentivized communicators
                                                   (1)                (2)                (3)                   (4)
                                                 0.450***                 0.499***               0.642***                0.602***
AEDO treatment
                                                 (0.0489)                  (0.111)               (0.0603)                 (0.126)
                                                 0.360***                 0.476***               0.632***                0.594***
LF treatment
                                                 (0.0704)                  (0.122)               (0.0572)                 (0.113)
                                                 0.350***                 0.386***               0.747***                0.704***
PF treatment
                                                 (0.0621)                  (0.102)               (0.0689)                 (0.135)

Pit Planting Dummy                                   Y                       Y                       Y                       Y
District FE                                          N                       Y                       N                       Y
Additional baseline controls                         N                       Y                       N                       Y

Observations                                       1,590                   1,338                   1,587                   1,385
R-squared                                          0.441                   0.511                   0.615                   0.655
p-values for
  AEDO = LF                                        0.174                   0.715                   0.892                   0.894
  AEDO = PF                                        0.099                   0.052                   0.166                   0.108
  LF = PF                                          0.895                   0.135                   0.112                   0.084
p-value for incentive = non-incentive
  AEDO                                                                                             0.208                   0.024
  LF                                                                                               0.055                   0.102
  PF                                                                                               0.001                   0.000

*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Standard errors clustered by village in parentheses. Sample excludes control villages. Additional baseline
controls in columns 2 and 4 include household head gender, education and age, household wall and roof construction materials and primary
source of water in dry and wet seasons, staple food consumed by household, number of animals and assets owned by household, primary
sources of farming income (own farm, others’ farm, own business), and whether anyone in the household had taken a loan in the preceding
12 months.
                                   Table 6: Knowledge after one season among recipient farmers
                                                                         Dependent variable: Knowledge scores in household survey
                                                                  Unincentivized communicators            Incentivized communicators
                                                                   0.195***            0.183***          0.0595***           0.0605***
AEDO treatment
                                                                   (0.0574)            (0.0477)           (0.0264)            (0.0248)
                                                                  0.0850***           0.0685***          0.0757***           0.0780***
LF treatment
                                                                   (0.0315)            (0.0263)           (0.0256)            (0.0263)
                                                                    0.0273              0.0302            0.127***            0.121***
PF treatment
                                                                   (0.0269)            (0.0238)           (0.0358)            (0.0337)
                                                                   0.190***            0.293***           0.220***            0.229***
Pit planting district
                                                                   (0.0254)            (0.0363)           (0.0213)            (0.0345)
District FE                                                            N                   Y                  N                   Y
Additional baseline controls                                           N                   Y                  N                   Y
Observations                                                         2,699               2,323              2,696               2,370
R-squared                                                            0.191               0.269              0.222               0.258
p-values for
  AEDO = LF                                                          0.073                      0.026                       0.557                      0.550
  AEDO = PF                                                          0.007                      0.006                       0.069                      0.084
  LF = PF                                                            0.092                      0.172                       0.163                      0.217
Mean of Dep. Var. for Control Villages                               0.092                      0.092                       0.092                      0.092
Mean of Dep. Var. for AEDO Villages                                  0.287                      0.298                       0.134                      0.138
p-value for incentive = non-incentive
  AEDO                                                                                                                      0.064                      0.026
  LF                                                                                                                        0.914                      0.725
  PF                                                                                                                        0.025                      0.023
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Standard errors clustered by village in parentheses. Excluded group is control villages. Additional baseline controls in columns 2 and 4
include household head gender, education and age, household wall and roof construction materials and primary source of water in dry and wet seasons, staple food
consumed by household, number of animals and assets owned by household, primary sources of farming income (own farm, others’ farm, own business), and whether
anyone in the household had taken a loan in the preceding 12 months. Dependent variable includes zero scores for respondents who answered that they were not aware
of the technology.
                                                                    Table 7: Adoption after two seasons
Technology                                                                                   Pit Planting                                                         Composting
                                                                                       Directly observed usage
                                                      Used on at least one                                                                                  Household produced at
Dependent variable                                                                      on at least one plot in            Plan to use next year
                                                   household plot in 2010/11                                                                                 least compost heap
                                                                                               2010/11
                                                       Non-                               Non-                              Non-                              Non-
Communicator incentives                                              Incentive                          Incentive                         Incentive                         Incentive
                                                     incentive                          incentive                         incentive                         incentive
                                                        (1)              (2)               (3)              (4)              (5)              (6)              (7)              (8)
                                                      0.022***        0.055***          0.089***         -0.022           0.084***          0.036            -0.035          0.190***
AEDO treatment
                                                       (0.010)         (0.019)           (0.014)         (0.053)           (0.036)         (0.032)           (0.073)          (0.099)
                                                        0.002         0.063***           0.0340         0.062***            0.021         0.115***           -0.049          0.144***
LF treatment
                                                       (0.010)         (0.026)           (0.024)         (0.035)           (0.038)         (0.048)           (0.060)          (0.065)
                                                        0.017         0.102***            0.082         0.136***          0.082***        0.176***           -0.073          0.261***
PF treatment
                                                       (0.013)         (0.019)           (0.073)         (0.037)           (0.040)         (0.041)           (0.057)          (0.061)
District FE                                               Y               Y                 Y               Y                 Y                Y                Y                Y
Observations                                           1,716            1,569              261             469              1,716           1,666             1,373            1,209
p-values for
  AEDO = LF p-value                                    0.067            0.722             0.006           0.229             0.095           0.071             0.871            0.622
  AEDO = PF p-value                                    0.725            0.009             0.926           0.016             0.975           0.000             0.653            0.478
  LF = PF p-value                                      0.246            0.045             0.498           0.088             0.143           0.179             0.667            0.076
Mean of Dep. Var. for Control Villages                 0.009            0.010             0.009           0.010             0.087           0.087             0.246            0.246
Mean of Dep. Var. for AEDO Villages                    0.052            0.033            0.0769           0.000             0.213           0.123             0.173            0.444
p-value for incentive = non-incentive
  AEDO                                                                  0.805                             0.738                             0.052                              0.061
  LF                                                                    0.024                             0.329                             0.080                              0.051
  PF                                                                    0.024                             0.289                             0.059                              0.000
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Estimates in columns (3) and (4) are OLS coefficients; all other columns report average marginal effects from probit regression. Standard errors clustered
by village in parentheses. Excluded group is control villages.
                                Table 8: Communicators per HH
                                         (1)              (2)              (3)               (4)

Dependent variable                       Household adopted target technology in 2010/11 season


Sample                                  All LF and PF villages               Common support


Incentives?                         Non-incentive      Incentive      Non-incentive      Incentive


PF village                             -0.00232        0.184***         0.000882          0.232**
                                       (0.0466)         (0.0613)         (0.0433)          (0.106)
Communicators per HH                    -0.318           -0.965          -3.379**          -5.633
                                        (0.573)          (0.969)          (1.501)          (5.246)
Pit planting district                 -0.208***        -0.303***        -0.239***        -0.334***
                                       (0.0399)         (0.0379)         (0.0740)         (0.0668)

Observations                            1,588            1,387             570              505
R-squared
Mean of Dependent Var in LF             0.113            0.210            0.123            0.185
common support min                     0.0526

*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Robust standard errors clustered by village in parentheses. Cols 1-4
estimated via OLS; cols 5-8 estimated via probit, with average marginal effects shown. Common support
sample (cols 3-4 and 7-8) is limited to villages where communicators per capita is between the minimum
value for PF villages and the maximum value for LF villages.
                                                      Table 9: Testing Alternative Hypotheses
                                                        Dependent variable: Household adopted target technology in 2010/11 season
Alternative hypothesis:                                    Non-linearity of incentives                        Jointness of incentives

                                           LF villages                                                            PFs related PFs in group PFs talk
                                                       LF vill. with PF vill. with PF vill. with
                                           with <=65                                                                to one     with one    daily with
                                                        <= 50 hh      > 65 hhs      > 100 hs
                                               hh                                                                  another      another   one another

                                                (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)                 (5)              (6)              (7)
Average marginal effect of
                                              0.0719          0.00274         0.249***         0.279***
Incentive village
                                             (0.0632)         (0.0458)        (0.0430)         (0.0523)
Incentive village @ 25th percentile                                                                                0.248***         0.188***         0.201***
of PF links                                                                                                        (0.0402)         (0.0463)         (0.0496)
Incentive village @ 75th percentile                                                                                0.187***         0.246***         0.232***
of PF links                                                                                                        (0.0652)         (0.0369)         (0.0534)

p-value for incentive @ 25th pct =
                th                                                                                                   0.311            0.171            0.632
incentive @ 75 pct

Mean of Dep Var in LF Non-
                                               0.137           0.111
incentive Villages
Mean of Dep Var in PF Non-
                                                                                0.106           0.0828               0.104            0.104            0.104
incentive Villages

Observations                                    766             550              512              332                1,415            1,415            1,415
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Estimates shown are average marginal effects from probit regression. Pit planting village dummy included in all specifications.
Sample includes all non-communicator households. Standard errors clustered by village in parentheses.
                                                        Table 10: Heterogeneity in PF-Incentive Effects Across Measures of Social Proximity

                                                                              PF uses same
                                                             PF has smaller                                                       PF in            PF in        PF in group   Respondent         Full set of
Dependent variable: Household adopted target technology                          or fewer  PF educational PF house has
                                                               farm than                                                        immediate        extended          with     talks daily with     interaction
in 2010/11 season                                                              inputs than  attainment     grass roof
                                                              respondent                                                          family          family        respondent         PF               terms
                                                                               respondent

VARIABLES                                                          (1)              (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)              (6)             (7)             (8)             (9)
                                                                  0.0858          0.0744          0.0891          0.0747          0.0851         0.0889***         0.0856        0.0886***          0.0833
AEDO treatment
                                                                 (0.0557)        (0.0542)        (0.0563)        (0.0570)        (0.0520)         (0.0523)        (0.0585)        (0.0530)         (0.0545)
                                                                0.0520***       0.0515***       0.0609***       0.0676***         0.0452         0.0529***         0.0486        0.0649***        0.0914***
LF treatment
                                                                 (0.0293)        (0.0303)        (0.0320)        (0.0338)        (0.0304)         (0.0297)        (0.0293)        (0.0326)         (0.0381)
                                                                  0.0378          0.0586         0.334***        0.196***        0.167***        0.182***        0.0798***       0.186***            0.195
PF treatment
                                                                 (0.0765)        (0.0680)        (0.0937)        (0.0641)        (0.0375)         (0.0501)        (0.0399)        (0.0387)          (0.145)
PF treatment X mean(PF has smaller or equal farm as             0.321***                                                                                                                          0.363***
respondent)                                                       (0.191)                                                                                                                           (0.200)
PF treatment X mean(PF uses fewer or similar inputs as                            0.212
respondent)                                                                      (0.208)
                                                                                                -0.0494***                                                                                         -0.0448
PF treatment X mean(PF education)
                                                                                                 (0.0270)                                                                                          (0.0272)
                                                                                                                 -0.0620                                                                           -0.0509
PF treatment X mean(PF grass roof)
                                                                                                                 (0.0937)                                                                          (0.0726)
PF treatment X mean(PF in respondent's immediate                                                                                  -0.103
family)                                                                                                                           (0.343)
                                                                                                                                                  -0.0727                                            0.0778
PF treatment X mean(PF in respondent's extended family)
                                                                                                                                                  (0.128)                                            (0.162)
                                                                                                                                                                    0.416***                          0.230
PF treatment X mean(PF in group with respondent)
                                                                                                                                                                     (0.223)                         (0.209)
                                                                                                                                                                                   -0.190***       -0.289***
PF treatment X mean(PF talks daily with respondent)
                                                                                                                                                                                      (0.109)        (0.154)
                                                                  0.254***       0.246***         0.241***        0.258***         0.262***        0.280***         0.276***        0.259***        0.201***
Constant
                                                                  (0.0952)       (0.0900)           (0.109)        (0.0979)        (0.0896)         (0.0918)        (0.0846)         (0.0898)        (0.118)
Observations                                                        2,309          2,309             2,267          2,267            2,309           2,309            2,309            2,309          2,267
R-squared                                                           0.225          0.225             0.228          0.225            0.220           0.220            0.225            0.225          0.243
Standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.1, ** p<0.05, * p<0.01. Sample includes all non-communicator households in villages where incentives are provided. Standard errors clustered by village in
parentheses. All regressions control for district FE and the same set of control variables as in prior tables. Each regression also controls for the main effect (of "smaller farm", "same or fewer inputs",
"education",...etc), but only the interaction terms with the PF treatment are shown for brevity.
                                                Table 11: Types of Target Farmers Persuaded by PFs with and without Incentives
                                                         Dependent variable: Household adopted target technology in 2010/11 season
                                            Agricultural comparability                                   Social Links                                                                     Poverty
                                                              PF uses same
                                        PF has smaller                                    PF in                                 PF in group           Respondent
                                                             or fewer inputs                             PF in extended                                                    PF educational        PF house has
Baseline village mean of:                 farm than                                     immediate                                  with             talks daily with
                                                                  than                                       family                                                         attainment            grass roof
                                         respondent                                       family                                respondent                 PF
                                                               respondent
Average marginal effect of characteristic for:
Non-incentive villages                          -0.143            -0.0504                 0.430***             0.170               -0.00245              0.0853                  0.001                0.005
                                                (0.186)           (0.134)                  (0.258)            (0.107)               (0.127)              (0.107)                (0.015)              (0.079)
Incentive villages                            0.240***           0.253***                   0.410             0.0402               0.317***               0.134                 -0.015               -0.008
                                               (0.0955)           (0.139)                  (0.385)            (0.125)               (0.113)              (0.102)                (0.015)              (0.070)
p-value for incentive village X
characteristic                                0.088                0.137                   0.965               0.413                0.101                 0.759                 0.467                 0.893

District FE                                     Y                    Y                        Y                  Y                     Y                    Y                      Y                    Y
Household baseline controls                     Y                    Y                        Y                  Y                     Y                    Y                      Y                    Y
Observations                                  1,063                1,063                    1,063              1,063                 1,063                1,063                  1,063                1,063
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Estimates shown are average marginal effects from probit regression. Sample includes all non-communicator households in PF villages. Standard errors clustered by village in
parentheses. Pit planting village dummy included in all specifications. Specifications include controls for household head gender, education and age, household wall and roof construction materials and primary
source of water in dry and wet seasons, staple food consumed by household, number of animals and assets owned by household, primary sources of farming income (own farm, others’ farm, own business), and
whether anyone in the household had taken a loan in the preceding 12 months.




When included jointly...                      p-value
PF has smaller farm than
                                              0.088
respondent
PF uses same or fewer inputs
                                              0.137
than respondent
PF educational attainment                     0.467
PF house has grass roof                       0.893
                                                         Table 12: Communicator Adoption
Estimation:                        OLS         OLS          OLS         IV         IV        OLS         OLS          OLS         IV         IV
                                                                                            Comm
                                  Comm
                                                                                           used tech
Dependent variable:              used tech               Non-comm HH used tech                                     Non-comm HH used tech
                                                                                           (share of
                                   (0/1)
                                                                                             PFs)
Communicator:                       LF          LF           LF         LF         LF         PF          PF           PF         PF         PF
                                    (1)         (2)          (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)         (7)          (8)        (9)       (10)

                                             0.0838**      -0.0169    0.516      1.264                 0.286***      0.237***   0.522***   0.590**
Communicator used technology
                                             (0.0406)      (0.0676)   (0.388)    (2.815)               (0.0551)      (0.0512)   (0.131)    (0.234)
                                                            0.104                -0.220                             0.000206               -0.258
Communicator knowledge score
                                                           (0.0714)              (0.704)                             (0.0761)              (0.197)
Communicator held at least one                             0.293*                -0.626                              0.256***               0.125
activity                                                   (0.156)               (2.070)                             (0.0682)              (0.129)
                                  0.211                                                    0.409***
Incentive village
                                  (0.130)                                                  (0.0880)
                                 -0.578***   -0.215***    -0.305***   0.0438      0.542    -0.331***   -0.126***    -0.166***   -0.0709    0.0391
Pit Planting district
                                  (0.133)     (0.0429)     (0.0597)   (0.256)    (1.887)    (0.0825)    (0.0427)     (0.0559)   (0.0567)   (0.139)


Observations                      1,132       1,132         1,007     1,132      1,007      1,415       1,415         1,415      1,415      1,415
R-squared                         0.405       0.125         0.168       -          -        0.381       0.137         0.161        -          -
    Appendices for BenYishay and Mobarak, “Communicating with Farmers through Social Networks”



Appendix A1: Training Protocol

In August 2009, the Ministry of Agriculture and Food Security (MoAFS) conducted trainings for all the
Agricultural Extension Development Officers (AEDOs) and Agricultural Extension Development
Coordinators (AEDCs; supervisors of AEDOs) covering the 120 treatment sections. The Department of
Agricultural Extension Services (DAES) coordinated the trainings, which were jointly facilitated with the
Departments of Agricultural Research Services (DARS) and Land Resources Conservation (DLRC). Four
training sessions were conducted nationally, at the MoAFS Residential Training Centers in Lunzu, Thyolo
and Mzimba. Staff in areas targeted for the conservation farming intervention were training separately from
those in areas targeted for the nutrient management intervention. AEDOs and AEDCs were trained only in
the technology relevant to their work area. Trainings lasted for three days, and covered the following:

    •   Day 1
        ◦ Overview of the research study, focusing on motivation and research questions
        ◦ Review of the concept of lead farmer. DAES had promoted working with lead farmers since
          2006, so some (but not all) of the AEDOs were familiar with the role of a lead farmer and how
          to select a lead farmer.
        ◦ Introduction to the concept of peer farmer. As this concept was developed by DAES and the
           study research team, this was a new topic for all the AEDOs.
    •   Day 2
        ◦ Classroom explanation of conservation farming / nutrient management technologies, with
          specific discussion of pit planting/Chinese composting.
        ◦ Hands-on training in pit planting /Chinese composting using the demonstration plots at the
           Training Centres.
    •   Day 3
        ◦ Visits to farmers who had adopted pit planting / Chinese composting to discuss the experience
        ◦ Explanation to each AEDO of the specific village assignment, whether he/she was to work with
          a lead or peer farmer in the village, and whether there were any gender requirements for the
          extension partner.

Training of Extension Partners (Lead and Peer Farmers)

         At the training, AEDOs were assigned to select lead and peer farmers in the target villages by the
end of August. Although AEDOs were told to work primarily with either a lead or peer farmer (or neither,
depending on assigned communication strategy), they were asked to identify one lead farmer and five peer
farmers in all villages in order for data collection about social networks to be complete and unbiased. In
control villages, “shadow” lead and peer farmers (six representatives of different social networks in the
village) were identified through village focus groups facilitated by the field supervisors of the data collection
teams, for accurate comparison of social networks. As soon as the lead and peer farmers were identified,
their names were reported back to the District office of the Ministry of Agriculture and Food Security, to
ensure that those households were all sampled in the baseline survey.
         The AEDOs assigned to work with either lead farmers or peer farmers trained those individuals in
their home villages during the month of September. Typically, the training lasted for half of a day and
involved an explanation of the new technology as well as a practical demonstration. The AEDOs then
made follow-ups with the lead and peer farmers over the next few months, often assisting them to set up
demonstration plots on their own fields.
Appendix A2: Technical Specifications of Pit Planting and Nutrient Management

Specifications for Pit Planting

Pit planting is a conservation farming technology that increases a soil’s capacity for storing water while at the same time
allowing for minimum soil disturbance. This is because when planting pits are excavated in a field, they may be used for at
least two seasons before farmers have to reshape the pits. Planting pits enable farmers to use small quantities of water and
manure very efficiently, and are cost and time efficient (although labor to construct the pits can be a constraint). Pits are
ideal in areas where rainfall is limited.

The following are the guidelines for pit planting that the project will employ. These guidelines were developed by the
MoAFS Department of Land Resources Management.

Step 1: Site Selection

Identify a plot with relatively moderate slopes. If possible the site should be secure from livestock to protect the crop
residues.

Step 2: Land Preparation

Mark out the pit position using a rope, and excavate the pits following the recommended dimensions (as shown in the
table below). These should be dug along the contour. The soil should be placed on the down slope side. Stones may be
placed on the upslope side of the pit to help control run off, but this is optional. If available, crop residues from the
previous harvest should be retained in the field so there is maximum ground cover.

Pit dimension and spacing:

Spacing between pits                                    70cm
Spacing between rows                                    75cm
Depth                                                   15cm
Length                                                  30cm
Width                                                   15cm


At this spacing, there will be 15,850 pits per hectare (158 pits per 0.1ha). Where rainfall is limited, pits can be made deeper
and wider to make maximum use of rainwater.

Step 3: Planting, Manure and Fertilizer Application

The pit can be planted to maize crop at the spacing below:

Crop                                    Seeds/pit                          Plants/ha
Maize                                   2                                  56,000


It is recommended that farmers apply 2 handfuls of manure in each pit. Two weeks before rainfall, apply manure and
cover the pit with earth. If basal fertilizer is available, it can also be applied at the same time. When manure has been
applied, the pits should be covered with soil. A shallow depression should still remain on top.

If top dressing is available, it should be applied when the maize is kneed high. In some areas, it may be after 21 days. Use
the local area recommendations to calculate the right amount to be applied (refer to the Guide to Agricultural Production in
Malawi).
Step 4: Weed Control and Pest Management

The pits must be kept free of weeds at all times. Weed as soon as the weeds appear and just before harvesting. This will
reduce the amount of weeds in the following season. Use of herbicides to control weeds is optional.

Step 5: Harvesting

Remove the crop. Cut plants at base, leaving stems and leaves on the soil. The roots should not be uprooted; they should
be left to decompose within the pit.

Increasing the Efficiency of the Pits

It is important to realize that the use of these pits alone will not produce the highest yields. For best results:

     •    Always incorporate crop residues, leaving a minimum of 30% of crop residue on the field.
     •    Apply manure generously.
     •    Protect crops from weeds, pests, and diseases.
     •    Always plant with the first productive rains.
     •    Grow crops in rotation; at least 30% of the cropped land should be planted to legumes.


Guidelines for Nutrient Management

Below are the guidelines to the nutrient management strategy the project will employ. These guidelines were developed by
the MoAFS Department of Agricultural Research.

Step 1: Materials for Making Compost
The following materials are appropriate for making compost:

       • Leguminous crop residues (Ground-nuts and Soyabean)
       • Fresh leaves of leguminous trees
       • Chopped maize stover (about 6 inches long)
       • Animal or Chicken manure (Optional)
Mix three parts of leguminous biomass (crop residues and/or fresh leaves) to two parts maize stover
Step 2: Composting method
Put a layer of legume crop residue followed by a layer of stover then a layer of green leaves of legume tree repeat
making the layers until the heap is 120 cm high. After constructing a set of three layers add 5 liters of water to
moisten the materials.
After constructing the heap smear the wet earth around the heap covering the biomass. The materials should be
kept moist throughout the composting period. After 60 days the manure is ready, remove the manure and keep
them under shade
Step 3: Application method
Apply the manure at least two weeks before planting. Apply 3 kg of manure applied per 10 m ridge. Split open
the ridge about 4 cm deep, spread the manure on the open ridge then bury the manure thus reconstituting the
ridge.
Step 4: Planting
At the rain onset plant maize, one maize seed per planting hole on the ridge at a distance of 25 cm between
planting holes.
Step 5: Use of Inorganic Fertilizer (optional, depends on availability)

          •    Use 23:21:0+4S for basal dressing. Apply fertilizer as dollop; make a hole about 3 cm deep between the maize
               planting hills.
          •    Apply 60 kg N/ha of 23:21:0+4S at a rate 2g per hole (cups to be calibrated to measure 2 g
               fertilizer).
          •    Apply the inorganic fertilizer one (1) week after maize germination


                                Knowledge Questions Administered in Household Surveys

                                                                 Pit Planting

Knowledge Question                                                        Correct answer (acceptable range)

How far apart should the planting pits be?                                70 cm    (52.5 cm – 87.5 cm)
How deep should planting pits be?                                         20 cm    (15 cm – 25 cm)
How wide should planting pits be?                                         30 cm   (22.5 cm – 37.5 cm)
How long should planting pits be?                                         30 cm   (22.5 cm – 37.5 cm)
How many maize seeds should be planted in each pit?                       4

Should manure be applied?                                                 Yes
How much manure should be applied?                                        2 double handfuls
After harvest what should be done with the stovers?                       Maize plants cut off at base, leave roots to decompose
                                                                          in pit, stems and leaves used to cover the soil.


                                                             Chinese Compost
Knowledge Question                                                        Correct answer (acceptable range)
What materials should be used for Chinese                                 leguminous crop residues, fresh leaves of leguminous
composting?                                                               trees, maize stoves, chicken or livestock manure
How much time should Chinese compost be let                               60 days (48 – 72 days)
mature?
How should Chinese compost be kept while it is                            in a covered heap
maturing?
Should it be kept in the sun or the shade?                                Shade
Should it be kept moist or dry?                                           Moist
When should Chinese compost be applied to the field?                      at least 2 weeks before planting
                                                                 Appendix A3: Balance Tests
                                                                                                       p-value for ...
                                                                                                                                      AEDO        LF         PF
                                                  AEDO =        AEDO =        AEDO =                       LF =           PF =      Incentives Incentives Incentives
Characteristic                                                                              LF = PF
                                                    LF            PF           Control                    Control        Control     = Non-     = Non-     = Non-
                                                                                                                                    incentives incentives incentives
Household used pit planting on at least one
                                                     0.609        0.730         0.778         0.329         0.767         0.461        0.858         0.113         0.378
plotin 2008/9 ¹

Household used any composting in 2008/9 ²            0.408        0.381         0.584         0.912         0.867         0.819        0.945         0.929         0.447

Household head is male                               0.538        0.375         0.702        0.0790*        0.799         0.165        0.924         0.188         0.68

Household head age                                   0.672        0.384         0.476        0.0818*        0.136         0.783        0.461         0.979         0.812

Household head's highest level of education
                                                     0.428        0.504        0.0919*        0.847         0.202         0.153         0.5          0.435         0.284
completed (levels: 1-8)

House walls are made of burnt bricks                 0.987        0.386         0.478         0.239         0.337        0.0527*       0.309       0.003***        0.712

House roof is made of grass                          0.925        0.803         0.531         0.637         0.476         0.239         0.91         0.292        0.0819*

Number of animals owned by the household             0.927        0.476         0.812         0.475         0.704         0.309        0.685         0.118         0.167

Number of assets owned by household                0.0577*        0.391         0.336         0.202         0.341         0.846        0.547         0.953         0.175

Own farm is household's primary income
                                                     0.588        0.246         0.958       0.0237**        0.461         0.152        0.833         0.329       0.0455**
source

Total household cultivated land 2008/09
                                                     0.18        0.0977*        0.581         0.633         0.516         0.32         0.878         0.906         0.947
(hectares)

¹ Sample limited to pit planting districts; ² Sample limited to composting districts; Sample in all other rows includes all districts. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
Standard errors clustered by village in parentheses. All tests based on comparisons of means controlling for district fixed effects.
     Appendix A4: Differences in demographics between actual and shadow communicators
                                                       LFs                             PFs
Characteristic                            Actual      Shadow     p-value   Actual     Shadow     p-value
                                           0.913        0.935     0.68       0.756      0.762     0.91
Household head is male
                                         (0.0449)     (0.0273)             (0.0434)   (0.0310)
                                             40         41.33     0.75       41.07      43.85     0.23
Household head age
                                          (3.381)      (2.436)              (2.089)    (0.929)
Household head's highest level             4.348        4.311     0.92       3.967      3.745     0.51
of education completed (levels:
1-8)                                      (0.159)     (0.338)              (0.320)    (0.0979)
House walls are made of burnt              0.543        0.673     0.37       0.453      0.575     0.21
bricks                                    (0.113)     (0.0900)             (0.0870)   (0.0449)
                                           0.547        0.560     0.84       0.630      0.664     0.81
House roof is made of grass
                                         (0.0813)     (0.0400)              (0.107)   (0.0815)
Number of animals owned by                 1.761        1.785     0.94       1.762      1.640     0.57
the household                             (0.167)      (0.263)              (0.189)   (0.0985)
Number of assets owned by                  5.457        5.879     0.56       5.287      5.564     0.43
household                                 (0.451)      (0.562)              (0.253)    (0.239)
Own farm is household's                    0.935        0.888     0.57       0.729      0.873     0.19
primary income source                    (0.0387)     (0.0727)              (0.107)   (0.0218)
Total household cultivated land            1.384        1.316     0.77       0.929      1.125     0.04
2008/09 (hectares)                        (0.166)      (0.160)             (0.0830)   (0.0475)
Standard errors clustered by village in parenthesis
             Appendix A5: Perceptions of Communicators
                                        Honesty          Agricultural Knowledge
                                   LF             PF        LF          PF


                                 0.0624      0.225***       0.142     0.309***
Incentives
                                (0.0926)      (0.0819)     (0.119)     (0.0951)
                               -0.162***       -0.123      -0.184     -0.163***
Village assigned to CF
                                (0.0901)      (0.0807)     (0.117)     (0.0971)
                               -0.103***       0.0499    -0.144***     -0.0546
Household has grass roof
                                (0.0458)      (0.0725)    (0.0656)     (0.0677)
                              -0.0000604     0.000921     -0.00106   0.00399***
Age of respondent
                               (0.00112)     (0.00153)   (0.00182)    (0.00201)
                                3.669***     2.977***    3.478***     2.485***
Constant
                                 (0.196)       (0.177)      (0.24)      (0.181)


Observations                      853             745       812         724
R-squared                         0.018       0.025        0.025       0.037
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
                                  Appendix A6: Communicator wealth
Dependent variable                             Household adopted target technology in 2010/11 season
Sample                                                        All LF and PF villages
                                          Non-                  Non-                      Non-
Incentives?                                       Incentive                 Incentive             Incentive
                                        incentive             incentive                 incentive
                                           (1)       (2)          (3)          (4)         (5)       (6)

PF village                              -0.0330      0.111**      -0.0357      0.0727     -0.0161     0.0886*
                                        (0.0322)     (0.0443)    (0.0374)     (0.0609)    (0.0229)    (0.0509)
Communicator education                                          -0.0319***    -0.0255
                                                                 (0.0116)     (0.0205)
Communicator has grass roof                                                               0.145***     0.0414
                                                                                          (0.0414)    (0.0555)

Observations                               1,588       1,387      1,588          1,387       1,588        1,387
Mean of Dependent Var in LF                0.113       0.210      0.113          0.210       0.113        0.210
p-value on PF village incentive = non-
                                                        0.01                     0.136                    0.061
incentive
p-value on comm. char. incentive =
                                                                                 0.783                    0.139
non-incentive
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Robust standard errors clustered by village in parentheses. All columns
estimated via probit, with average marginal effects shown.
                                            Appendix A7: Yields after two years in PF villages
                                                                     Dependent variable: Household maize yield in 2010/11 season
                                                                                         (winsorized at 95%)
Technology                                                             Pit Planting                                Composting
Estimation                                                  ITT            ITT           IV               ITT         ITT                            IV
                                                             (1)            (2)          (3)               (4)         (5)                           (6)

                                                         298.1***         178.8***                                66.11            38.18
Incentive villages
                                                          (46.81)          (65.99)                               (113.5)          (118.3)
                                                                          0.107***           0.118                              0.0633***          0.0658
Baseline maize yield (winsorized at 95%)
                                                                           (0.0297)         (0.0695)                             (0.0366)         (0.0385)
HH used pit planting on any maize plot for                                                   5,020
the 2010/11 season                                                                          (6,646)
HH produced any compost during the                                                                                                                  143.1
2010/11 rainy season                                                                                                                               (438.5)

Observations                                                425               358             358                  532              432              432
R-squared                                                  0.306            0.306                                 0.145            0.169
Mean baseline yield                                                          1678                                                  1945
Implied impact over baseline                               17.8%            10.7%           299.3%                7.4%             3.4%             2.0%

*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Standard errors clustered by village in parentheses. Sample is limited to PF villages. Columns 1, 2, 4, and 5 show results
from OLS estimation. Columns 3 and 6 show instrumental variable regressions, where incentive eligibility instruments for technology adoption.
                                                             Appendix A8: Input Use and Pit Planting in PF villages
                                                                                  Dependent variable: use of each input on any household plot
                                      Used tool for land                                                                                                                     Used top dress
                                                                  Used herbicide              Intercropped               Used manure            Used basal fertilizer
                                         preparation                                                                                                                            fertilizer
                                       ITT         IV             ITT             IV         ITT            IV          ITT            IV         ITT             IV         ITT          IV
                                        (1)        (2)             (3)            (4)         (5)           (6)          (7)           (8)         (9)           (10)        (11)        (12)
                                     0.112***                   0.150***                  0.170***                    0.0773                     0.0385                     0.0720
Incentive village
                                     (0.0469)                   (0.0331)                  (0.0480)                   (0.0842)                   (0.0509)                   (0.0513)
HH used pit planting in                             1.698                     1.887                      1.874                      0.988                     0.560                      0.977
2010/11 season                                     (1.225)                   (1.357)                    (1.169)                    (0.615)                   (0.821)                    (0.953)
District FEs?                            Y             Y           Y            Y             Y               Y         Y                Y         Y               Y          Y              Y
Regression                             Probit        2SLS        Probit       2SLS          Probit          2SLS      Probit           2SLS      Probit          2SLS       Probit         2SLS
Observations                            765           765         765          765           765             765       765              765       765             765        765            765
Mean of Dep. Var. In Non-
                                             0.768                       0.0134                     0.117                      0.132                     0.582                     0.587
incentive PF Villages
 *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Standard errors in parentheses, clustered by village. Sample is all non-communicator HHs in PF villages where PP was promoted. ITT columns show average marginal
                                                    nd
effects from probit regressions. IV columns show 2 stage coefficients with incentive village assignment as the instrument.
                                                               Appendix A9: Labor and Pit Planting in PF villages
                                                              Dependent variable is total number of hours on all HH plots devoted to each type of labor
Type of labor                       Land preparation         Fertilizer Application           Planting             Weeding               Harvesting                                 Total
                                     ITT        IV             ITT          IV          ITT            IV      ITT        IV          ITT         IV                         ITT             IV
                                      (1)       (2)             (3)         (4)           (5)          (6)      (7)       (8)          (9)       (10)                        (11)           (12)
                                   -6.474                    -1.104***                     -2.753                     -0.192                    -1.986***                 -14.35***
Incentive village
                                   (4.970)                    (0.625)                      (4.618)                    (1.773)                    (0.633)                   (6.768)
HH used pit planting on                        -99.61***                       -16.41                     -38.35                     -5.019                     -299.0                 -214.9***
maize plot                                      (56.46)                        (11.84)                    (46.90)                    (43.95)                    (1,489)                 (108.2)
District FEs?                        Y              Y           Y                Y           Y              Y           Y              Y           Y              Y           Y               Y
Regression                          OLS           2SLS         OLS             2SLS         OLS           2SLS         OLS           2SLS         OLS           2SLS         OLS            2SLS
Observations                        629            629         629              629         619            619         563            563         386            386         630             630

Mean of Dep. Var. In Non-
                                             50                          9.9                         52                         19                       10.9                       141
incentive PF Villages
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Standard errors in parentheses, clustered by village. Sample is all non-communicator HHs in PF villages where PP was promoted. ITT columns show OLS coefficients.
                                    nd
Instrumental variable columns show 2 stage coefficients with incentive village assignment as the instrument.
