                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     ESTIMATING THE IMPACT OF MICROCREDIT ON THOSE WHO TAKE IT UP:
          EVIDENCE FROM A RANDOMIZED EXPERIMENT IN MOROCCO

                                           Bruno Crépon
                                          Florencia Devoto
                                            Esther Duflo
                                          William Pariente

                                        Working Paper 20144
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20144


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2014




Funding for this study was provided by the Agence Française de Développement (AFD), the International
Growth Centre (IGC), and the Abdul Latif Jameel Poverty Action Lab (J-PAL). We thank, without
implicating, these three institutions for their support. The draft was not reviewed by the AFD, IGC
or J-PAL before submission and only represents the views of the authors. The study received IRB
approval from MIT, COUHES 0603001706. This paper is registered in AEA Social Science Registry
under number AEARCTR-0000371 We thank Abhijit Banerjee and Ben Olken for comments. We
thank Aurélie Ouss, Diva Dhar and Stefanie Stantcheva for tremendous research assistance, and seminar
and conference participants for very useful comments. We also thank Team Maroc for their efforts
in conducting the surveys and the French National Institute of Statistics (INSEE) for their precious
help with data entry. We are deeply indebted to the whole team of Al Amana without whom this evaluation
would not have been possible, in particular, to Fouad Abdelmoumni, Zakia Lalaoui and Fatim-Zahra
Zaim. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Bruno Crépon, Florencia Devoto, Esther Duflo, and William Pariente. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Estimating the Impact of Microcredit on Those Who Take It Up: Evidence from a Randomized
Experiment in Morocco
Bruno Crépon, Florencia Devoto, Esther Duflo, and William Pariente
NBER Working Paper No. 20144
May 2014
JEL No. D21,G21,O16

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper reports the results from a randomized evaluation of a microcredit program introduced in
rural areas of Morocco starting in 2006 by Al Amana, the country’s largest microfinance institution.
Al Amana was the only MFI operating in the study areas during the evaluation period. Thirteen percent
of the households in treatment villages took a loan, and none in control villages. Among households
identified as more likely to borrow based on ex-ante characteristics, microcredit access led to a significant
rise in investment in assets used for self-employment activities (mainly animal husbandry and agriculture),
and an increase in profit. But this increase in profit was offset by a reduction in income from casual
labor, so overall there was no gain in measured income or consumption. We find suggestive evidence
that these results are mainly driven by effects on borrowers, rather than by externalities on households
that do not borrow. This implies that among those who chose to borrow, microcredit had large, albeit
very heterogeneous, impacts on assets and profits from self-employment activities, but small impact
on consumption: we can reject an increase in consumption of more than 10% among borrowers, two
years after initial rollout.


Bruno Crépon                                          Esther Duflo
CREST                                                 Department of Economics, E17-201A
15, boulevard Gabriel Peri                            MIT
92245 Malakoff Cedex                                  77 Massachusetts Avenue
France                                                Cambridge, MA 02139
crepon@ensae.fr                                       and NBER
                                                      eduflo@mit.edu
Florencia Devoto
Paris School of Economics                             William Pariente
48 boulevard Jourdan                                  Institut de Recherche Économique et Sociale (IRES)
75014 Paris France                                    Universite Catholique de Louvain
fdevoto@povertyactionlab.org                          Place Montesquieu 3, B-1348
                                                      Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium
                                                      william.pariente@uclouvain.be
1     Introduction

Several recent randomized evaluations in di↵erent countries and contexts have found that grant-

ing communities access to microcredit has positive impacts on investment in self-employed ac-

tivities, but no significant impact on overall consumption – or on overall income, when that is

measured (Attanasio et al. (2011); Augsburg et al. (2013); Banerjee et al. (2013); Angelucci, Kar-

lan and Zinman (2013); Desai, Johnson and Tarozzi (2013)). A plausible interpretation of these

findings is that the small businesses that the households gaining access to microcredit invest in

have low marginal product of capital. Consistent with this hypothesis, these studies often find

no significant impact of microcredit access on business profits or income from self-employment

activities on average, although several do find an impact on profits for pre-existing businesses

or for businesses at the top end of the distribution of profits (Angelucci, Karlan and Zinman

(2013); Banerjee et al. (2013)). Since the marginal business funded by a microfinance loan is

often more likely to be female-operated, this interpretation (that the impact of microcredit on

overall profits is low because it mainly funds unprofitable businesses) is also consistent with the

cash-drop literature that finds that while the marginal productivity of capital appears to be

large for male-run small businesses, it is much lower for those run by women (de Mel, McKenzie

and Woodru↵ (2008)).

    One remaining question about this interpretation, however, is that while the impact on average

self-employment profit is statistically insignificant in all existing studies, the point estimates are

generally positive. Moreover, in most studies, the di↵erential take-up of microcredit between

treatment and control groups is generally low, either because interest in microcredit in treatment

areas is low or because there is also some take-up in the control group (due either to leakage or

entry of competitors into the control area). This implies that the insignificantly positive point

estimates would translate into large (though still insignificant, obviously) instrumental estimates

of the impact of microcredit (as opposed to microcredit access) on the average business profit.

Could it be that the e↵ect on those who take up microcredit is actually large, although perhaps

imprecisely estimated?

    The studies where microcredit access is randomized at the area level, however, generally

focus on reporting reduced-form estimates and do not use area-level access as an instrument for




                                                  1
microcredit. There are good reasons to believe that microcredit availability impacts not only

on clients, but also on non-clients through a variety of channels: equilibrium e↵ects via changes

in wages or in competition, impacts on behavior of the mere possibility to borrow in the future,

etc. Thus, the exclusion restriction – that the instrument only a↵ects the outcome through its

impact on microcredit borrowing – is likely to be violated, and studies that randomize at the

area level (rightly) avoid using area-level microcredit access as an instrument. On the other

hand, in order to maximize power in the face of low demand, most of these studies use as the

study sample a convenience sample, which surveys people who are eligible and likely to borrow

based on observables (for example demographic characteristics or prior expression of interest).

The results are thus reduced-form estimates on a specific population. Furthermore, (with the

exception of Desai, Johnson and Tarozzi (2013)) identification comes from increased microcredit

access in treatment areas (rather than no access versus some access), and we are thus not

capturing the e↵ect driven by those who want microcredit the most (who may borrow both in

control and treatment areas).

  In this paper, we present results from a randomized evaluation of microcredit in rural areas of

Morocco. The study has three features that make it a good complement to existing papers. First,

it takes place in an area where there is absolutely no other microcredit penetration, before or

after the introduction of the product, and for the duration of the study. We are thus capturing

the impact on the most interested households in villages (although those are still marginal

villages for our partner, since they were chosen to be at the periphery of their planned zones

of operation). Second, we designed and implemented a sampling strategy that would give us

sufficient power to estimate the impact on borrowers, and also to capture impacts representative

at the village level Finally, we propose a strategy to test for externalities on non borrowers, and

to estimate direct e↵ect on borrowers.

  Existing strategies to estimate spillovers, which use two-step randomization (e.g.Crépon et al.

(2013)) are not feasible for this question, first because excluding a subset of potential clients

once an office is open would be difficult, and second because part of the potential impact of

microcredit on non-participants would only a↵ect those eligible to be clients. We thus propose

a simple strategy, based on the di↵erent probabilities to borrow found among by the households

that were surveyed, and build this strategy explicitly into the sample design.



                                                2
  The evaluation was implemented in 162 villages, divided into 81 pairs of similar villages.

The pairs were chosen at the periphery of the zone where Al Amana, our partner microfinance

institution (MFI), was planning to start their operations. We randomly selected one village in

each pair, and Al Amana started working in that village only. In a pilot phase, we collected

extensive data on a sample of 1,300 households in seven pairs of villages (seven treatment, seven

control), before introduction of microcredit. Several months after the program was introduced

in the pilot villages, we estimated a model of credit demand in those villages and selected

a small number of variables that were correlated with higher take-up. For all the remaining

villages, before Al Amana started their operation, we conducted a short survey (which included

the variables correlated to higher take-up) on 100 randomly selected households. We then

calculated for each household a propensity score to borrow based on our model. We interviewed

at baseline and endline (two years after rollout) all the households in the top quartile of the score

(in treatment and control group), plus five households randomly selected from the rest of the

village. In addition, at endline, we added a third group which had an even higher propensity to

borrow, by re-estimating the take-up equation in the whole sample, and using the initial census

(available for all households) to construct a new score. In total, our sample includes 4,465

households at baseline, 92% of which were successfully interviewed at endline (an unusually low

attrition rate), and 1,433 new households that were added at endline.

  Our sample thus has three categories of households, classified ex-ante in terms of their prob-

ability to borrow. We take advantage of the heterogeneity in the propensity to borrow in our

sample to test the existence of potential externalities from borrowers to non borrowers. We eval-

uate the e↵ect of the treatment on households who have a high propensity to borrow and those

who have a low probability to borrow. Finding no e↵ect on low propensity households would

indicate the absence of externalities or other e↵ects of microcredit availability on non borrowers.

Since low propensity households come from both villages with low microcredit take-up (where

almost everyone has a low propensity to borrow) and villages with higher take-up, our estimates

on this specific population are likely to capture spillovers from borrowers and anticipation e↵ect

(impact from the mere fact that microcredit is available). For most outcomes we fail to reject

that microcredit has no e↵ect on the low propensity sample. Motivated by this evidence, we use

a treatment as an instrument for borrowing, the last step of our analysis.




                                                 3
  For consistency with the other papers on microcredit, we first report a complete set of reduced-

form estimates on the households in the top quartile of ex-ante propensity to borrow, as well

as on households that were added at endline. Even in this sample, we find fairly low take-up

of microcredit (17% in treatment and zero in control). Households in treatment villages invest

significantly more in self-employment activities, particularly agriculture and animal husbandry,

which are dominant ones (65% of the sample engages in either of these activities). We find

a significant increase in total self-employment profit on average but the e↵ect appears to be

very heterogeneous. In particular, the e↵ect on profits is significantly positive at the higher

quantiles of profitability (as in other studies) but significantly negative at the lower quantiles.

The moderate increase in self-employment income is o↵set by a decrease in employment income,

which comes from a drop in labor supplied outside the farm or household business. Overall,

income increases (insignificantly) and consumption declines slightly (again, this is insignificant).

Finally, similarly to other studies, we find a significant decline in nonessential expenditures

(expenditures on festivals), but no change in any of the other “social outcomes” often meant to

be a↵ected by microcredit.

  We then present, for our key variables, estimates of the impact of making microcredit available

in a village on the population as a whole. We do this by using our entire endline sample

and applying the sampling probability in order to appropriately weight the observations. The

bottom line is similar. Not surprisingly, take-up of microcredit is even smaller in this sample:

13%. Yet, the relatively small di↵erence between the average household and one determined

to be “high probability” underscores how difficult it is to predict who will take up microcredit.

Correspondingly, the impact on most variables of interest is also smaller. However, even at the

population level, we find that microcredit access significantly increases sales and expenditures

in the business (however there is now a negative and insignificant e↵ect on profits). We also find

significant declines in labor supplied outside the home and salary income, and an insignificant

decrease in consumption.

  As we mentioned, our test of externality fails to reject the hypothesis of no externality, on every

variable considered individually except for two (labor supply outside the home and income). Of

course, a caveat could be the lack of statistical power. We nevertheless move on to present

an instrumental variable estimate of the impact of microcredit, using a dummy for being in a



                                                 4
treatment village as an instrument for take-up. This essentially scales up our previous estimates,

and gives us a sense of what the relatively modest reduced-form impact at the village level (or

for likely borrowers) implies for those who actually borrow. On average, the point estimate

suggests roughly a 50% increase in asset holding, a doubling of sales, and a more than doubling

of profits. Labor outside the home declines by about 50% both in terms of earnings and hours

supplied.

  Back-of-the-envelope calculations suggest that our profit estimates imply an average return

to microcredit capital in terms of business profit of around 140%, not taking into account

interest payments. Given this appealing figure, why aren’t more people taking out loans? One

possible reason is that, according to our estimates, the impacts of credit on profits are very

heterogeneous. We present counterfactual distributions for profits among compliers based on

Imbens and Rubin (1997): 25% of the compliers in the treatment groups have negative profits,

while almost no one in the control group does. Given this risk level, it is plausible that individuals

do not fully know what kind of returns to expect and are therefore hesitant to borrow. Another

possibility is that profits do not capture welfare improvement. We observe no change in total

income and consumption and a drop in hours worked outside the home. We do not observe

significant increase in labor supply in the household business, but the confidence interval does

not rule out a relatively large increase, and it is plausible that labor in the business was not

adequately measured, or that the hours spent taking care of a larger business are more stressful

for the households. (Otherwise, it would suggest that the entire increase in total income due to

microcredit is spent on leisure, which seems somewhat implausible given that households do not

work very many hours to start with.)

  Overall, our study confirms the key finding from other research: even in an environment with

very little access to credit, the aggregate impact of microcredit on the population at large is

fairly limited, at least in the short term. This holds true even for those who are most predisposed

to borrow. We can reject that household consumption increased by more than 10% monthly

among those who take up a loan. But our study reveals that, at least in this context, these

lackluster impacts appear to result from the combination of several o↵setting factors. First,

the take-up is low, even in these rural areas of Morocco where there is essentially no formal

credit alternative. Second, among those who take up, there are proportionally large average



                                                  5
impacts on self-employment investments, sales, and profits although there also appears to be

great heterogeneity in these e↵ects. Third, in the Moroccan context, those gains are o↵set by

correspondingly large declines in employment income, stemming from substantial decline in labor

supplied outside the household. Thus, some households choose to take advantage of microcredit

to change, in pretty significant ways, the way their lives are organized. But even these borrowers

do not appear to choose microcredit as a means to increase their standard of living, at least in

the relatively short run.



2       Context and evaluation

2.1     Al Amana’s rural credit program

With about 307,000 active clients and a portfolio of 1,944 million Moroccan dirhams or MAD

(235 million USD) as of December 2012, Al Amana is the largest microfinance institution in

Morocco. Since the start of its activities in 2000, Al Amana expanded from urban areas, into

peri-urban and then to rural areas. Between 2006 and 2007, Al Amana opened around 60 new

branches in non-densely populated areas. Each branch has a well-defined catchment area served

by credit agents permanently assigned to the branch.1

    The main product Al Amana o↵ers in rural areas is a group-liability loan. Groups are formed

by three to four members who agree to mutually guarantee the reimbursement of their loans.

Loan amounts range from 1,000 to 15,000 MAD (124 to 1,855 USD) per member. It can take

three to 18 months to reimburse loans, through payments made weekly, twice a month, or

monthly. For animal husbandry activities, a two-month grace period is granted. Interest rates

on rural loans ranged between 12.5% and 14.5% at the time of the study (i.e. between 2006 and

2009). To be eligible for a group-liability loan, the applicant must be between 18 and 70 years old,

hold a national ID card, have a residency certificate, and have been running an economic activity

other than non-livestock agriculture for at least 12 months. Unlike most MFIs worldwide, Al

Amana does not restrict its loans to women exclusively, but it does generally require that credit


    1
    A map is established and approved by Al Amana headquarters before the branch is opened, specifying the
exact area, and therefore villages, that are eligible to be served by the branch. An intervention area can consist
of one to six rural communities, and several villages belong to a community.



                                                        6
agents have at least 35% of women among their clients. However, this requirement was first

removed among the branches participating in the study and then among all branches.

  From March 2008, individual loans for housing and non-agricultural businesses were also

introduced in rural areas. These loans were larger (up to 48,000 MAD, or about 6,000 USD),

had an additional set of requirements, and were targeted at clients that could provide some sort

of collateral. During our period of focus, households almost only took out group-liability loans,

so this study is primarily an evaluation of that product.


2.2    Experimental design and data collection

The design of our study tracked the expansion of Al Amana into non-densely populated areas

between 2006 and 2007. Before each branch was opened, data was collected from at least six

villages located on the periphery of the intervention areas – villages that could either have

been included or excluded in the branch’s catchment area. Villages that were close to a rural

population center or along a route to other areas served by the branch were excluded, as this

would have disrupted Al Amana’s development. A very small number of villages where other

MFIs were present (less than 2%) were also excluded. Selected villages were then matched in

pairs based on observable characteristics (number of households, accessibility to the center of

the community, existing infrastructure, type of activities carried out by the households, type of

agriculture activities). On average, two pairs per branch were kept for the evaluation. In each

pair, one village was randomly assigned to treatment, and the other to control. In total, 81 pairs

belonging to 47 branches were included in the evaluation.

  Between 2006 and 2007, Al Amana opened new branches in six phases. These branches

were opened throughout rural Morocco.2 For the purposes of our evaluation, we divided this

expansion into four periods, and conducted the baseline survey in four waves of field operations

between April 2006 and December 2007. Our sampling strategy followed a novel approach to

maximize the evaluation’s power to detect both direct and population-level e↵ects of microfinance

access. Specifically, we selected two samples of households: one containing those with the


   2
    Our sample is spread throughout rural areas of the entire country. Opened branches, 47 in total, are located
in 27 provinces belonging to 11 regions (out of a total of 16 regions in the country) and cover all main dialects
spoken in the country. Figure B1 in the Online Appendix shows the spatial distribution of Al Amana branches
participating of the study.


                                                       7
highest probability to become clients of the microfinance institution and one containing a random

selection of households from the rest of the population. Using the first sample increases the

probability to detect an e↵ect on those who are the most likely to become clients, if there is one.

Using both samples together, with appropriate weights, allows us to measure the e↵ect on the

whole population of o↵ering access to microfinance services.

   To this end, in each of the fourteen villages of the first wave, we sampled 100 households

to whom we administered a full baseline survey. In villages of fewer than 100 households, we

surveyed them all. This wave took place in April-May 2006, six months before the scheduled

launch of the second wave. We used data from this survey and administrative data on credit

take-up in treatment villages over the first six months (reported weekly by credit agents) to

estimate a model to predict the likeliness to borrow for each household. We present the result

of this model in Appendix Table A1.

   Based on this model, we designed a short survey instrument including the key variables
                                                   3   For each of the subsequent waves, we started by
predicting a higher likelihood to borrow.

administering this short survey to a random sample of 100 households in each village (or all the

households if the village had fewer than 120). We entered survey data on computers on site, and

an Excel macro selected the top quartile of households predicted to be the most likely to borrow

on the basis of the model, as well as five additional households from the rest of the population.

We administered the full baseline survey to this sample.

   The baseline survey included questions on assets, investment and production in agriculture,

animal husbandry, non-agricultural self-employment activities, labor supply of all household

members (hours and sectors), as well as a detailed consumption survey. Since microcredit aims

to have broad impacts on behavior and wellbeing, we also included questions on education,

health, and women’s decision-making power in the households.


   3
    The variables collected in this short survey were the following: household size, number of members older
than 18, number of self-employment activities, number of members with trading or services or handicraft as main
activity, gets a pension, distance to souk (in km), does trading as self-employment activity, has a fiber mat, has
a radio, owns land, rents land, does crop-sharing, number of olive and argan trees, bought agriculture productive
assets over the past 12 months, uses sickle, uses rake (in agriculture), number of cows bought over the past 12
months, phone expenses over the past month (in MAD), clothes expenses over the past month (in MAD), had an
outstanding formal loan over the past 12 months, would be ready to form a four-person group and guarantee a
loan mutually, amount that would be able to reimburse monthly (in MAD), would take out a loan of 3,000 MAD
to be repaid in nine monthly installments of 400 MAD.




                                                        8
   After the baseline survey was completed in each wave, one treatment and one control village

were randomly assigned within each pair. In treatment villages, credit agents started to promote

microcredit and to provide loans immediately after the baseline survey.4 They visited villages

once a week and performed various promotional activities: door-to-door campaigns, meetings

with current and potential clients, contact with village associations, cooperatives and women’s

centers, etc.

   Two years after the start of each wave of the Al Amana intervention, we conducted an endline

household survey, based on the same instrument, in the same 81 pairs of villages (May 2008-

January 2010). 4,465 households interviewed at baseline were sampled for endline.5 Of them,

92% (4,118 households) were found and interviewed again. To maximize power, an additional

1,433 households (also predicted to have a high probability to borrow based on the credit model

and the data from the short-form survey) were sampled at endline. To select these additional

households, we re-estimated the model to predict the likelihood to borrow for each household

using administrative data on who borrowed by the time of the endline survey (i.e. over the two

years of the evaluation time frame), matched with data collected with the short-form survey

before the rollout of microcredit (and hence not a↵ected by the rollout), updated the dependent

variables including clients over the two-year period, and re-estimated the coefficients of the

model. This allowed us to much better identify likely borrowers. 6 Thus, the endline household

survey was conducted, in total, with 5,551 households.7


   4
      By the time of the baseline survey, branches were fully operational and were conducting business in the center
of their catchment areas (within a 5 km radius of the branch location). Once the baseline survey was completed,
credit agents started to cover the whole branch catchment area, with the only exception of control villages.
    5
      In wave 1 villages, we kept for the analysis 25% of households with a high probability to borrow, plus five
households chosen randomly.
    6
      Note that the sample is still selected using a linear combination of variables collected at baseline (the same
in treatment and control villages) and is therefore not endogenous to the treatment.
    7
      Out of the 5,551, to remove obvious outliers without risking cherry-picking, we trimmed 0.5% of observations
using the following mechanical rule: for each of the main continuous variables of our analysis (total loan amount, Al
Amana loan amount, other MFI loan amount, other formal loan amount, utility company loan amount, informal
loan amounts, total assets, productive assets of each of the three self-employment activities, total production,
production of each of the three self-employment activities, total expenses, expenses of each of the three self-
employment activities, income from employment activities, and monthly household consumption), we computed
the ratio of the value of the variable and the 90th percentile of the variable distribution. We then computed the
maximum ratio over all the variables for each household and we trimmed 0.5% of households with the highest
ratios. Analysis is thus conducted over 5,424 observations instead of the original 5,551, and no further trimming
is done in the data.




                                                         9
2.3    Potential threat to experiment integrity

The experimental design was generally well respected, and we observe essentially no entry of Al

Amana (or any other MFI, as it turns out) in the control group.8 Villagers did not travel to

other branches to get loans either.

   Attrition was not a major concern in the experiment since 92% of the households in the

baseline were found at endline. (Attrition is slightly higher in the treatment group at 8.6%,

compared to 6.8% in control; see Table 1, Panel B.) Tables B3 and B4 compare attrition in the

treatment and the control groups, and examine the characteristics of the attritors compared to

non-attritors. Table B3 focuses on attrition of the baseline sample, while Table B4 uses the

short form survey to examine attrition in the full endline sample (including households that

were not included at baseline). Attritors belong to smaller households with younger household

heads, and are less likely to have a self-employment activity. We then look at whether attritors’

characteristics di↵er between the treatment and control groups (Panel C of Tables B3 and B4).

We find only one characteristic that di↵ers for attritors in treatment villages (they are relatively

more likely to run a self-employment activity).

   Next, we examine balance between treatment and control. Table 1 provides means in the

control group and the treatment-control di↵erence for the variables collected in the baseline

survey of 4,465 households. In Appendix Table B1 and B2, we reproduce the same analysis

for the whole sample of 5898 households and for the 4934 households with high probability to

borrow.

   Unfortunately, there are some di↵erences between the treatment and control groups, more

than would be expected by pure chance (although we know that the randomization was well

done, since it was carried out in our office, by computer). Jointly, these baseline characteristics

are di↵erent in the treatment and control groups. At baseline, households in treatment villages

had on average a slightly larger access to financial services, but not larger loans. They had higher

probability to be engaged in livestock activity in treatment villages, and hence larger sales and

assets, and lower probability to run a non-farm business. As a result of these imbalances, we


   8
    A few of the originally selected pairs of treatment and control villages were removed from the sample early
on – before data collection – because it turned out that the treatment and control villages were served by another
Al Amana branch. A few more were removed because Al Amana decided not to operate in their area at all.
Implementation was done e↵ectively and according to plan in the rest of the sample.

                                                       10
include individual-level control variables in our analysis, and present a robustness check without

such control variables in the appendix. Our results are not sensitive to control variables.



3       Reduced-form results

For consistency with the other papers in the literature, we first report a set of reduced-from

results on the sample of likely borrowers (the top quartile of households selected to be most

likely to borrow). We then turn to population-level estimates, and estimates of the impact of

the treatment on the treated.


3.1     Specification

We estimate the following reduced-form specification.


                                                           p
                                                           X
                           ypij = ↵ + Tpi + Xpij +               m 1(p   = m) + !ij                         (1)
                                                           m=1


where p denotes the village pair, i the village and j the household. Tpi is a dummy for the

introduction of microcredit in village i, ypij is an outcome for household j in village i in pair p.

Xpij is a vector of control variables.9 The regression includes the 81 pair dummies represented
   P
by pm=1 m 1(p = m). Standard errors are clustered at the village level.

    Equation 1 is estimated on two di↵erent samples. The first is the sample of households more

likely to become clients of the microfinance institution (see Section 2.2). In Section 4.2 we also

present estimation results obtained using the whole sample, using sampling weights to obtain

results representative of the whole village population. As we evaluate the e↵ect of microcredit

on a large number of outcomes, we account for multiple hypothesis testing. Each table of results

we present focuses on a specific family of outcomes for which we produce (in the last column)

an index (which is the average of the z-scores of each outcome within the family). Furthermore


    9
    The basic set of covariates most of our regression includes the number of household members, number of
adults, head age, does animal husbandry, does other non-agricultural activity, had an outstanding loan over
the past 12 months, household spouse responded the survey, and other household member (excluding the head)
responded the survey. Since part of the sample includes households that were only included at endline, we do not
have baseline information for them. In regressions, we enter a dummy variable identifying them and set to zero
the other covariates. We present in Appendix Table B7 regression results in which no covariates are introduced
and a table in which an extended set is considered.

                                                      11
we report both the standard p-value and the p-value adjusted for multiple hypotheses testing

across all the indexes.10



  For a reduced set of outcome variables (and still for the sample of likely borrowers), we also

consider the corresponding quantile regressions. To perform the regression we follow Chamber-

lain (1994) and simply compute the desired quantiles of the considered outcome variable in each

village and then implement minimum distance estimation, explaining the di↵erent estimated

quantiles by the treatment variable and pair dummy variables. We consider quantiles 10, 25,

50, 75 and 90%.



3.2      Access to credit

Table 2 presents the results on credit access and borrowing. As in previous studies (Banerjee

et al. (2013); Karlan and Zinman (2010)), we find that households tend to underreport borrowing:

administrative data suggest that 17% of households in this sample borrow in the treatment

villages (and none in the control villages), while in survey data only 11% of households admit

to borrowing. The administrative data is more reliable in this context, and this is what we

will use for the first stage in our instrumental variable regressions below. Access to any other

form of formal credit is very limited. In the control villages, 2% of households report borrowing

from another MFI, 2% from another bank, and 2% from any other formal source. Only 6%

report borrowing from informal sources though this may be underestimated to the extent that

households do not like to admit to borrowing (as it is frowned upon by Islam), or to the extent

that informal loans between villagers are recorded as gifts. The only common source of loans

is the utility companies: 16% of households in control villages borrow from a utility company

to finance their electricity or water and sanitation installation. The pattern is very similar in

treatment villages, except that households report 1pp more borrowing from other formal sources

(there may be some confusion between these other sources and Al Amana, partially accounting

for the underreporting of Al Amana loans). Therefore microfinance was introduced by Al Amana

in our treatment villages in a context where households had very limited alternative access to


 10
      We adjust p-values following Hochberg (1988) in order to control the familywise error rate (FWER).




                                                       12
finance. This is a unique feature that sets our study apart from most other impact evaluations

of access to microfinance.

   Turning to loan amounts, households in treatment villages report additional outstanding

loans of 796 MAD (USD 96) on average from Al Amana over the 12 months prior the survey.11

There are also small but significant increases in reported amounts borrowed from both other

formal credit sources and the utility companies, as well as a small insignificant substitution with

informal loans, which might be related to confusion between various types of loans, as previously

mentioned. In total, average outstanding loan amount increases by 1,193 MAD and repayment

per month increases by 33 MAD, as reported by households in treatment villages. Appendix

Table B5 uses administrative data to provide some characteristics of the loans disbursed by

Al Amana in treatment villages. According to this administrative data, clients in treatment

villages borrowed on average 10,571 MAD. This compares to outstanding loan amounts of 8,872

MAD as declared in our survey data.12 Thus, households underreport borrowing both on the

extensive and the intensive margins. In terms of other loan characteristics, clients most often

form groups of four people who act as mutual guarantors and reimburse their loans in 12 or 18

monthly installments. The average client household took up a loan 5.7 months after microcredit

was made available in the village and 50% of them took a second loan by the end of the two-year

evaluation timeframe. Most of loans were taken within the first six months (67.9%). When

applying for microcredit, most of clients (68%) declared to be planning to use the loan in animal

husbandry activities, mainly cattle and sheep rising, 26.4% in trade-related businesses, and the

remaining 5.5% in other non-agricultural businesses such as services and handicraft. It is not

surprising that no client declared an intent to allocate loans to other agricultural activities (crops

and fruit trees), as Al Amana did not lend for such activities.


3.3    Income levels and composition, and labor allocation

Table 3 shows the impact of the introduction of microcredit on self-employment activities. 83%

of the households in the control group have some form of self-employment activity – the dom-


  11
     Average outstanding loans of 967 MAD (796+180) represent 2.7% of average household annual consumption
in the control group. If we consider loan amounts declared by actual borrowers in our survey, this share increases
to 24% of annual consumption.
  12
     This amount can be directly deduced from information in Table 2 as (796+180)/(0.09+0.02)=8872.



                                                       13
inant forms being animal husbandry and agriculture – whereas only 14.7% of households have

a non-farm business (see Appendix Table B6). The results of Table 3 suggest that the intro-

duction of microcredit leads to a significant expansion of the existing self-employment activities

in agriculture and animal husbandry, but does not help start new activities. We even find a

small non significant reduction in self-employment of 1.6 percentage points for the households

in treated villages.

  Access to microfinance has a positive e↵ect on assets: the estimated impact is 1,454 MAD. We

do not find any e↵ect of microcredit on investments over the last 12 months, probably because

most additional investments caused by the new access to microfinance took place in the first

year of the intervention (since most loans were disbursed in the first six months), thus more

than 12 months before the endline.

  Figure 1 shows that quantile treatment e↵ects on asset accumulation are positive at almost all

quantiles. Assets of self-employment activities mainly consist of animals (cows or goats) owned

by the households. Additional results reported in Table B6 show that the impact on the stock

of assets mainly comes from livestock activities. This building-up of assets could correspond to

business investment strategy (the assets representing unrealized profits) or to a self-insurance

mechanism (the assets are in-kind savings) or to a combination of the two.

  One other important result in Table 3 is that, summed across all types of activities, there is

a significant expansion in self-employment activities (which comes from existing activity since

there is no impact on the extensive margin): revenues, expenditures and profit all significantly

increase. Profit, defined as the di↵erence between revenues and expenses, increases by 2,011

MAD, a substantial amount compared to the average profit in the control group, 9,056 MAD.

Figure 1 presents the results of quantile regressions. It shows that quantile treatment e↵ects

are significantly negative for the lowest quantile (0.10), non-significant at the median, and sig-

nificantly positive for the quantiles 80 and 90. The finding that the increase in self-employment

activity is concentrated at the highest quartile echoes Banerjee et al. (2013) and Angelucci,

Karlan and Zinman (2013). Negative profits at the low end of the distribution might be par-

tially due to long-terms investments misclassified as current expenses. These quantile treatment

e↵ects are only reduced forms: they do not necessarily mean that the impact of getting credit




                                               14
itself has the same heterogeneity (since there may be externalities, and we do not know where

the compliers lie in the distribution of outcomes). We return to this question in 4.3.

  Table 4 shows the impact of microcredit on di↵erent sources of income. The major result

in this table is that the increase in self-employment profit is o↵set by a significant decrease in

employment income. Note that, despite the fact that 83% of households have a self-employment

activity, employment income accounts for as much as 56.9% of household income while self-

employment activities account for only 32.7%. Most (90%) of employment income comes from

casual (day) labor and very little from stable salaried work (10%). The e↵ect of access to

microfinance is quite substantial, -1,052 MAD, a reduction of 6.7% compared to the control

group mean. As a result of the reduction in wage earnings, the net increase of employment and

self-employment income taken together is small and insignificant. Thus, it appears that, in this

context, microfinance access leads to a change in the mix of activities, but no income growth

overall.

  Table 5 reports on the e↵ect of the introduction of microcredit on the time worked by house-

hold members aged 6 to 65 over the past seven days, for various age ranges. Column 1 shows that

there is an insignificant reduction in the total amount of hours of labor supplied, and columns

2-4 show there is substitution between the di↵erent types of activities. Considering all members

together, we find a significant reduction in work outside the home of 2.8 hours, or 8.3% of the

control group mean. Time spent on self-employment activities increases, but not significantly

so. Overall, hours of work decline in every age group, although the reduction is significant only

for the youth (16 to 20) and the elderly (51 to 65).

  The reduction in labor supplied outside the home is consistent with the results on employment

income (Table 4). The relatively small increase in time spent on self-employment activities

despite increased investment may be due to the fact that investments in agriculture and animal

husbandry may not need to be coupled with a proportional increase in labor input. Still, this is a

remarkable fact: the average quantity of labor (24 hours per week) supplied per adult household

member seems relatively low, suggesting that members may have the opportunity to increase

their e↵orts by a large margin (provided that we measure time allocation correctly). This would

suggest that households take the opportunity of access to credit to invest in less labor-intensive

occupations and increase their leisure time.



                                               15
3.4   Consumption

Table 6 reports the estimated e↵ects of the introduction of microcredit on household consumption

(expenditure and consumption of home production are both included). The table shows the e↵ect

on total consumption, either at the household level (column 2) or per member (column 1), and

by type of consumption expenditures: durables, non-durables, food, health, etc. (columns 3 to

9). Consistent with the lack of e↵ect of overall income, we find a small, negative and insignificant

point estimate on consumption (44.6 MAD per month). This absence of e↵ect on consumption

is confirmed by quantile treatment e↵ect presented in Figure 1, which shows no e↵ect at any

quantile.

  Turning to the composition of consumption, we do not find the increase in durable consump-

tion that other papers have reported, but this may be due to the fact that the survey was

administered more than 12 months after most people got the loans. Consistent with all the

other papers, we find a statistically significant reduction in nonessential expenditures (in this

case, festivals, rather than other temptation goods).



3.5   Education and female empowerment

The impact of microfinance is supposed to go beyond the expansion of business activity and

consumption levels. Indirect e↵ects such as the empowerment of women and improvements

in the health status and education levels of children are often considered potential impacts of

microfinance.

  We did not see any shift in the composition of household consumption that would support

this hypothesis. Table 7 looks at other “empowerment” outcomes, namely education and female

empowerment. We find no impact on education, despite the reduction in outside labor among

teenagers (other randomized controlled trials have found di↵erent e↵ects, some finding positive

and others negative impacts).

  Since the majority of borrowers of our sample are men, the expected e↵ect on female em-

powerment is less clear-cut than for standard microfinance programs, which tend to focus on

women. Nevertheless, we do examine the impacts on female empowerment using several proxies.




                                                16
The first is the number of income-generating activities managed by a female household member

(column 5). In remote rural areas, such activities are usually managed by male members (1.5

activities on average compared to 0.39 for women). We also use a series of qualitative indicators

to describe female empowerment such as the capacity of women to make decisions, and their

mobility inside and outside the villages. We construct a summary index of these qualitative

variables (column 3) as they are part of the same “family” of outcomes. We find no evidence of

the e↵ect of microfinance on any of these variables or on the index.

    These results are in line with the fact that only a small proportion of women borrow in

remote rural areas and that additional borrowing for men is unlikely to change the bargaining

power of women within the household. They are also consistent with the results from all the

other microfinance evaluations except for Angelucci, Karlan and Zinman (2013), which find

improvements in female empowerment in Mexico.



4     Estimation of externalities and instrumental variable estimates

Section 3 presented reduced-form estimates of the impacts of access to microcredit on the specific

population of households that were ex-ante the most likely to become clients of Al Amana. We

were also interested in two other questions: measuring impacts on the population as a whole,

and disentangling direct e↵ects on those who choose to borrow from indirect e↵ects on others,

such as general equilibrium e↵ects due to changes in prices, or changes in behavior stemming

from the possibility to borrow in the future. We now exploit our experimental design to get at

both questions.



4.1    Impact of access to microcredit over the whole population of selected
       villages

Measuring the impact of access to credit on the village population is straightforward given our

design: we just re-estimate the same set of regressions, but using the whole sample, and weighting

appropriately using the sampling weights, so that the estimates are now representative at the




                                               17
village level. Those results are of course representative of the marginal villages selected to be in

our experiment (and not of the entire catchment area of Al Amana branch).

  Table 8 presents the results for some key outcome variables. Panel A simply reproduces

the results presented in Section 3 for the population of households likely to become clients

of Al Amana (those who were in the top quartile of the propensity score). Panel B presents

intention-to-treat estimates on the same outcomes but over the whole population selected for

the endline survey (the households in the top quartile plus the five randomly selected), weighted

by the inverse of the probability to be selected in that population. Not surprisingly, take-

up of microcredit is even smaller in this sample (13%), although the relatively small (though

statistically significant) di↵erence with the “high-probability” sample underscores how difficult

it is to predict who will take up microcredit. Correspondingly, the impact on most variables

of interest is also smaller. However, even at the population level, still we find that microcredit

access significantly increases sales and expenditures in the business. We also find significant

declines in labor supplied outside the home and in salary income, and an insignificant decrease

in consumption. There is now a negative and insignificant impact on profits: combined with the

estimate on likely borrowers and the quantile regressions, which did show significant negative

treatment e↵ects at the lowest quantiles, this suggests that those who are least likely to borrow

are those with the most negative treatment e↵ect on profit.



4.2   Externalities

Prima facie, results in the previous section are not suggestive of strong externalities. We evaluate

the e↵ect of the treatment on the samples of households with high and low propensity to borrow.

Finding no e↵ect on the households who are predicted not to borrow is an indication that the

no e↵ect on non borrowers (in the form of externalities and anticipation e↵ects). In practice,

we estimate the treatment e↵ect separately for those with the highest 30% and lowest 30%

probability to borrow, and omit the middle group.

  To implement this test, we first re-estimate the propensity to borrow based on actual endline

behavior. By using actual borrowing behavior as measured by the endline survey, instead of using

the model based on only pilot phase 1, we increase the predictive power of the model. This is




                                                18
done by estimating a logit regression for the decision to become a client of Al Amana, using the

set of baseline variables obtained from the initial short survey (which we collected at baseline

well before the intervention took place, and which we have for the entire population) and village

dummies. This model is estimated on the whole set of households in treatment villages that

were interviewed at endline. The results are presented in Online Appendix Table B8. Several

characteristics are individually significant in the regression, and they are also strongly significant

taken together. The predicted probability to borrow ranges from almost zero to 0.80. It has

an interquartile range of 20 percentage points, and a 37-percentage-point di↵erence between

quantiles of order 90% and 10%. This allows us to identify reasonably well the heterogeneity

related to the propensity to borrow.

  Panel C of Table 8 presents estimation results of the main equation with the two interaction

terms (high and low propensity sample).13 Column 1 presents the results on the probability to

borrow. Households in the high probability sample are 36 percentage points more likely to have

taken a loan from Al Amana than their control counterparts. In the low probability sample, the

di↵erence between treatment and control households is statistically di↵erent than zero but very

small (less than 2 percentage points). A caveat of our analysis is that a significant part of the

low-probability sample comes from villages where there is very little or no access to credit. Thus,

the estimates on the low-probability sample capture the e↵ect of credit availability in areas where

microcredit was o↵ered but where there is no demand and a combination of credit availability

and spillover (from borrowers to non borrowers) e↵ects in villages where some households took

loans.

  Column 2 to 11 present the results for the key outcome variables individually. For most

outcomes, estimated values for the coefficient associated to the interaction between treatment

and the low probability sample are insignificant and generally fairly small.

  An interesting exception to the finding that externalities do not seem to be important arises

from the variables on time worked by households outside the home and the income derived

from it: there we see highly significant negative impacts on hours worked outside even among


  13
     This equation is run without weights, to leverage to the maximum extent the power given to us by our design,
which made sure we had enough people in the sample with relatively high probability to borrow. Under the null,
OLS is BLUE and the regressions should not be weighted. With weights, we still reject the hypothesis of no
externalities, but the results are noisier.



                                                       19
low-probability households. This is surprising, as prima facie we might have expected the

externalities to run the other direction (if those who borrow free up opportunities, leading to

more jobs or increases in wages ). It could be that the ability to borrow (and thus to smooth

out shocks if needed) reduces the need for income diversification.


4.3    Local average treatment e↵ect

Motivated by the finding that externalities (except for labor supply) do not seem to be very

important, we present suggestive estimates of the impact of microcredit take-up on outcomes,

using a dummy for residing in a treatment village as an instrument for borrowing. This amounts

to re-scaling the reduced-form estimates by dividing them by 0.17. Given how noisy the evidence

on externality is, this is at best tentative; still, it is useful to get an order of magnitude of what

the reduced-form evidence would entail.

  The equation we estimate is

                                                          p
                                                          X
                          ypij = a + bCpij + Xpij c +           m 1(p   = m) + uij                       (2)
                                                          m=1


where Cpij is a dummy variable corresponding to being a client of Al Amana. This equation is

estimated using the treatment village dummy variable as an instrumental variable for Cpij , and

for comparison by OLS. The IV strategy is valid only if the assumption of no externalities is

correct.

  Table 9 Panel B reports the IV estimates for the main outcome variables selected in Table

8. We present the means for compliers at the bottom of the table, as well as the control group

means.14

  The IV estimates imply that, if the entire e↵ect can indeed be attributed to borrowers, the

changes induced by Al Amana are large for those who do take up, although the orders of magni-

tude remain plausible. Assets (column 1) increase by 64%, and production (column 2) increases

by 153% compared to the compliers’ mean. Similarly, expenses increase by 147% (column 3) and

profits by 168% (column 4). The reduction in weekly hours worked in employment activities and


  14
     The complier mean in the control group is calculated as E(Y (0)|C) = [E(Y |Z = 0) E(Y |Z = 1, T =
0) ⇤ (1 P (T = 1))]/P (T = 1), where Z indicates treatment assignment, T indicates being a microcredit client
and P (T = 1) the proportion of clients in Z = 1.

                                                     20
the derived income (columns 8 and 6) are also sizable, and both represent a substantial share

of compliers’ mean (wage earnings decrease from 18,530 MAD to 12,250 MAD; hours of work

decrease from 42.13 to 24 hours per week).

   If we assume that the impact on profits is entirely driven by borrowers, this suggests large

average returns to microcredit loans. In Table 3, we found that impact of the treatment dummy

on profits is 2,011 MAD for the second year of the experiment (the profits are measured over

the previousyear). During that year, the average amount borrowed in the treatment group was

834 MAD (with an average maturity of 16 months).15 . If we do not value any increase in hours

worked, this suggests an average financial return to microcredit capital of 2.4, well above the

microcredit interest rate. While this number is large, it is in line with prior estimates based on

capital drop (de Mel, McKenzie and Woodru↵ (2008)), or for credit to larger firms (Banerjee

et al. (2013)).

   The impacts on consumption are small and relatively precise: we can reject with 95% confi-

dence that microcredit take-up increases consumption by more than 10%.


   To assess the extent of heterogeneity in the treatment e↵ect, we first estimate, under the

maintained assumptions of no externality, the cumulative distribution of potential outcomes

(with and without treatment) for the compliers. The distribution F1 of potential outcome when

benefiting from the treatment is simply the cumulative distribution over the clients. Following

(Imbens and Rubin (1997)) , the counterfactual cumulative distribution F0 of potential outcome

when not benefiting from the treatment for the compliers/clients is given by:16


                   F0 (y|C) = (F (y|T = 0)         F (y|T = 1, C = 0)(1         P (C)) P (C)


   15
      This figure is the product of 9,520 MAD borrowed by people who borrowed, multiplied by 16% (she share of
clients), and by 52.5% (the share of clients who are borrowing in the second year). See Table B5 in the Online
Appendix, where we estimate these figures on a subsample of clients who could be matched into the Al Amana
administrative database.
   16
      We estimate the underlying cumulative distribution functions as step function with a large number of small
intervals. Although the corresponding estimated function is asymptotically positive and increasing, a problem
documented by (Imbens and Rubin (1997)) is that the estimated function can fail to be either positive or increasing,
and they propose a method to constrain the CDF to be non negative and increasing. Following them, we start the
estimation procedure with the first interval by applying the formula for unconstrained estimation and retaining
either the estimated value if is positive, or zero otherwise. We then estimate the CDF recursively for all the other
intervals by applying for each interval the formula for unconstrained estimation and retaining either the estimated
value if greater than or equal to the estimated value in the preceding interval, or else the estimated value in the
preceding interval. Finally, we rescale all estimates so that the cumulative distribution function reaches 1 on the
last interval.


                                                        21
   Figure 2 presents the results.17 There are some interesting findings. First, while the distri-

bution among compliers in the treatment group stochastically dominates that in the control for

asset accumulation, and there is visibly no impact on consumption, the two curves are clearly

di↵erent for profits: in the treatment groups, compliers have both more instances of low (neg-

ative) profits and high profits. Indeed, among the compliers in the treatment group, it seems

that very few people have negative profit (the estimated CDF is very close to zero), while about

25% of compliers in the treatment group have negative profits. The two curves cross for a value

of profits roughly equal to zero. On the other hand, the compliers with the top 40% of profits

have higher profits in the treatment groups than in the control group.

   Turning to income from employment activities, Figure 2 shows that impact of being a client

of Al Amana also appears to be far from homogeneous on the population of compliers. As

can be seen on the graph, there is no e↵ect above the quantile of order 60%; all e↵ects are

concentrated at the bottom of the distribution. In particular, 45% of the compliers who are

clients do not supply any labor outside their own activity, compared to only 30% for the non-

clients. Similarly, a higher proportion of compliers rely less on day labor income in the treatment

than in the control for low values (below 15,000 MAD) of the variables. This suggests that the

negative impact of credit on work supplied outside the home is driven primarily by households

that do not rely heavily on casual labor in the first place.

   Last, Table 9 Panel A, presents the results of the OLS control variable regression estimates

obtained from a regression of our key outcomes on a dummy variable for being a client of Al

Amana on the sub-sample of households in treatment villages. The di↵erences of these estimates

with the LATE estimates are sizable both in magnitude and sign. This unsderscores the problems

associated with identification of causal e↵ect of microcerdit.


4.4    Robustness checks

In this section we briefly report on robustness checks. We experimented with changes in the

list of control variables and di↵erent ways to compute standard errors. Results are presented

in Appendix Table B7. The first panel considers simple regressions just including the set of


  17
     Note that we do not present confidence intervals, which would likely be wide, given that the first stage is not
very large.


                                                        22
strata dummy variables, and the second panel reproduces our previous results, including a set of

control variables listed in Table 2. This panel also provides standard errors computed assuming

clustered residuals, as well as standard errors without clusters. The last panel provides results

obtained by adding to the previous set of control variables an extended set involving, among

others, the dependent variable at baseline, as well as other variables listed in the footnote of

Table B7. As can be seen from the table, results are very robust. We obtain the same order

of magnitude for all estimated coefficients, as well as for standard errors. Expanding the list of

control variables does not lead to any gain in precision. Finally, the clustered and unclustered

errors in Panel B are quite similar, suggesting that, in this case, clustering did not have a large

impact on our standard errors.



5     Conclusion

In this paper, we measure the impact of access to microfinance in remote rural areas in Morocco,

where during the span of the intervention there was no access to credit outside that provided

by our partner, Al Amana.

    We identified pairs of villages at the periphery of the catchment area of new branches, and

randomly selected one village in each pair for treatment. We surveyed both households that

were identified ex-ante as having relatively higher probability to borrow, as well as randomly

selected households in the village: the objective of this sampling strategy was to be able to

estimate both direct impact and possible externalities on non borrowers.

    On average, take-up of microfinance is only 13% in the population and 17% in our “higher

probability” sample (and zero in the control group). Consistent with other evaluations of mi-

crofinance programs, we find that households that have access to microcredit expand their

self-employment activity (primarily agriculture or animal husbandry, in this context), and their

profits increase. Our estimates seem to suggest that these e↵ects are driven by those who actu-

ally borrow, implying that the modest reduced-form estimates actually come from fairly large

average impacts (we estimate average returns to capital of close to 100% before repayment of

interest) combined with a low take-up.

    This presents a puzzle: if the returns are really that high, why are people not borrowing in


                                                23
larger numbers? And why are half of the clients apparently dropping out after a year? We see two

plausible explanations. The first is that although microfinance is associated with large average

increases in profits, the utility gain may not be as large as these estimate suggest: running one’s

own business may be stressful (as (Karlan and Zinman (2010)) find in the Philippines). We may

also not capture increase in labor in the household’s own business, which may be difficult for

survey respondents to remember.

  The second possible explanation is the substantial heterogeneity in how profitable microfi-

nance investments are. Although noisy, both the reduced-form quantile regressions and the IV

estimates of the changes in the distribution of profit for the outcomes suggest that for a sub-

stantial minority of households (about 25% of those who take up microcredit), the impact on

profit may actually be negative. This large dispersion may explain the fairly low take-up of

microfinance: households may recognize the unpredictable rate of return, and be risk averse.

  Another key finding is that despite significant increase in self-employment income (at least

among the population that is most likely to borrow), we see no net impact of microcredit access

on total labor income, or on consumption. This result is similar to what other evaluations

of microcredit programs find. In our context, this appears to be driven by a loss in income

from wage labor, which is large enough to o↵set the gain in self-employment income, and is

directly related to a substantial decline in labor supply outside the home by those who take up

microcredit.18 What is surprising is that this does not appear to be driven by time constraints:

the increase in labor supply on self-employment activities is small and insignificant, although

the confidence intervals does not allow us to rule out an increase in hours spent.

  There are two plausible channels for this set of results. The first is that access to microcredit

allows households to invest in agriculture and animal husbandry and increase their profit. Leisure

being a normal good, the income e↵ect leads them to reduce their labor supplied, particularly

outside the home. Anecdotal evidence suggests that there is a strong disutility associated with

day labor, giving credence to this explanation. A second possible channel is that our results

reflect a shift in the way households cope with risk. Access to credit enables households to

purchase lumpy assets, such as livestock, which are typically used for self-insurance (Deaton


  18
    On the other hand, we find an increase in labor supply for those who are estimated to have a very low
probability to borrow, which is consistent with a relatively closed labor market: the jobs that are left by the
microcredit clients are taken up by those who do not borrow.


                                                      24
(1991); Rosenzweig and Wolpin (1993)). This increased form of insurance can be a substitute

of other ex-ante risk-management strategies such as income diversification through day labor,

which are also taking place in the absence of formal insurance markets (Kochar (1999); Rose

(2001)). Regardless, microcredit appears to be a powerful financial instrument for the poor, but

not one that fuels an exit from poverty through better self-employment investment, at least in

the medium run (two years after the introduction of the program). We are currently following up

with the households, now that a much longer time period has elapsed, to check if the investment

in business assets paid o↵ in the longer run.




                                                25
References

Angelucci, Manuela, Dean Karlan, and Jonathan Zinman. 2013. “Win Some Lose Some?

  Evidence from a Randomized Microcredit Program Placement Experiment by Compartamos

  Banco.” Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA) IZA Discussion Papers 7439.

Attanasio, Orazio, Britta Augsburg, Ralph de Haas, Emla Fitzsimons, and Heike

  Harmgart. 2011. “Group lending or individual lending? Evidence from a randomised field

  experiment in Mongolia.” Institute for Fiscal Studies IFS Working Papers W11/20.

Augsburg, Britta, Ralph De Haas, Heike Harmgart, and Costas Meghir. 2013. “Micro-

  finance, Poverty and Education.” National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc NBER Working

  Papers 18538.

Banerjee, Abhijit, Esther Duflo, Rachel Glennerster, and Cynthia G. Kinnan. 2013.

 “The Miracle of Microfinance? Evidence from a Randomized Evaluation.” National Bureau of

  Economic Research, Inc NBER Working Papers 18950.

Chamberlain, Gary. 1994. “Advances in Econometrics: Sixth World Congress , Volume I.” ,

  ed. C. Sims, Chapter Quantile Regression, Censoring, and the Structure of Wage, 171–209.

  Cambridge University Press.

Crépon, Bruno, Esther Duflo, Marc Gurgand, Roland Rathelot, and Philippe

  Zamora. 2013. “Do Labor Market Policies have Displacement E↵ects? Evidence from a

  Clustered Randomized Experiment.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128(2): 531–580.

Deaton, Angus. 1991. “Saving and Liquidity Constraints.” Econometrica, 59(5): 1221–48.

de Mel, Suresh, David McKenzie, and Christopher Woodru↵. 2008. “Returns to Capital

  in Microenterprises: Evidence from a Field Experiment.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,

  123(4): 1329–1372.

Desai, Jaikishan, Kristin Johnson, and Alessandro Tarozzi. 2013. “On the Impact of Mi-

  crocredit: Evidence from a Randomized Intervention in Rural Ethiopia.” Barcelona Graduate

  School of Economics Working Papers 741.




                                             26
Imbens, Guido W, and Donald B Rubin. 1997. “Estimating Outcome Distributions for

  Compliers in Instrumental Variables Models.” Review of Economic Studies, 64(4): 555–74.

Karlan, Dean, and Jonathan Zinman. 2010. “Expanding Credit Access: Using Randomized

  Supply Decisions to Estimate the Impacts.” Review of Financial Studies, 23(1): 433–464.

Kochar, Anjini. 1999. “Smoothing Consumption by Smoothing Income: Hours-of-Work Re-

  sponses to Idiosyncratic Agricultural Shocks in Rural India.” The Review of Economics and

  Statistics, 81(1): 50–61.

Rose, Elaina. 2001. “Ex ante and ex post labor supply response to risk in a low-income area.”

  Journal of Development Economics, 64(2): 371–388.

Rosenzweig, Mark R, and Kenneth I Wolpin. 1993. “Credit Market Constraints, Con-

  sumption Smoothing, and the Accumulation of Durable Production Assets in Low-Income

  Countries: Investment in Bullocks in India.” Journal of Political Economy, 101(2): 223–44.




                                             27
Figure 1: Quantile regression (ITT)




                28
Figure 2: Cumulative distribution of potential outcomes for compliers




                                 29
Table 1. Summary Statistics
                                                                            Control Group              Treatment - Control
                                                      Obs            Obs        Mean      St. Dev.     Coeff.      p-value

Panel A. Baseline Household Sample
Household composition
# members                                            4,465          2,266       5.13       2.69         0.04         0.573
# adults (>=16 years old)                            4,465          2,266       3.45       1.99         0.03         0.529
# children (<16 years old)                           4,465          2,266       1.68       1.64         0.01         0.842
Male head                                            4,465          2,266       0.935      0.246        0.001        0.813
Head age                                             4,465          2,266         48         16           1   ***    0.007
Head with no education                               4,465          2,266       0.615      0.487       -0.013        0.353
Access to credit:
Loan from Al Amana                                   4,465          2,266       0.007      0.084       -0.003        0.425
Loan from other formal institution                   4,465          2,266       0.060      0.238        0.030 **     0.023
Informal loan                                        4,465          2,266       0.068      0.251        0.023 ***    0.006
Electricity or water connection loan                 4,465          2,266       0.156      0.363       0.013         0.523
Amount borrowed from (in MAD):
Al Amana                                             4,465          2,266         43        622          -21         0.317
Other formal institution                             4,465          2,266       1,040     18,301        -373         0.230
Informal loan                                        4,465          2,266        292       3,073         140         0.179
Electricity or water entities                        4,465          2,266        582       2,097         -10         0.893
Self-employment activities
# activities                                         4,465          2,266        1.5        1.2          0.0         0.512
Farms                                                4,465          2,266       0.599      0.490        0.017        0.321
    Investment                                       4,465          2,266        191       4,152         133         0.154
    Sales                                            4,465          2,266       7,569     21,229         339         0.551
    Expenses                                         4,465          2,266       3,581      9,482         263         0.279
    Savings                                          4,465          2,266       1,284      3,568         -62         0.523
    Employment                                       4,465          2,266         33        272           42         0.166
    Self-employment                                  4,465          2,266         73        171           8          0.133
Does animal husbandry                                4,465          2,266       0.533      0.499        0.042   **   0.027
    Investment                                       4,465          2,266        468       2,926         156         0.157
    Sales                                            4,465          2,266       3,456      9,312         567    *    0.077
    Expenses                                         4,465          2,266       4,163     10,562         469         0.111
    Savings                                          4,465          2,266      10,161     16,731        1,087   **   0.045
    Employment                                       4,465          2,266        270       4,844          13         0.930
    Self-employment                                  4,465          2,266        206       3,033         -67          0.15
Runs a non-farm business                             4,465          2,266       0.216      0.411       -0.034   **   0.012
# activities managed by women                        4,465          2,266       0.218      0.585       0.004         0.750
Share of HH activities managed by women              4,465          2,266       0.160      0.367       0.007         0.466
Distance to souk                                     4,465          2,266       25.2       32.4          0.7         0.679
Has income from:
Self-employment activity                             4,465          2,266       0.780      0.414       -0.016        0.176
Day labor/salaried                                   4,465          2,266       0.583      0.493       -0.016        0.192
Risks:
Lost more than 50% of the harvest                    4,125          2,077       0.106      0.308       0.004         0.642
Lost more than 50% of the livestock                  4,125          2,077       0.030      0.172       0.003         0.606
Lost any livestock over the past 12 months           4,465          2,266       0.190      0.393       0.028 **      0.014
HH member illness, death and/or house sinister       4,465          2,266       0.218      0.413       0.013         0.168
Consumption
Consumption (in MAD)                                 4,465          2,266       2,251      1,266        32           0.317
Non-durables consumption (in MAD)                    4,465          2,266       2,098      1,156        36           0.233
Durables consumption (in MAD)                        4,465          2,266         45        236          2           0.696
HH is poor                                           4,465          2,266       0.246      0.431        0.005        0.686


Panel B. Attrition
Not surveyed at endline                                    4,465        2,266   0.068       0.252       0.018 **      0.018
Notes: Data source: Baseline household survey. Unit of observation: household. Panel A & B: sample includes all households
surveyed at baseline. ***, **, * indicate significance at 1, 5 and 10%.
Table 2. Credit
                                          (1)                     (2)                    (3)                     (4)                     (5)                    (6)                     (7)                     (8)                  (9)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Index of
                                   Al Amana -              Al Amana -                                                                Utility                                                                 Loan
                                                                                    Other MFI            Other Formal                                       Informal                  Total                                      dependent
                                   Admin data              Survey data                                                              company                                                               repayment
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  variables

Panel A. Credit access†	  
Treated village                       0.167                   0.090                    -0.006                 0.007                   0.017                   -0.003                0.077                                           0.129
                                    (0.012)***              (0.010)***                (0.004)               (0.003)**                (0.017)                 (0.007)              (0.017)***                                      (0.017)***
Observations                   4,934                            4,934                  4,934                   4,934                   4,934                  4,934                   4,934                                          4,934
Control mean                   0.000                            0.022                  0.023                   0.016                   0.157                  0.059                   0.247                                          0.000
Hochberg-­‐corrected	  p-­‐value                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.000

Panel B. Loan amounts (in MAD) ††	  
Treated village                                               796                        -13                   341                     181                     -113                  1,193                     33
                                                         (103)***                       (34)                 (172)**                  (89)**                  (168)                 (284)***                 (13)**
Observations                                                    4,934                  4,934                   4,934                   4,934                  4,934                   4,934                   4,934
Control mean                                                     180                    124                     519                     566                    493                    1,882                    42

Notes: Data source: Column1: Al Amana administrative data. Columns 2-9: Endline household survey. Observation unit: household. Sample includes
households with high probability-to-borrow score surveyed at endline, after trimming 0.5% of observations (3,525 who got both a full baseline and endline
household survey administered, plus an additional 1,409 households who got only the full endline survey administered). (see Section 3 for an explanation of
sample strategy). Coefficients and standard errors (in parentheses) from an OLS regression of the variable on a treated village dummy, controlling for strata
dummies (paired villages) and variables specified below. Standard errors are clustered at the village level. ***, **, * indicate significance at 1, 5 and 10%.
Controls include: number of household members, number of adults, head age, does animal husbandry, does other non-agricultural activity, had an
outstanding loan over the past 12 months, HH spouse responded the survey, and other HH member (excluding the HH head) responded the survey.
†	  Column	  1-­‐8:	  dummy	  variable	  equal	  to	  1	  if	  the	  households	  had	  an	  outstanding	  loan	  over	  the	  12	  months	  prior	  to	  the	  survey.	  ††	  Sum	  of	  outstanding	  loans	  (in	  
MAD) over the 12 months prior to the survey.

Column	  9:	  the	  dependent	  variable	  consists	  of	  an	  index	  of	  z-­‐scores	  of	  the	  outcome	  variables	  in	  columns	  2-­‐8	  (including	  both	  credit	  access	  and	  loan	  amounts)	  
following	  Kling,	  Liebman,	  and	  Katz	  (2007).	  P-­‐values	  for	  this	  regression	  are	  reported	  using	  Hochberg's	  correction	  method.
Table 3. Self-employment activities: revenues, assets and profits
                                (1)             (2)              (3)                                                             (4)                      (5)                    (6)                        (7)
                                                                                                                                                                              Has a self-                Index of
                                                                      Sales + home                                           Of which:
                                                 Assets                                           Expenses                                              Profit               employment                 dependent
                                                                      consumption                                         Investment
                                                                                                                                                                               activity                  variables


Treated village                                   1,454                   6,090                     4,079                       -224                   2,011                      -0.016                   0.029
                                                 (659)**                (2,166)***                (1,720)**                    (224)                  (1,211)*                   (0.010)                 (0.015)**

Observations                       4,934                4,934             4,934            4,934            4,934         4,934          4,934
Control mean                       15,982               30,450            21,394           1,529            9,056         0.831          0.000
Hochberg-­‐corrected	  p-­‐value                                                                                                        0.235
Notes: Data source: Endline household survey. Observation unit: household. Coefficients and standard errors (in parentheses) from an OLS
regression of the variable on a treated village dummy, controlling for strata dummies (paired villages) and variables specified below. Standard
errors are clustered at the village level. ***, **, * indicate significance at 1, 5 and 10%. Same controls as in Table 2.
Definitions:
(1) Sum of assets owned in the three activities, including the stock of livestock.
(2) Total Production = sum of agricultural, livestock and non-agricultural business production over the 12 months prior to the survey. Production
includes both sales and self-consumption. Agricultural production also includes stock.
(3) Sum of labor, inputs, rent and investment in all three activities, purchased over the 12 months prior to the survey.
(4) Sum of productive assets purchased over the 12 months prior to the survey. Animal husbandry assets include the purchases of livestock.
(5) Profit =(2)-(3)
(6) Variable equals 1 if the HH ran a self-employment activity over the 12 months prior to the survey.
(7)	  The	  dependent	  variable	  consists	  of	  an	  index	  of	  z-­‐scores	  of	  the	  outcome	  variables	  in	  columns	  1-­‐6	  following	  Kling,	  Liebman,	  and	  Katz	  (2007).	  
P-­‐values	  for	  this	  regression	  are	  reported	  using	  Hochberg's	  correction	  method.
Table 4. Income
                                         (1)                             (2)                             (3)                 (4)                 (5)                                                    (6)                             (7)
                                                                                                          HH income, over the past 12 months, from:
                                       Total                  Self-employment,
                                                                                              Self-employment                     Day labor &                 Household asset                                              Index of dependent
                                                                daily labor &                                                                                                                         Other
                                                                                                  activities                       salaried                        sales                                                        variables
                                                                   salaried
Panel A. Income (in MAD)
Treated village          447                                            960                           2,011                           -1,052                          -679                             166                           0.000
                       (1,345)                                        (1,269)                        (1,211)*                        (477)**                         (262)**                          (233)                         (0.017)

Observations                   4,934                4,934               4,934            4,934                4,934               4,934                4,934
Control mean                  27,670               24,805               9,056           15,748                 709                2,157                0.000
Hochberg-­‐corrected	  p-­‐value                                                                                                                      0.978
Notes: Data source: Endline household survey. Observation unit: household. Coefficients and standard errors (in parentheses) from an OLS regression of the
variable on a treated village dummy, controlling for strata dummies (paired villages) and variables specified below. Standard errors are clustered at the village
level. ***, **, * indicate significance at 1, 5 and 10%. Same controls as in Table 2.
Definitions:
(3): income equals total profit from the self-employment activity.
(7):	  the	  dependent	  variable	  consists	  of	  an	  index	  of	  z-­‐scores	  of	  the	  outcome	  variables	  in	  columns	  1-­‐6	  following	  Kling,	  Liebman,	  and	  Katz	  (2007).	  P-­‐values	  for	  this	  
regression are reported using Hochberg's correction method.
Table 5. Time worked by HH members
                                                                          (1)                      (2)                       (3)                       (4)                   (5)               (6)
                                                                     Hours worked by household members over the past 7 days†
                                                                                                                                                                                 Index of
                                                                        Total                                           of which:                                       # of HH
                                                                                                                                                                                dependent
                                                                                               self-                                                                    members
                                                                                                                         outside                                                 variables
                                                                                            employment                                              chores
                                                                                                                        activities
                                                                                             activities
Household members 6-65 years old
Treated village                                                          -3.3                      1.1                     -2.8                      -1.6
                                                                        (2.5)                     (1.5)                  (1.1)***                   (1.0)*
Control mean                                                           143.1                      46.9                     33.8                      62.3                   5.2
Household members 6-15 years old
Treated village                                                          -0.5                      0.6                      0.2                      -1.3
                                                                        (0.7)                     (0.4)                    (0.3)                   (0.4)***
Control mean                                                            19.2                       6.3                      3.4                       9.4                   1.4
Household members 16-20 years old
Treated village                                                         -1.4                       -0.2                    -1.3                       0.1
                                                                       (0.8)*                     (0.4)                  (0.4)***                    (0.4)
Control mean                                                            21.6                       6.6                      5.5                       9.6                   0.8
Household members 21-50 years old
Treated village                                                          -0.5                      1.1                      -1.5                       0.0
                                                                        (1.5)                     (0.8)                   (0.8)**                    (0.6)
Control mean                                                            84.4                      26.3                     21.9                      36.3                   2.5
Household members 51-65 years old
Treated village                                                          -1.2                     -0.5                      -0.3                      -0.4
                                                                       (0.6)**                   (0.3)                     (0.3)                     (0.3)
Observations                                                            4,918                    4,918                     4,918                     4,918                 4,918
Control mean                                                            18.2                       8.1                      3.1                       7.0                   0.6
Observations                                                            4,918                    4,918                     4,918                     4,918                 4,918
Index
Treated village                                                                                                                                                                             -0.017
                                                                                                                                                                                           (0.010)*
Observations                                                                                                                                                                                4,918
Control mean                                                                                                                                                                                0.000
Hochberg-­‐corrected	  p-­‐value                                                                                                                                                           0.318

Notes: Data source: Endline household survey. Observation unit: household. Coefficients and standard errors (in parentheses) from
an OLS regression of the variable on a treated village dummy, controlling for strata dummies (paired villages) and variables specified
below. Standard errors are clustered at the village level. ***, **, * indicate significance at 1, 5 and 10%. Same controls as in Table 2.
†	  Sum	  of	  hours	  worked	  by	  household	  members	  over	  the	  past	  7	  days	  in	  self-­‐employment,	  outside	  activities	  	  and	  housework.	  
Households were asked at endline survey about the # of hours worked by each HH member over the past 7 days.
(6)	  The	  dependent	  variable	  consists	  of	  an	  index	  of	  z-­‐scores	  of	  the	  outcome	  variables	  in	  all	  panels	  of	  columns	  1-­‐4	  following	  Kling,	  
Liebman,	  and	  Katz	  (2007).	  P-­‐values	  for	  this	  regression	  are	  reported	  using	  Hochberg's	  correction	  method.
Table 6. Consumption
                               (1)                          (2)                   (3)                    (4)          (5)           (6)           (7)                                                 (8)                     (9)                  (10)
                           Monthly per                                                                      Monthly household consumption (in MAD) in:                                                                                         Index of
                             capita                       Total               Durables           Non-durable                 Food                 Health                Education             Temptation & Festivals &                        dependent
                         consumption (in                                                                                                                                                      entertainment celebrations                       variables
                              MAD)

Treated village                      -1                     -45                   18                     -60                   3                      3                       -1                       -6                    -39                  -0.013
                                    (9)                    (47)                  (16)                   (41)                  (23)                   (5)                     (1)                      (6)                  (12)***               (0.015)

Observations                   4,919                  4,924                         4,924                    4,924           4,924                   4,924                   4,924                     4,924                  4,924                     4,924
Control mean                    557                   3,057                           64                     2,841           1,784                       46                    24                       298                    429                       0.000
Hochberg-­‐corrected	  p-­‐value                                                                                                                                                                                                                       >0.999
Notes: Data source: Endline household survey. Observation unit: household. Coefficients and standard errors (in parentheses) from an OLS regression of the variable on a
treated village dummy, controlling for strata dummies (paired villages) and variables specified below. Standard errors are clustered at the village level. ***, **, * indicate
significance at 1, 5 and 10%. Same controls as in Table 2.
Definitions:
(1): Monthly household per capita expenditures, including food self-consumption.
(2)-(9): Monthly household expenditures, including food self-consumption.
(10):	  the	  dependent	  variable	  consists	  of	  an	  index	  of	  z-­‐scores	  of	  the	  outcome	  variables	  in	  columns	  1-­‐9	  following	  Kling,	  Liebman,	  and	  Katz	  (2007).	  P-­‐values	  for	  this	  
regression are reported using Hochberg's correction method.
Table 7. Social effects
                                       (1)                   (2)                                                    (3)                                 (4)                                   (5)                                   (6)
                            Share of kids aged 6-15   Share of teenagers                                      Index of women                      % household self-                     Number of self-                          Index of
                                   in school        (aged 16-20) in school                                    independence†                     employment activities                 employment activities                     dependent
                                                                                                                                                 managed by women                      managed by women                          variables

Treated village                          0.006                                  -0.004                                0.173                                 -0.014                                  -0.02                           -0.007
                                        (0.008)                                (0.006)                               (0.205)                               (0.009)                                 (0.01)                          (0.012)

Observations                              4,934                                 4,934                                 4,934                                  4,934                                 4,934                            4,934
Control mean                    0.455                                           0.088                                 -0.071                                 0.248                                  0.39                           0.000
Hochberg-­‐corrected	  p-­‐value                                                                                                                                                                                                  >0.999
Notes: Data source: Endline household survey. Observation unit: household. Coefficients and standard errors (in parentheses) from an OLS regression of the
variable on a treated village dummy, controlling for strata dummies (paired villages) and variables specified below. Standard errors are clustered at the village
level. ***, **, * indicate significance at 1, 5 and 10%. Same controls as in Table 2.
†	   Effect on the sum of 14 standardized measures (measures include: at least one woman in the household has currently an own activity, decides by herself on
activity assets, buys activity assets herself, decides by herself on activity inputs, buys inputs herself, decides what to produce, commercializes production,
decides by herself on commercialization, makes sales herself, had an own activity in the past 5 years, is allowed to go to the market by herself, is allowed to
take public transportation by herself, is allowed to visit family by herself, is allowed to visit friends by herself). Each measure is coded so that 1 reflects
independence and 0 reflects lack of independence.
(6):	  the	  dependent	  variable	  consists	  of	  an	  index	  of	  z-­‐scores	  of	  the	  outcome	  variables	  in	  columns	  1-­‐5	  following	  Kling,	  Liebman,	  and	  Katz	  (2007).	  P-­‐values	  for	  this	  
regression are reported using Hochberg's correction method.
Table 8: Externalities
                                              (1)             (2)            (3)             (4)            (5)           (6)           (7)           (8)           (9)                 (10)            (11)
                                                                                                                                                  Weekly hours worked by HH                         Festivals &
                                           Client Al                                                                   Has a self- Income from                                       Monthly HH
                                                                         Sales + home                                                                members aged 16-65                            celebrations
                                           Amana -      Assets (stock)                   Expenses          Profit     employment day labor/                                         consumption
                                                                         consumption                                                                 self-                                           expenses
                                          Admin data                                                                    activity     salaried                     outside             (in MAD)
                                                                                                                                                  employment                                         (in MAD)
Panel A: Borrowers
Treated village                             0.167           1,454           6,090          4,079           2,011        -0.016         -1,052          0.6             -3.0             -45             -39
                                          (0.012)***       (659)**        (2,166)***     (1,720)**        (1,211)*      (0.010)       (477)**         (1.30)         (1.0)***           (47)          (12)***

Observations                                 4,934          4,934          4,934            4,934          4,934         4,934         4,934          4,918            4,918            4,924          4,924
Control mean                                 0.000          15,982         30,450          21,394          9,056         0.831        15,748          40.6             30.4             3,057           429

Panel B: All sample weighted
Treated village                             0.132           1,002           3,707          4,186           -479         -0.021         -1,234          0.5              -2.0            -45.0            -8
                                          (0.011)***        (705)          (1,943)*      (1,334)***       (1,254)      (0.010)**      (558)**         (1.1)            (1.1)*          (36.0)           (11)

Observations                                 5,524          5,524          5,524            5,524          5,524         5,524         5,524          5,508            5,508            5,513          5,513
Control mean                                 0.000          15,490         26,376          17,263          9,113         0.824        15,911           38.6            30.0             2,927           401

Panel C: Top and bottom 30% unweighted
Treated village X High Predicted             0.364          1,049          15,903          10,270          5,633         -0.023        -2,112          2.90            -7.00             -92            -40
Propensity to Borrow
                                           (0.011)***      (1,298)        (4,155)***     (3,560)***      (2,453)**      (0.014)       (694)***        (2.30)          (1.8)***          (94)           (18)**
Treated village X Low Predicted              0.015          1,598            563            946            -383          -0.002        -2,467         -1.40            -6.20             80             -18
Propensity to Borrow
                                           (0.003)***      (1,132)         (2,683)        (1,727)         (1,733)       (0.013)       (794)***        (1.30)          (1.6)***          (62)            (18)

Observations                                 3,315          3,315          3,315            3,315         3,315          3,315         3,315          3,303            3,303            3,307          3,307
Control mean                                 0.000          17,608         31,667          22,343         9,325          0.823        16,119          40.02            31.88            3,063           427
Control mean, hight PTB                      0.000          21,687         37,988          27,073         10,915         0.832        15,652           45.8            32.4             3,253           460
Control mean, low PTB                        0.000          13,690         25,595          17,798         7,796          0.815        16,567           34.4            31.4             2,881           395
p-value: T X Low PTB = T X High PTB          0.000          0.748           0.002          0.019           0.047         0.277         0.735          0.105            0.737            0.120          0.375
Notes: Data source: Endline household survey. Observation unit: household. Panel A: sample includes households with high probability-to-borrow score. Panel B: sample includes both households with high
probability-to-borrow score and households picked at random. Observations are weighted by the inverse probability of being sampled. Panel C: sample includes both households with high probability-to-borrow
score and households picked at random, but only those in the top 30% and in the bottom 30% of the predicted propensity to borrow (PTB) distribution. All panels include sample after 0.5% trimming of
observations. Panel A & B: coefficients and standard errors (in parentheses) from an OLS regression of the variable on a treated village dummy, controlling for strata dummies (paired villages) and variables
specified below. Panel C: coefficients and standard errors (in parentheses) from an OLS regression of the variable on a treated village dummy interacted with a dummy equal to 1 if HH predicted propensity to
borrow is in the 0-30th percentile of the PTB distribution (Low Predicted PTB), on a treated village dummy interacted with a dummy equal to 1 if HH predicted PTB is in the 70-100th percentile of the PTB
distribution (High Predicted PTB) and on a dummy equal to 1 if HH predicted PTB is in the 0-30th percentile of the PTB distribution (not shown), controlling for strata dummies (paired villages) and variables
specified below. All panels: standard errors are clustered at the village level. ***, **, * indicate significance at 1, 5 and 10%. Same controls as in Table 2.
Table 9: The impact of borrowing
                             (1)                 (2)            (3)             (4)             (5)             (6)          (7)           (8)                 (9)
                                                                                                                          Weekly hours worked by HH
                                                                                            Has a self-  Income from        members aged 16-65             Monthly HH
                                          Sales + home
                           Assets (stock)                    Expenses         Profit       employment        day                                          consumption
                                          consumption                                                                        self-
                                                                                             activity   labor/salaried                      outside         (in MAD)
                                                                                                                          employment
Panel A: OLS
                               4,690          19,703          11,848          7,855            0.019          -1,239           6.7            -3.1             481
                             (1,868)**       (7,772)**       (5,588)**       (4,134)*         (0.016)        (1,128)         (3.0)**         (3.1)           (191)**
                               2,448           2,448           2,448          2,448            2,448           2,448          2,440          2,440            2,444
                              16,523          31,182          21,574          9,608            0.815         15,127           39.2           27.8             2,947
Panel B: IV
Client                         8,684          36,365          24,355          12,010           -0.093        -6,279            3.4           -18.2            -267
                             (4,004)**      (12,466)***      (9,920)**       (7,199)*         (0.060)       (2,860)**         (8.0)         (5.8)***          (278)

Observations                       4,934             4,934           4,934          4,934           4,934        4,934          4,918          4,918             4,924
Control mean                      15,982            30,450          21,394          9,056           0.831       15,748           40.6          30.4              3,057
Control complier mean†            13,563            23,703          16,548          7,155           0.903       18,530           43.5          42.1              3,421
Note : Data source: Endline household survey. Observation unit: household. Panel A: Sample includes households with high probability-to-borrow score in treated
villages. Coefficients and standard errors (in parentheses) from an OLS regression of the variable on a client dummy, controlling for strata dummies (paired villages)
and variables specified below. Client is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the household has borrowed from Al Amana. Panel B: Sample includes households with high
probability-to-borrow score in treated and control villages. Coefficients and standard errors (in parentheses) from an instrumental variable regression of the
variable on the variable client , controlling for strata dummies (paired villages) and variables specified below. Client is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the household
has borrowed from Al Amana and is instrumented with treated village , a dummy equal to 1 if the household lives in a treatment village. Standard errors are
clustered at the village level. ***, **, * indicate significance at 1, 5 and 10%. Same controls as in Table 2.
†	   The complier mean in the control group is calculated as E(Y0|C)=[E(Y|Z=0)-E(Y|Z=1,T=0)*(1-P(T=1))]/P(T=1), where Z indicates treatment assignment, T
indicates being a microcredit client and P(T=1) the proportion of clients in Z=1
PAPER APPENDIX
Table A1. Propensity to borrow

Propensity to borrow, all households interviewed at baseline in wave 1 treatment villages
                                                                                                 Coef.

Does more than 3 self-employment activities                                                       2.365
                                                                                              (0.734)***
Does trading as self-employment activity                                                          0.846
                                                                                                (0.501)*
Share # members with trading, services or handicraft as main activity to # members                3.125
                                                                                                (1.756)*
Owns land                                                                                        -1.588
                                                                                              (0.443)***
Rents land                                                                                       -1.992
                                                                                              (0.575)***
Have not bought agriculture productive assets over the past 12 months                            -1.048
                                                                                               (0.476)**
Uses sickle & rake (in agriculture)                                                              -0.979
                                                                                              (0.338)***
ln(# of olive and argan trees)                                                                    0.518
                                                                                              (0.096)***
# of cows bought over the past 12 months                                                         -2.010
                                                                                               (1.020)**
Gets a pension                                                                                    2.021
                                                                                              (0.539)***
Has a radio                                                                                       1.066
                                                                                              (0.403)***
Has a fiber mat                                                                                   1.574
                                                                                               (0.650)**
Phone expenses over the past month (in MAD)                                                      -0.019
                                                                                              (0.006)***
Clothes expenses over the past month (in MAD)                                                     0.001
                                                                                                (0.001)*
Had an outstanding formal loan over the past 12 months                                            0.869
                                                                                              (0.330)***
ln(amount that would be able to reimburse monthly (in MAD))                                       0.250
                                                                                               (0.109)**
Would be ready to form a 4-person group and guarantee a loan mutually                             0.570
                                                                                                (0.321)*
Would uptake a loan of 3,000 MAD to be repaid in 9 monthly installments of 400 MAD              0.593
                                                                                               (0.338)*

Observations                                                                                     665
Mean dependent variable                                                                         0.104
Pseudo R2                                                                                       0.280
Number of villages                                                                                7
Notes: Data source: Mini survey. Unit of observation: household. Sample includes all households surveyed at
baseline in phase 1 pilot treatment villages (i.e. wave 1). Coefficients and standard errors (in parenthesis)
from a logit regression of the variable client on variables specified in the table. Client is a dummy variable
equal to 1 if the household had taken up a microcredit within the first 6 months of the intervention. ***, **, *
indicate significance at 1, 5 and 10%.
ON-LINE APPENDIX
Table B1. Summary Statistics
                                                                         Control Group            Treatment - Control
                                                        Obs        Obs       Mean      St. Dev.   Coeff.      p-value

Panel A. Endline sample
# members                                                5,898        2,965        6.13       3.07  0.05        0.627
# members older than 18                                  5,898        2,965        3.60       2.10  0.04        0.570
# self-employment activities                             5,898        2,965        1.41       0.99  0.02        0.573
# members with trading, services or handicraft as
                                                         5,898        2,965       0.299     0.627  -0.037 *     0.061
main activity
Gets a pension                                           5,898        2,965        0.15       0.35  0.00        0.833
Distance to souk (in km)                                 5,898        2,965         11         9      0         0.398
Does trading as self-employment activity                 5,898        2,965       0.139     0.346  -0.045 *** 0.003
Has a fiber mat                                          5,898        2,965       0.817     0.387  -0.012       0.290
Has a radio                                              5,898        2,965       0.778     0.415  0.020 *      0.090
Owns land                                                5,898        2,965       0.623     0.485  0.010        0.540
Rents land                                               5,898        2,965       0.171     0.376  0.002        0.828
Does crop-sharing                                        5,898        2,965       0.137     0.344  -0.008       0.435
# of olive and argan trees                               5,898        2,965         36        131     -4        0.154
Bought agriculture productive assets over the past
                                                         5,898        2,965       0.240     0.427  0.034 ** 0.029
12 months
Uses sickle (in agriculture)                             5,898        2,965       0.626     0.484  -0.006       0.739
Uses rake (in agriculture)                               5,898        2,965       0.556     0.497  -0.009       0.587
# of cows bought over the past 12 months                 5,898        2,965         0.2       5.7    0.2        0.112
Phone expenses over the past month (in MAD)              5,898        2,965         40        100     -1        0.780
Clothes expenses over the past month (in MAD)            5,898        2,965        512        925    -36        0.131
Had an outstanding formal loan over the past 12
                                                         5,898        2,965       0.227     0.419  0.012        0.604
months
Would be ready to form a 4-person group and
                                                         5,898        2,965       0.644     0.479  0.040 *** 0.009
guarantee a loan mutually
Amount that would be able to reimburse monthly
                                                         5,898        2,965        181        433     0         0.994
(in MAD)
Would uptake a loan of 3,000 MAD to be repaid in 9
                                                         5,898        2,965       0.139     0.346  0.012        0.270
monthly installments of 400 MAD
Panel B. Attrition
Not surveyed at endline                                  5,898        2,965       0.052     0.223  0.013 ** 0.017
Not surveyed at endline and trimmed obs                  5,898        2,965       0.058     0.233  0.012 ** 0.038
Notes: Data source: Mini-Survey. Unit of observation: household. Sample includes all households surveyed at baseline,
plus all households only surveyed at endline (4,465 households who were surveyed at baseline, plus an additional of
1,433 households surveyed only at endline). ***, **, * indicate significance at 1, 5 and 10%.
Table B2. Summary Statistics
                                                                         Control Group            Treatment - Control
                                                        Obs        Obs       Mean      St. Dev.   Coeff.      p-value

Post-attrition endline sample: HHs with high probability-to-borrow score
# members                                                   4,934  2,486       6.28       3.10      0.07       0.512
# members older than 18                                     4,934  2,486       3.68       2.10      0.05       0.470
# self-employment activities                                4,934  2,486       1.42       0.98      0.02       0.543
# members with trading, services or handicraft as
                                                            4,934  2,486      0.320      0.654    -0.047 ** 0.027
main activity
Gets a pension                                              4,934  2,486       0.15       0.36      0.00       0.995
Distance to souk (in km)                                    4,934  2,486        11         9         -1        0.287
Does trading as self-employment activity                    4,934  2,486      0.146      0.354    -0.046 *** 0.003
Has a fiber mat                                             4,934  2,486      0.830      0.375    -0.015       0.205
Has a radio                                                 4,934  2,486      0.798      0.402     0.023 *     0.062
Owns land                                                   4,934  2,486      0.623      0.485     0.017       0.344
Rents land                                                  4,934  2,486      0.173      0.378    -0.002       0.870
Does crop-sharing                                           4,934  2,486      0.137      0.344    -0.009       0.406
# of olive and argan trees                                  4,934  2,486        38        135        -3        0.254
Bought agriculture productive assets over the past
                                                            4,934  2,486      0.251      0.433     0.040 ** 0.021
12 months
Uses sickle (in agriculture)                                4,934  2,486      0.630      0.483    -0.005       0.781
Uses rake (in agriculture)                                  4,934  2,486      0.558      0.497    -0.001       0.976
# of cows bought over the past 12 months                    4,934  2,486       0.3        6.2       0.2        0.249
Phone expenses over the past month (in MAD)                 4,934  2,486        41        102        -1        0.637
Clothes expenses over the past month (in MAD)               4,934  2,486       544        960       -48 *      0.063
Had an outstanding formal loan over the past 12
                                                            4,934  2,486      0.236      0.425     0.012       0.630
months
Would be ready to form a 4-person group and
                                                            4,934  2,486      0.677      0.468     0.040 ** 0.012
guarantee a loan mutually
Amount that would be able to reimburse monthly
                                                            4,934  2,486       191        428        1         0.963
(in MAD)
Would uptake a loan of 3,000 MAD to be repaid in 9
                                                            4,934  2,486      0.152      0.360     0.004       0.738
monthly installments of 400 MAD
Notes: Data source: Mini-Survey. Unit of observation: households. Sample includes households with high probability-to-
borrow score surveyed at endline after trimming 0.5% of observations (3,525 who got both a full baseline and endline
household survey administered, plus an additional 1,409 households who got only the full endline survey
administered). ***, **, * indicate significance at 1, 5 and 10%.
Table B3. Attrition
Panel A. Attrition rate                                                      Control Group               Treatment - Control
                                                       Obs            Obs        Mean      St. Dev.      Coeff.      p-value
Not surveyed at endline                                4,465         2,266       0.068       0.252       0.018 **         0.018


Panel B. Attrition: household characteristics                            Surveyed at endline             Attrited - Surveyed
                                                       Obs            Obs      Mean       St. Dev.       Coeff.       p-value
Household composition
# members                                              4,465         4,118           5.22       2.71       -0.87    ***    0.000
# adults (>=16 years old)                              4,465         4,118           3.51       2.01       -0.56    ***    0.000
# children (<16 years old)                             4,465         4,118           1.70       1.64       -0.32    ***    0.000
Male head                                              4,465         4,118          0.942      0.233      -0.076    ***    0.000
Head age                                               4,465         4,118           48.5       15.9         -2.6   **     0.013
Head with no education                                 4,465         4,118          0.615      0.487      -0.086    ***    0.003
Access to credit:
Loan from Al Amana                                     4,465         4,118          0.006      0.076       0.005           0.400
Loan from other formal institution                     4,465         4,118          0.078      0.268       0.000           0.968
Informal loan                                          4,465         4,118          0.077      0.266       0.004           0.718
Electricity or water connection loan                   4,465         4,118          0.162      0.368      -0.006           0.637
Self-employment activities
# activities                                           4,465         4,118           1.56       1.21       -0.34 ***       0.000
Farms                                                  4,465         4,118          0.614      0.487      -0.140 ***       0.000
Does animal husbandry                                  4,465         4,118          0.558      0.497      -0.125 ***       0.000
Runs a non-farm business                               4,465         4,118          0.196      0.397      -0.012           0.558
# activities managed by women                          4,465         4,118           0.21       0.57       -0.01           0.767
Distance to souk                                       4,465         4,118          25.71      31.41       -1.72           0.245
Has income from:
Self-employment activity                               4,465         4,118          0.778      0.416      -0.097 ***       0.000
Day labor/salaried                                     4,465         4,118          0.576      0.494       0.032           0.245
Consumption
Consumption                                            4,465         4,118          2281       1281         -178 ***       0.003
HH is poor                                             4,465         4,118          0.249      0.433      -0.043 *         0.056

Panel C. Attrition: household characteristics by treatment group
                                                                      Surveyed at endline, control        Attrited X Treated
                                                                                group                           Village
                                                       Obs             Obs      Mean        St. Dev.     Coeff.       p-value
Household composition
# members                                              4,465          2,111           5.17        2.68          0.06      0.854
# adults (>=16 years old)                              4,465          2,111         3.472         1.99          0.06      0.801
# children (<16 years old)                             4,465          2,111           1.69        1.65          0.01      0.951
Male head                                              4,465          2,111         0.939         0.24       -0.043       0.282
Head age                                               4,465          2,111           48.0        16.0           -0.4     0.852
Head with no education                                 4,465          2,111         0.618        0.486        0.014       0.817
Access to credit:
Loan from Al Amana                                     4,465          2,111         0.006        0.078       -0.014       0.280
Loan from other formal institution                     4,465          2,111         0.060        0.237       -0.067 **    0.010
Informal loan                                          4,465          2,111         0.069        0.253       -0.002       0.922
Electricity or water connection loan                   4,465          2,111         0.160        0.367        0.007       0.813
Self-employment activities
# activities                                           4,465          2,111           1.55        1.21          0.05      0.714
Farms                                                  4,465          2,111         0.604        0.489        0.014       0.810
Does animal husbandry                                  4,465          2,111         0.538        0.499        0.039       0.496
Runs a non-farm business                               4,465          2,111         0.217        0.412        0.023       0.562
# activities managed by women                          4,465          2,111           0.22        0.58         -0.02      0.713
Distance to souk                                       4,465          2,111         25.28        32.33          3.14      0.244
Has income from:
Self-employment activity                               4,465          2,111         0.786         0.41        0.093 *     0.057
Day labor/salaried                                     4,465          2,111         0.586        0.493       -0.023       0.677
Consumption
Consumption                                            4,465          2,111          2256        1278             -20     0.862
HH is poor                                             4,465          2,111         0.250        0.433        0.018       0.694
Notes: Data source: Baseline household survey. Unit of observation: household. Sample includes all households surveyed at
baseline. Panel A: coefficients from an OLS regression of the variable on a treated village dummy, controlling for strata
dummies (paired villages). Panel B: coefficients from an OLS regression of the variable on an attrited dummy, controlling for
strata dummies (paired villages). Panel C: coefficients from an OLS regression of the variable on a treatment village dummy
(not shown), attrited dummy (not shown) and a dummy of the interaction of treatment village dummy and attrited dummy,
controlling for strata dummies (paired villages). Standard errors are clustered at the village level.***, **, * indicate
significance at 1, 5 and 10%.
Table B4. Attrition
Panel A. Attrition rate                                                      Control Group              Treatment - Control
                                                       Obs            Obs        Mean      St. Dev.     Coeff.      p-value
Not surveyed at endline                               5,898          2,965         0.052       0.223     0.013 **      0.017


Panel B. Attrition: household characteristics                            Surveyed at endline             Attrited - Surveyed
                                                       Obs            Obs      Mean       St. Dev.       Coeff.       p-value
# members                                             5,898          5,551       6.24        3.04        -1.36 ***      0.000
# members older than 18                               5,898          5,551       3.67        2.08        -0.75 ***      0.000
# self-employment activities                          5,898          5,551       1.44        0.99        -0.42 ***      0.000
# members with trading, services or handicraft
                                                      5,898          5,551       0.283      0.609       -0.044          0.115
as main activity
Gets a pension                                        5,898          5,551        0.15       0.35        0.02           0.347
Distance to souk (in km)                              5,898          5,551         11         9            -1    **     0.048
Does trading as self-employment activity              5,898          5,551       0.117      0.321       -0.045   ***    0.007
Has a fiber mat                                       5,898          5,551       0.814      0.389       -0.046   **     0.042
Has a radio                                           5,898          5,551       0.792      0.406       -0.046   *      0.081
Owns land                                             5,898          5,551       0.635      0.481       -0.174   ***    0.000
Rents land                                            5,898          5,551       0.178      0.382       -0.094   ***    0.000
Does crop-sharing                                     5,898          5,551       0.138      0.345       -0.078   ***    0.000
# of olive and argan trees                            5,898          5,551         35        124          -14    ***    0.007
Bought agriculture productive assets over the
                                                      5,898          5,551       0.259      0.438       -0.062 ***      0.004
past 12 months
Uses sickle (in agriculture)                          5,898          5,551       0.631      0.483       -0.187 ***      0.000
Uses rake (in agriculture)                            5,898          5,551       0.559      0.497       -0.188 ***      0.000
# of cows bought over the past 12 months              5,898          5,551        0.3        6.7         -0.3           0.121
Phone expenses over the past month (in MAD)           5,898          5,551         40         96          -13 ***       0.006
Clothes expenses over the past month (in MAD)         5,898          5,551        506        857          -45           0.245
Had an outstanding formal loan over the past 12
                                                      5,898          5,551       0.238      0.426       -0.006          0.700
months
Would be ready to form a 4-person group and
                                                      5,898          5,551       0.673      0.469       -0.105 ***      0.000
guarantee a loan mutually
Amount that would be able to reimburse
                                                      5,898          5,551        183        419          -26           0.197
monthly (in MAD)
Would uptake a loan of 3,000 MAD to be repaid
                                                      5,898          5,551       0.145      0.353        0.018          0.404
in 9 monthly installments of 400 MAD

Panel C. Attrition: household characteristics by treatment group
                                                                     Surveyed at endline, control         Attrited X Treated
                                                                               group                            Village
                                                       Obs            Obs      Mean        St. Dev.      Coeff.       p-value
# members                                                   5,898    2,810        6.20        3.07        0.05           0.879
# members older than 18                                     5,898    2,810        3.64        2.08        0.19           0.507
# self-employment activities                                5,898    2,810        1.43        0.99        0.27 **        0.039
# members with trading, services or handicraft
                                                            5,898    2,810       0.304       0.636       0.074           0.170
as main activity
Gets a pension                                              5,898    2,810        0.15        0.35        0.00           0.955
Distance to souk (in km)                                    5,898    2,810         11          9            2    ***     0.008
Does trading as self-employment activity                    5,898    2,810       0.139       0.346      -0.013           0.707
Has a fiber mat                                             5,898    2,810       0.822       0.383       0.045           0.314
Has a radio                                                 5,898    2,810       0.780       0.414      -0.043           0.410
Owns land                                                   5,898    2,810       0.631       0.483       0.036           0.603
Rents land                                                  5,898    2,810       0.177       0.382       0.073 **        0.044
Does crop-sharing                                           5,898    2,810       0.142       0.349       0.044           0.155
# of olive and argan trees                                  5,898    2,810         37         133          14            0.173
Bought agriculture productive assets over the
                                                            5,898    2,810       0.243       0.429       0.036           0.411
past 12 months
Uses sickle (in agriculture)                                5,898    2,810       0.636       0.481       0.128 **        0.049
Uses rake (in agriculture)                                  5,898    2,810       0.564       0.496       0.021           0.749
# of cows bought over the past 12 months                    5,898    2,810         0.3        5.9          0.1           0.849
Phone expenses over the past month (in MAD)                 5,898    2,810         41         101           0            0.988
Clothes expenses over the past month (in MAD)               5,898    2,810        521         922          34            0.667
Had an outstanding formal loan over the past 12
                                                            5,898    2,810       0.230       0.421      -0.018           0.583
months
Would be ready to form a 4-person group and
                                                            5,898    2,810       0.653       0.476       0.067           0.222
guarantee a loan mutually
Amount that would be able to reimburse
                                                            5,898    2,810        183         439         -17            0.658
monthly (in MAD)
Would uptake a loan of 3,000 MAD to be repaid
                                                            5,898    2,810       0.140       0.347       0.057           0.183
in 9 monthly installments of 400 MAD
Notes: Data source: Mini survey. Unit of observation: household. Sample includes all households surveyed at baseline, plus
all households only surveyed at endline. Panel A: coefficients from an OLS regression of the variable on a treated village
dummy, controlling for strata dummies (paired villages). Panel B: coefficients from an OLS regression of the variable on an
attrited dummy, controlling for strata dummies (paired villages). Panel C: coefficients from an OLS regression of the variable
on a treatment village dummy (not shown), attrited dummy (not shown) and a dummy of the interaction of treatment
village dummy and attrited dummy, controlling for strata dummies (paired villages). Standard errors are clustered at the
village level.***, **, * indicate significance at 1, 5 and 10%.
Table B5. Summary Statistics of Al Amana loans
                                                                             Clients
                                                                Obs          Mean          St. Dev.
Time elapsed between start of microcredit distribution in
                                                              280             5.7            6.4
the	  village	  and	  uptake	  (in	  months)†
Share of clients who took up their 1st loan within the first
                                                              280           0.679           0.468
6 months
Share of clients who took up their 1st loan within the 6th
                                                              280           0.157           0.365
and 12th month
Share of clients who took up their 1st loan during the
second year                                                   280           0.164           0.371
All loans
# of loans                                                    280            1.46           0.57
Share of loans, by type:
  group-liability                                             280           0.806           0.342
  individual                                                  280           0.177           0.337
  housing                                                     280           0.017           0.099
Loan amount (in MAD)                                          280          10,571           7,513
Loan amount by type:
  group-liability loans (in MAD)                              248           8,615           5,996
  individual loans (in MAD)                                    68          10,978           7,701
  housing loans (in MAD)                                        9           8,556           1,810
Repayment frequency (in days)                                 280             30               2
Repayment period (in months)                                  280             16               4
Share of loans, by client activity:
  Animal husbandry                                            280           0.680           0.457
  Trading                                                     280           0.264           0.434
  Services                                                    280           0.032           0.172
  Handicraft                                                  280           0.023           0.142
First loan
Loan amount (in MAD)                                          280           5,920           3,055
Took a group-liability loan                                   280           0.886           0.319
Took an individual loan                                       280           0.111           0.314
Took a housing loan                                           280           0.004           0.060
Loans by year
Share of clients who borrowed during the 1st year             280           0.836           0.371
Share of clients who borrowed during the 2nd year             280           0.525           0.500
Amount borrowed during the 1st year (in MAD)                  234           6,669           4,443
Amount borrowed during the 2nd year (in MAD)                  147           9,520           6,323
Note: Source: Al Amana administrative data. Data corresponds to 68% of total clients in the
household sample of borrowers.
Table B6. Self-employment activities
                           (1)                         (2)                (3)                (4)                (5)                (6)             (7)            (8)
                                                                                                                                Does the         Activ.
                                                 Sales + home                             Of which:                                                          Ownes land
                                  Assets                              Expenses                                Profit            activity        Diversif.
                                                 consumption                            Investment
Panel A: Agriculture
Treated village                    315               2,027               948                -478              1,078              0.009            0.122         0.000
                                  (185)*            (1,085)*           (410)**            (145)***            (952)             (0.013)          (0.076)       (0.010)
Observations                      4,934             4,934               4,934              4,934              4,934              4,934            4,934         4,921
Control mean                      1,138             10,938              5,526               573               5,412              0.644            2.511         0.640

Panel B: Livestock
Treated village                   1052               1552                977                289                575               -0.010           0.200
                                 (619)*             (608)**            (487)**             (196)              (459)             (0.011)         (0.084)**
Observations                      4,934              4,934              4,934              4,934              4,934               4,934           4,934
Control mean                     14,027              7,638              5,932               851               1,706               0.738           3.638

Panel C: Non-agricultural businesses
Treated village                 87                   2511               2153                -35                358               -0.006           -0.006
                              (139)                 (1,879)            (1,747)             (63)               (628)             (0.007)          (0.007)
Observations                  4,934                  4,934              4,934              4,934              4,934               4,934            4,934
Control mean                   817                  11,874              9,936               105               1,938               0.147            0.156
Notes: Data source: Endline household survey. Observation unit: household. Coefficients and standard errors (in parentheses) from an OLS regression of the variable
on a treated village dummy, controlling for strata dummies (paired villages) and variables specified below. Standard errors are clustered at the village level. ***, **, *
indicate significance at 1, 5 and 10%. Same controls as in Table 2.
Same definitions as in Table3.
Table B7. Robustness
                                       (1)              (1)             (2)             (3)              (4)           (5)            (6)            (7)            (8)                  (9)
                                                                                                                                                  Weekly hours worked by HH
                                    Client Al                                                                      Has a self- Income from                                           Monthly HH
                                                                   Sales + home                                                                     members aged 16-65
                                    Amana -       Assets (stock)                     Expenses          Profit     employment day labor/                                             consumption
                                                                   consumption                                                                      self-
                                   Admin data                                                                       activity     salaried                         outside             (in MAD)
                                                                                                                                                 employment
Panel A: without household controls
Treated village                    0.167               2,086           6,232           4,015           2,218         -0.004         -1,079            1.5              -2.9              -19
                                (0.012)***           (693)***       (2,362)***       (1,855)**        (1,234)*       (0.014)       (507)**           (1.5)           (1.0)***           (49)
Panel B: same household controls as in Tables 2-9
Treated village                   0.167            1,454              6,090            4,079           2,011         -0.016          -1,052           0.6               -3              -45
                                (0.012)***        (659)**           (2,166)***       (1,720)**        (1,211)*       (0.010)        (477)**          (1.3)           (1.0)***           (47)

Unclustered standard errors         (0.007)***       (730)**        (2,572)**        (2,083)*         (1,377)        (0.009)*       (565)*           (1.2)           (1.1)***           (58)

Panel C: with extended set of household controls
Treated village                     0.166             1,363           6,786            4,893           1,802         -0.012          -1,063          0.5               -2.9             -45
                                    (0.012)***       (597)**        (2,155)***      (1,725)***        (1,205)        (0.010)        (465)**         (1.3)            (1.0)***          (45)
Observations                          4,934           4,934           4,934            4,934           4,934          4,934           4,934         4,918             4,918            4,924
Control mean                          0.000          15,982           30,450          21,394           9,056          0.831         15,748          40.6              30.4             3,057
Note: Data source: Endline household survey. Observation unit: household. Coefficients and standard errors (in parentheses) from an OLS regression of the variable on a treated village
dummy, controlling for strata dummies (paired villages) and variables specified below. Standard errors are clustered at the village level. ***, **, * indicate significance at 1, 5 and 10%. Panel
A: no control variables. Panel B: same controls as in Table 2. Panel C: controls include the lagged value of the dependent variable (at baseline), had a non Al Amana formal loan, had an
informal loan, animal husbandry sales, animal husbandry savings, had lost any livestock over the past 12 months, share of self-activity income over total income, share of daily labor/salaried
income over total income and ratio of consumption over total income. Same controls as in Table 2 are also included.
Table B8. Propensity to borrow
Propensity to borrow, all household interviewed at endline in treatment villages
                                                                                                        Coef.

# members                                                                                                0.056
                                                                                                       (0.030)*
# members older than 18                                                                                  -0.009
                                                                                                        (0.042)
# self-employment activities                                                                             0.187
                                                                                                       (0.096)*
# members with trading, services or handicraft as main activity                                          -0.054
                                                                                                        (0.122)
Gets a pension                                                                                            0.62
                                                                                                      (0.242)**
Distance to souk (in km)                                                                                 -0.094
                                                                                                        (0.092)
Does trading as self-employment activity                                                                 0.265
                                                                                                        (0.231)
Has a fiber mat                                                                                          -0.163
                                                                                                        (0.187)
Has a radio                                                                                              0.048
                                                                                                        (0.159)
Owns land                                                                                                0.177
                                                                                                        (0.189)
Rents land                                                                                               0.346
                                                                                                        (0.253)
Does crop-sharing                                                                                        -0.428
                                                                                                        (0.283)
# of olive and argan trees                                                                               -0.101
                                                                                                        (0.097)
Bought agriculture productive assets over the past 12 months                                             -0.153
                                                                                                        (0.164)
Uses sickle (in agriculture)                                                                             -0.304
                                                                                                        (0.187)
Uses rake (in agriculture)                                                                               0.054
                                                                                                        (0.185)
Phone expenses over the past month (in MAD)                                                              0.018
                                                                                                        (0.074)
Clothes expenses over the past month (in MAD)                                                            0.344
                                                                                                     (0.122)***
Had an outstanding formal loan over the past 12 months                                                   0.028
                                                                                                        (0.176)
Would be ready to form a 4-person group and guarantee a loan mutually                                    -0.173
                                                                                                        (0.161)
Amount that would be able to reimburse monthly (in MAD)                                                   0.25
                                                                                                     (0.071)***
Would uptake a loan of 3,000 MAD to be repaid in 9 monthly installments of 400 MAD                       0.186
                                                                                                        (0.176)

Observations                                                                                            2,215
Mean dependent variable                                                                                 0.158
Pseudo R2                                                                                               0.143
Number of villages                                                                                        63
Notes: Data source: Mini survey. Unit of observation: household. Sample includes all households surveyed at endline
in treatment villages. Coefficients and standard errors (in parenthesis) from a logit regression of the variable client
on variables specified in the table and on village dummies. Client is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the household had
taken up a microcredit within the two-year evaluation time frame. ***, **, * indicate significance at 1, 5 and 10%.
Table B9. Summary Statistics of borrower households, by sample timing
Panel A. Household characteristics of those sampled at endline
                                                                    Control Group                        Treatment-Control
                                                    Obs        Obs      Mean      St. Dev.               Coeff.    p-value
# members                                             1,409           693        7.73        3.64        -0.12         0.603
# members older than 18                               1,409           693        4.41        2.46        -0.08         0.583
# self-employment activities                          1,409           693         1.5         0.8         0.0          0.791
# members with trading, services or handicraft
                                                      1,409           693         0.3        0.6          -0.1   **    0.001
as main activity
Gets a pension                                        1,409           693       0.052       0.222       -0.007         0.534
Distance to souk (in km)                              1,409           693       11.1         8.7         -1.1          0.196
Does trading as self-employment activity              1,409           693       0.152       0.359       -0.058 **      0.002
Has a fiber mat                                       1,409           693       0.711       0.453       -0.025         0.275
Has a radio                                           1,409           693       0.706       0.456       -0.018         0.384
Owns land                                             1,409           693       0.752       0.432       -0.006         0.829
Rents land                                            1,409           693       0.395       0.489       -0.027         0.396
Does crop-sharing                                     1,409           693       0.323       0.468       -0.046         0.138
# of olive and argan trees                            1,409           693       35.6        186.7        -8.9 *        0.070
Bought agriculture productive assets over the
                                                      1,409           693       0.245       0.431        0.076 **      0.013
past 12 months
Uses sickle (in agriculture)                          1,409           693       0.786       0.410       -0.036         0.192
Uses rake (in agriculture)                            1,409           693       0.694       0.461       -0.030         0.236
# of cows bought over the past 12 months              1,409           693        0.8        11.6          0.2          0.709
Phone expenses over the past month (in MAD)           1,409           693         87         170          -1           0.896
Clothes expenses over the past month (in MAD)         1,409           693        713        1,212        -102 *        0.070
Had an outstanding formal loan over the past 12
                                                      1,409           693       0.203       0.403        0.018         0.567
months
Would be ready to form a 4-person group and
                                                      1,409           693       0.587       0.493        0.028         0.275
guarantee a loan mutually
Amount that would be able to reimburse monthly
                                                      1,409           693        197         515          0.7          0.972
(in MAD)
Would uptake a loan of 3,000 MAD to be repaid
                                                      1,409           693       0.177       0.382       -0.018         0.336
in 9 monthly installments of 400 MAD

Panel B. Household characteristics by sample timing
                                                                                                        Sampled at endline -
                                                                         Sampled at baseline                  baseline
                                                       Obs            Obs      Mean       St. Dev.       Coeff.     p-value
# members                                             4,934          3,525       5.80        2.67        1.88    **    0.000
# members older than 18                               4,934          3,525       3.46        1.91        0.95    **    0.000
# self-employment activities                          4,934          3,525        1.4         1.0         0.2    **    0.000
# members with trading, services or handicraft
                                                      4,934          3,525        0.3        0.7          -0.1   **    0.000
as main activity
Gets a pension                                        4,934          3,525      0.184       0.387       -0.043   **    0.000
Distance to souk (in km)                              4,934          3,525      11.2         8.8          -0.5   **    0.002
Does trading as self-employment activity              4,934          3,525      0.124       0.330        0.010         0.424
Has a fiber mat                                       4,934          3,525      0.869       0.338       -0.155   **    0.000
Has a radio                                           4,934          3,525      0.850       0.357       -0.142   **    0.000
Owns land                                             4,934          3,525      0.586       0.493        0.196   **    0.000
Rents land                                            4,934          3,525      0.094       0.292        0.291   **    0.000
Does crop-sharing                                     4,934          3,525      0.070       0.254        0.225   **    0.000
# of olive and argan trees                            4,934          3,525      39.3        121.2         -7.0         0.146
Bought agriculture productive assets over the
                                                      4,934          3,525      0.268       0.443        0.020         0.292
past 12 months
Uses sickle (in agriculture)                          4,934          3,525      0.577       0.494        0.175   **    0.000
Uses rake (in agriculture)                            4,934          3,525      0.512       0.500        0.173   **    0.000
# of cows bought over the past 12 months              4,934          3,525       0.1         5.1          0.8    **    0.012
Phone expenses over the past month (in MAD)           4,934          3,525        24          49           58    **    0.000
Clothes expenses over the past month (in MAD)         4,934          3,525       464         778          161    **    0.000
Had an outstanding formal loan over the past 12
                                                      4,934          3,525      0.251       0.434       -0.016         0.268
months
Would be ready to form a 4-person group and
                                                      4,934          3,525      0.734       0.442       -0.092 **      0.000
guarantee a loan mutually
Amount that would be able to reimburse monthly
                                                      4,934          3,525       190         420         43.0    **    0.001
(in MAD)
Would uptake a loan of 3,000 MAD to be repaid
                                                      4,934          3,525      0.153       0.360        0.026 *       0.082
in 9 monthly installments of 400 MAD
Notes: Data source: Mini survey. Unit of observation: household. Panel A: Sample includes households with high probability-
to-borrow score sampled at endline. Panel B: Sample includes households with high probability-to-borrow score sampled at
baseline and at endline. Panel A: coefficients from an OLS regression of the variable on a treated village dummy, controlling
for strata dummies (paired villages). Panel B: coefficients from an OLS regression of the variable on a dummy equal to 1 if
the borrower household was sampled at endline, controlling for strata dummies (paired villages). Standard errors are
clustered at the village level.***, **, * indicate significance at 1, 5 and 10%.
Table B10: Impacts on borrowers, by sample
                                       (1)                 (2)            (3)             (4)             (5)           (6)           (7)           (8)           (9)                 (10)             (11)
                                                                                                                                                Weekly hours worked by HH                          Festivals &
                                        Client Al                                                                   Has a self- Income from                                        Monthly HH
                                                                      Sales + home                                                                 members aged 16-65                             celebrations
                                        Amana -      Assets (stock)                    Expenses          Profit    employment day labor/                                          consumption
                                                                      consumption                                                                  self-                                            expenses
                                       Admin data                                                                    activity     salaried                      outside             (in MAD)
                                                                                                                                                employment                                          (in MAD)


Treated village X Endline sampled         0.245           365            6023            2,591           3432         -0.011        -1,448          1.80             -4.90            -124            -61
Borrower
                                        (0.018)***       (1,468)        (5,454)         (4,035)         (2,963)       (0.019)       (1,106)         (3.30)          (2.2)**           (112)          (26)**
Treated village X Baseline Sampled        0.136           1,897          6,117           4,683           1,434        -0.017         -890           0.10             -2.30             -12            -30
Borrower
                                        (0.012)***       (829)**       (2,836)**       (2,316)**        (1,425)       (0.011)        (668)          (1.40)          (1.2)*            (61)           (15)**

Observations                              4,934          4,934          4,934            4,934          4,934          4,934         4,934          4,918            4,918            4,924          4,924
Control mean                              0.000          15,982         30,450          21,394          9,056          0.831        15,748           40.6            30.4             3,057           429
Control mean, endline sampled             0.000          20,933         39,395          27,280          12,115         0.86         16,937           49.7            32.7             3,444           483
Control mean, baseline sampled            0.000          14,069         26,993          19,119          7,874          0.82         15,289           37.1            29.5             2,907           408
F(T X endline = T X baseline)             33.4            0.7            0.0              0.2            0.3            0.1           0.1            0.2              0.9              0.6            1.0
p > F(T X endline = T X baseline)         0.000          0.401          0.989            0.688          0.569          0.764         0.705          0.650            0.338            0.430          0.326

Notes: Data source: Endline household survey. Observation unit: household. Sample includes households with high probability-to-borrow score surveyed at endline, after trimming 0.5% of observations.
Coefficients and standard errors (in parentheses) from an OLS regression of the variable on a treated village dummy interacted with a dummy equal to 1 if HH was sampled at baseline and on a treated village
dummy interacted with a dummy equal to 1 if HH was sampled at endline . Standard errors are clustered at the village level. ***, **, * indicate significance at 1, 5 and 10%. Same controls as in Table 2.
Figure F1: Geographical distribution of Alamana branches included in the study sample




Source : Al Amana
