NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE DISTRIBUTIONAL PREFERENCES OF AMERICANS
Raymond Fisman
Pamela Jakiela
Shachar Kariv
Working Paper 20145
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20145
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2014

We thank Daniel Markovits and Daniel Silverman for helpful discussions and comments. This paper
has also benefited from suggestions by the participants of seminars at several universities and conferences.
We thank the American Life Panel team at the RAND Corporation for software development and technical
and administrative support. We acknowledge financial support from the Center for Equitable Growth
(CEG) at the University of California, Berkeley. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Raymond Fisman, Pamela Jakiela, and Shachar Kariv. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Distributional Preferences of Americans
Raymond Fisman, Pamela Jakiela, and Shachar Kariv
NBER Working Paper No. 20145
May 2014
JEL No. C91,D64
ABSTRACT
We measure the distributional preferences of a large, diverse sample of Americans by embedding
modified dictator games that vary the relative price of redistribution in the American Life Panel.
Subjects' choices are generally consistent with maximizing a (social) utility function. We decompose
distributional preferences into two distinct components - fair-mindedness (tradeoffs between oneself
and others) and equality-efficiency tradeoffs - by estimating constant elasticity of substitution utility
functions at the individual level. Approximately equal numbers of Americans have equality-focused
and efficiency-focused distributional preferences. After controlling for individual characteristics, our
experimental measures of equality-efficiency tradeoffs predict the political decisions of our subjects.
Raymond Fisman
School of Business
Columbia University
622 Uris Hall
3022 Broadway
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
rf250@columbia.edu
Pamela Jakiela
Department of Agricultural
and Resource Economics
University of Maryland
2200 Symons Hall
College Park, MD 20742
pjakiela@gmail.com

Shachar Kariv
Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720
kariv@berkeley.edu

1

Introduction

Distributional preferences shape individual opinions on a range of issues
related to the redistribution of income — examples include social security,
unemployment benefits, and government-sponsored healthcare. These issues
are complex and contentious in part because people promote their competing private interests, but they also often disagree about what constitutes a
just or equitable outcome, either in general or in particular situations. We
therefore cannot understand public opinion on a number of important policy
issues without understanding the individual distributional preferences of the
general population.
Distributional preferences may naturally be divided into two qualitatively different components: the weight on own income versus the incomes
of others, and the weight on reducing differences in incomes versus increasing
total income. In a classic series of writings, John Rawls and John Harsanyi
argue that a “fair-minded” person must make distributive decisions that satisfy “the impartiality and impersonality requirements to the fullest possible
degree” (Harsanyi 1978, p. 227) — in other words, the fair-minded should
place equal weight on themselves and others. However, as a comparison of
Harsanyi (1955) and Rawls (1971) would suggest, fair-minded people may
disagree about the extent to which efficiency should be sacrificed to combat
inequality.1
Political debates often center on the redistribution of income. Voters
may be motivated by both their own self-interest and their views on what
constitutes an equitable distribution, and it is often difficult to tease apart
these two competing motivations. For example, in the United States, we typically associate the Democratic party with the promotion of policies which
reduce inequality, and the Republican party with the promotion of efficiency.
However, whether Democratic voters are more willing to sacrifice efficiency
— and even their own income — to reduce inequality is an open question;
alternatively, Democrats may be those who expect to benefit from government redistribution, as the median voter theorem would suggest, or those
who agree with other elements of the party’s platform. This highlights
1

Harsanyi (1955) and Rawls (1971) came to quite different conclusions about the
equality-efficiency tradeoffs that fair-minded people should make in their distributional
preferences. In fact, their familiar philosophical theories of distributive justice – utilitarianism and Rawlsianism – instill competing conceptions. Stated simply, Harsanyi
argued that distributional preferences should maximize efficiency (increasing total payoffs), whereas Rawls argued that they should minimize inequity (reducing differences in
payoffs).

2

the importance of correctly distinguishing fair-mindedness from preferences
regarding equality-efficiency tradeoffs and accurately measuring both in a
large and diverse sample of American voters.
To this end, we conduct an incentivized experiment using the American
Life Panel (ALP), a longitudinal survey administered online by the RAND
Corporation. The ALP makes it possible to conduct sophisticated experiments via the internet, and to combine data from these experiments with
detailed individual demographic and economic information. The ALP thus
provides an uncommon opportunity to bring together rich experimental and
survey data on a diverse set of participants to study the distributional preferences of the U.S. population.2
We study a modified two-person dictator game in which the set of monetary payoffs is given by the budget line ps πs + po πo = 1, where πs and πo
correspond to the payoffs of self (the subject) and an unknown other (an
anonymous ALP respondent not sampled for the experiment), and p = po /ps
is the relative price of redistribution.3 This design allows us to decompose
2

Bellemare, Kröger, and van Soest (2008) study distributional preferences in a large,
diverse sample of Dutch adults. In their experiment, survey respondents from the CentERpanel participate in ultimatum games. Data characterizing their decisions within the
experiment, their beliefs about the likelihood that specific ultimatum game offers would
be accepted, and their individual characteristics is used to estimate a structural model
of inequality aversion in the Dutch population. Aside from different societies, we restrict
attention to dictator games and ignore the complications of strategic behavior and reciprocity motivations in response games in order to focus on behavior motivated by purely
distributional preferences. (While Bellemare, Kröger, and van Soest (2008) also conduct
dictator games, they only use decisions in those games to assess the predictive power of
the structural parameter estimates derived from ultimatum game decisions.)
As a result, there are two key differences between our study and that of Bellemare,
Kröger, and van Soest (2008). First, our experimental design allows us to separately identify fair-mindedness and equality-efficiency tradeoffs, and to estimate individual utility
functions at the subject level; their study makes more restrictive assumptions about the
functional form of the utility function and the distribution of unobservable heterogeneity within the population. Second, their study explores the relationship between beliefs
(specifically, optimism about others’ fair-mindedness) and distributional preferences, while
we focus on the relationship between equality-efficiency tradeoffs measured in the laboratory and political decisions in the real world. Our overall findings resonate with theirs. In
particular, they also find considerable heterogeneity in preferences, much of which is not
correlated with observable characteristics.
3
The experimental design and data analysis draw on our prior work. The modified
dictator game was first used by Andreoni and Miller (2002) and further developed by
Fisman, Kariv, and Markovits (2007), who introduced a graphical interface that makes it
possible to present each subject with many choices in the course of a single experimental
session. This allows us to analyze behavior at the level of the individual subject, without
the need to pool data or assume that subjects are homogenous.

3

distributional preferences into fair-mindedness and equality-efficiency tradeoffs: increasing the fraction of the budget spent on other, po πo , as p increases
indicates distributional preferences weighted towards equality (reducing differences in payoffs), whereas decreasing po πo when the relative price of redistribution increases indicates distributional preferences weighted towards
efficiency (increasing total payoffs).
In Figure 1 we depict a budget line where ps > po (the relative price of
redistribution is less than 1) and highlight the allocations consistent with
prototypical fair-minded distributional preferences. The point A, which lies
on the diagonal, corresponds to the equal allocation πs = πo . This allocation is consistent with Rawlsian or maximin distributional preferences, which
are characterized by right-angle indifference curves (and the utility function
us (πs , πo ) = min{πs , πo }). Point B represents an allocation in which πs = 0
and πo = 1/po , consistent with the linear indifference curves characterizing
utilitarian preferences (with the utility function us (πs , πo ) = πs + πo ). The
Rawlsian and utilitarian preferences represent the two ends of the spectrum
of equality-efficiency tradeoffs. The centroid of a budget line, C, represents
an allocation with equal budget shares spent on self and other such that
ps πs = po πo . This allocation is consistent with Cobb-Douglas preferences
(characterized by the utility function us (πs , πo ) = πs πo ). In this case the
equality-efficiency tradeoffs are intermediate between Rawlsian and utilitarian preferences. More generally, the concavity of us (πs , πo ) measures aversion to inequality. Finally, note that because the distributional preferences
depicted in Figure 1 are fair-minded, each indifference curve is symmetric
with respect to the diagonal. Increasing the weight on self relative to other
shifts indifference curves upwards.
We begin our analysis of the experimental data by using revealed preference theory to determine whether observed choices are consistent with
utility maximization. Because our subjects faced a wide range of intersecting budget lines, our data provide a stringent test of utility maximization.
Although individual behaviors are complex and heterogeneous, we find that
most subjects come close to satisfying the utility maximization model according to a number of standard measures. We therefore conclude that, at
least in a controlled experimental setting where the tradeoffs are sufficiently
transparent, most Americans are capable of making coherent and purposeful
redistributive choices in the sense that these choices achieve a well-defined
objective.
The consistency of individual decisions naturally leads us to ask what
kind of distributional preferences are consistent with the observed choices.
The sample exhibits considerable heterogeneity in preferences, but relatively
4

few subjects made choices that correspond to prototypical distributional
preferences. Of our 1,002 subjects, 85 (8.5 percent) made choices consistent with Rawlsian distributional preferences. Only 2 displayed utilitarian
preferences, while 3 displayed Cobb-Douglas preferences with equal weights
on self and other. Finally, only 81 subjects (8.1 percent) behaved selfishly,
allocating themselves more than 95 percent of the total payoff, on average.
These are, of course, special cases where the regularities in the data are very
clear. To explain the distinct types of individual behavior revealed by the
full data set, we must impose further structure on the data.
To this end, we estimate individual-level utility functions of the constant elasticity of substitution (CES) form commonly employed in demand
analysis. In the redistribution context, the CES has the form
us (πs , πo ) = [απsρ + (1 − α)πoρ ]1/ρ
where α represents the degree of fair-mindedness (i.e. the relative weight
on self versus other ) and ρ characterizes equality-efficiency tradeoffs (i.e.
the curvature of the altruistic indifference curves). Any 0 < ρ ≤ 1 indicates
distributional preference weighted towards increasing total payoffs, whereas
any ρ < 0 indicates distributional preference weighted towards reducing
differences in payoffs. Our estimation is done for each subject n separately,
generating individual-level estimates α̂n and ρ̂n .
The estimation results for the CES specification reinforce the conclusion
that distributional preferences vary widely across subjects. Table 1 provides
a population-level summary of the parameter estimates. We classify subjects
as either fair-minded, intermediate, or selfish, and as either equality-focused,
intermediate, or efficiency-focused. For 330 subjects (32.9 percent) we cannot reject the null hypothesis of fair-mindedness (α̂n = 1/2); while we cannot
reject the hypothesis of selfishness (α̂n = 1) for 151 subjects (15.1 percent).
Thus, fair-minded subjects outnumber selfish ones by more than two to one.
More than half of our subjects display a statistically significant degree of
either equality or efficiency focus, with the 285 efficiency-focused subjects
(28.4 percent) slightly outnumbering the 245 subjects (24.4 percent) who
are equality-focused. We observe a greater degree of efficiency-focus among
fair-minded subjects: 63 (19.0 percent of fair-minded subjects) show a preference for equalizing payoffs while 120 (36.3 percent) show a preference for
maximizing the average payoff.
Exploiting the detailed demographic and economic data available on
ALP subjects, we then examine the correlates of the estimated CES parameters, α̂n and ρ̂n . Less educated subjects, as well as African Americans,
5

are notably more fair-minded than the rest of the sample. Younger and
lower income subjects and African Americans display great efficiency focus,
while women show greater equality focus. While observable attributes have
predictive power in the data, we find that marked heterogeneity in distributional preferences remains within each demographic and economic group:
observable attributes explain only about five percent of the variation in CES
parameters.
Given the potential link from distributional preferences to policy choices,
it is natural to examine the empirical relationship between distributional
preferences and subjects’ political decisions. Though Democratic voters are
typically assumed to be more equality-focused than Republicans, the recent
work of Kuziemko, Norton, Saez, and Stantcheva (2013) highlights the possibility that supporters of the two parties may differ in their attitudes toward
government intervention in general, and not in terms of their aversion to
income inequality and their overall support for redistribution (once government is taken out of the equation). In our final set of results, we use data
from ALP modules on voting and party affiliations to assess the relationship between our experimental measures of distributional preferences and
subjects’ political choices. After controlling for demographic characteristics
and state of residence fixed effects, we find that our measure of efficiency
focus, ρ̂n , is negatively related to the probability of having voted for Barack
Obama in 2012, and also negatively related to the probability of reporting an affiliation with the Democratic party. These results indicate that
American voters are motivated by their distributional preferences governing
equality-efficiency tradeoffs.
To summarize, our experiment characterizes the distributional preferences of a diverse set of Americans. We find that subjects are consistent in
their choices, and show a high degree of heterogeneity in both the extent of
fair-mindedness and willingness to trade off efficiency and equality. Yet in
spite of this heterogeneity, a high fraction of Americans across a wide range
of demographic and economic characteristics are fair-minded in the sense
that their choices are not skewed in favor of their own payoffs. Further,
among fair-minded individuals, we observe the full spectrum of equalityefficiency tradeoffs. These findings may inform debates about tax policy and
other forms of government redistribution. As Saez and Stantcheva (2013)
emphasize, optimal tax policy will depend on the distributional preferences
of voters and taxpayers, and our work provides a first step in characterizing
these preferences.

6

2

Experimental Design

We embed an incentivized experiment in the American Life Panel (ALP), an
internet survey administered by the RAND Corporation to approximately
6,000 adult Americans. The ALP allows us to implement a sophisticated
experiment with a large and diverse subject pool, providing a unique opportunity to explore the heterogeneity in distributional preferences within the
U.S. population.

2.1

Experimental Procedures

To provide a positive account of individual distributional preferences, one
needs a choice environment that is rich enough to allow a general characterization of patterns of behavior. In our prior work, we developed a computer
interface for exactly this purpose (Fisman, Kariv, and Markovits 2007). The
interface presents a standard consumer decision problem as a graphical representation of a budget line and allows the subject to make choices through
a simple point-and-click design.4
In this paper, we study a modified dictator game in which a subject
divides an endowment between self and an anonymous other, an individual
chosen at random from among the ALP respondents not sampled for the
experiment. The subjects is free to allocate a unit endowment in any way
she wishes subject to the budget constraint, ps πs + po πo = 1, where πs
and πo denote the payoffs to self and other, respectively, and p = po /ps
is the relative price of redistribution. This decision problem is presented
graphically on a computer screen, and the subject must choose a payoff
allocation, (πs , πo ), from a budget line representing feasible payoffs to self
and other.5 Confronting subjects with a rich menu of such budget lines
allows us to identify both the tradeoff between both self and other (i.e.
4

The experimental method is applicable to many types of individual choice problems.
See Choi, Fisman, Gale, and Kariv (2007) and Ahn, Choi, Gale, and Kariv (forthcoming),
for settings involving, respectively, risk and ambiguity. Choi, Kariv, Müller, and Silverman (forthcoming) investigate the correlation between individual behavior under risk and
demographic and economic characteristics within the CentERpanel, a representative sample of more than 2,000 Dutch households; that project demonstrated the feasibility of
using the graphical experimental interface in web-based surveys.
5
See Fisman, Kariv, and Markovits (2007) for an extended description of the experimental interface. Full experimental instructions are included in the Online Appendix. In a
standard dictator experiment (cf. Forsythe, Horowitz, Savin, and Sefton 1994), πs +πo = 1:
the set of feasible payoff pairs is the line with a slope of −1, so the problem is simply dividing a fixed total income between self and other, and there is no inherent tradeoff between
equality and efficiency.

7

fair-mindedness) and the tradeoff between equality and efficiency.
The experiment consisted of 50 independent decision problems. For each
decision problem, the computer program selected a budget line at random
from the set of lines that intersect at least one of the axes at 50 or more
experimental currency tokens, but with no intercept exceeding 100 tokens.
Subjects made their choices by using the computer mouse or keyboard arrows to move the pointer to the desired allocation, (πs , πo ), and then clicked
the mouse or hit the enter key to confirm their choice.
At the end of the experiment, payoffs were determined as follows. The
experimental program first randomly selected one of the 50 decision problems to carry out for real payoffs. Each decision problem had an equal
probability of being chosen. Each subject then received the tokens that she
allocated to self in that round, πs , while the randomly-chosen ALP respondent with whom she was matched received the tokens that she allocated to
other, πo . Payoffs were calculated in terms of tokens and then translated
into dollars at the end of the experiment. Each token was worth 50 cents.
Subjects received their payments from the ALP reimbursement system via
direct deposit into a bank account.

2.2

Subject Pool

The ALP is a panel survey of approximately 6,000 American adults implemented online by the RAND Corporation.6 To recruit subjects for our
experiment, ALP administrators sent email invitations to a random sample
of the more than 5,000 ALP respondents for whom detailed demographic
information is available. 1,172 received the email and logged in to the experiment.7 Table 2 describes the progression of ALP respondents who logged
in through the instructions and the incentivized decision problems.8 1,002
respondents — 85.5 percent of those who logged in — completed the experiment; these subjects constitute our subject pool.
6
ALP respondents have been recruited in several different ways. The initial participants
were selected from the Monthly Survey Sample of the University of Michigan’s Survey
Research Center. Additional respondents have been added through random digit dialling,
targeted recruitment of a vulnerable population sample of low-income individuals, and
snowball sampling of existing panel members.
7
We are unable to distinguish subjects who read the invitation email and chose not to
participate from those who never received the invitation (for example, because they do
not regularly access the email account registered with the ALP).
8
In the Online Appendix, we examine the individual characteristics associated with
completing the experiment in the sample of 1,172 ALP respondents who ever logged in.
The completion rate are significantly higher for college graduates and significantly lower
for African Americans.

8

Summary statistics on our 1,002 experimental subjects are reported in
Table 3. Though they are not a random sample of Americans, they are
broadly representative of the geographic, demographic, and socioeconomic
diversity of the U.S. population. Subjects in our experiment are drawn from
47 U.S. states, and range in age from 19 to 91. 58.3 percent are female. 9.0
percent of our subjects did not finish high school, while 12.6 percent hold
graduate degrees. The average household income of subjects in our sample is
approximately 55,000 US dollars. 55.6 percent of subjects are currently employed; the remainder include retirees (17.4 percent), the unemployed (10.3
percent), the disabled (8.1 percent), homemakers (6.3 percent), and others
who are on medical leave or otherwise temporarily absent from the work
force. 67.6 percent identify themselves as non-Hispanic whites, 17.9 percent
as Hispanic or Latino, and 11.0 percent as African American. 17.9 percent
live in the Northeast (census region I), 20.2 percent in the Midwest (census
region II), 35.1 percent in the South (census region III), and 26.8 percent in
the West (census region IV). Our subject pool is therefore substantially more
diverse in terms of age, educational attainment, household income, occupational status, and place of residence than the samples of university students
used in most lab experiments. Implementing our experiment through the
ALP also allows us to draw on the wealth of information that has been collected through previous surveys, and to combine this information with our
experimental data.

3

Individual Heterogeneity

In this section, we explore the allocation decisions of our experimental subjects in a simple framework that imposes minimal functional form assumptions on distributional preferences.

3.1

Fair-mindedness

We begin by constructing a simple, reduced form measure of fair-mindedness:
the fraction of tokens kept by self, πs /(πs + πo ), averaged across all 50 decision problems at the subject level. This measure is equal to one for perfectly
selfish subjects; fair-minded subjects who put equal weight on self and other
will keep approximately half of the total tokens, on average. We observe
considerable heterogeneity across subjects. The individual-level average of
πs /(πs +πo ) ranges from 0.03 to 1, though the vast majority of subjects (84.6
percent) kept an average of at least half the tokens. Only 35 subjects (3.49
percent) kept an average of less than 45 percent of tokens. Thus, among
9

subjects that kept less than half of the tokens, most appear to place nearly
equal weight on the payoffs to self and other.9
Several key features of our data stand out. First, we observe very low
numbers of selfish subjects who kept almost all of the tokens. The average
of πs /(πs + πo ) is at least 95 percent For only 81 subjects (8.1 percent). This
relatively low number of selfish subjects contrasts with the large body of experiments with the the usual collection of undergraduate students. Overall,
our subjects kept approximately 65 percent of the tokens. In the studies of
standard split-the-pie dictator games reported in Camerer (2003), the typical mean allocations to other are about 80 percent. Second, a substantial
fraction of subjects kept an average of approximately half the tokens. In
fact, these fair-minded subjects far outnumber the selfish types: 370 subjects (36.9 percent) kept an average of 45 to 55 percent of the tokens. Moreover, the distribution of πs /(πs + πo ) is quite smooth between 0.5 and 0.99,
suggesting considerable heterogeneity in fair-mindedness among non-selfish
subjects.
Figure 2 explores the extent to which this heterogeneity in fair-mindedness
is explained by demographic and socioeconomic characteristics. Each section of the figure represents a partition of the subject pool into mutually
exclusive categories — for example, men and women. The figure indicates
the average across subjects of the individual-level average of πs /(πs + πo )
within a category; the 95 percent confidence intervals for means, and the 25th
and 75th percentiles of the distribution are labeled for each group. There are
substantial differences in the average of πs /(πs + πo ) across groups. Women
keep a smaller fraction of the tokens than men. Surprisingly, πs /(πs + πo )
increases with both household income and education level. A number of
these differences are statistically significant.
In addition to the clear between-group differences, there is considerable
heterogeneity within every category. For all the sub-groups included in
the figure, the 25th percentile of the distribution is between 0.5 and 0.52.
This means that every demographic and socioeconomic category we consider
includes non-negligible numbers of fair-minded subjects who treat self and
other more or less symmetrically. The 75th percentiles range from 0.62 to
0.83, and we observe relatively selfish subjects who keep an average of at
9

This suggests that almost all of our subjects comprehended the tradeoff between self
and other that they were making. Numerous experimental studies suggest that subjects
rarely allocate more to other than to self in standard dictator games. Since our design
includes random variation in the price of redistribution and subjects may respond to price
variation in different ways, subjects who put equal weight on the payoffs to self and other
may not allocate themselves exactly half of the tokens in our experiment.

10

least 95 percent of the tokens in every category. In most cases — for example,
when we compare men to women or lower and higher income households —
there is much more variation among subjects within a category than there is
across category averages. Regression analysis confirms this: the complete set
of dummy variables for demographic and socioeconomic categories explains
4.95 percent of the variation in average πs /(πs + πo ).10 Thus, most of the
observed heterogeneity in fair-mindedness is not explained by demographic
and socioeconomic factors.

3.2

Equality-Efficiency Tradeoffs

Subjects may also differ in their equality-efficiency tradeoffs, as discussed
above. Of the fair-minded subjects, 85 subjects (8.5 percent) always made
nearly equal allocations πs = πo indicating Rawlsian preferences.11 Only
three subject allocated all their tokens to self when ps < po and to other
when ps > po indicating utilitarian preferences, while two subjects made
equal expenditures on self and other ps πs = po πo indicating Cobb-Douglas
preferences. Thus, very few subjects made allocations that fit with fairminded prototypical distributional preferences.
To explore the equality-efficiency tradeoffs of the remaining subjects, we
regress the budget share spent on tokens kept (ps πs ) on the log-price of
redistribution (p = ps /po ) at the individual level. We classify a subject as
efficiency-oriented if the OLS slope coefficient is greater than or equal to 0
because increasing ps πs when p increases indicates distributional preferences
weighted towards efficiency (increasing total payoffs), whereas decreasing
ps πs when p increases indicates distributional preferences weighted towards
equality (reducing differences in payoffs).
In Figure 3, we explore the variation in the fraction of efficiency-oriented
subjects across demographic and socioeconomic categories. Each section of
the figure represents a partition of the subject pool into mutually exclusive
categories, and we indicate the proportions and the 95 percent confidence
intervals. We again observe considerable variation within and across subgroups. Specifically, less educated subjects (those with less than a high
school diploma), minorities, younger subjects, the unemployed, and the
10

Regression results are reported in the Online Appendix.
Since humans implement their decisions with error, we classify subjects as being consistent with a prototypical model of distributional preferences if, on average, their choices
deviate from those prescribed by that model by less than 0.02 (i.e. by no more than 2 percent of the tokens or budget). In the Online Appendix, we report the fraction of subjects
behaving in a manner consistent with each of the prototypical types for a range of values
for the maximum average deviation.
11

11

never married are more efficiency-focused than other groups; older Americans, retirees, non-Hispanic whites, and Protestants focus less on efficiency
and more on equality. As in the case of fair-mindedness, most of the observed heterogeneity in equality-efficiency tradeoffs is also not explained by
demographic and socioeconomic factors.

4

Individual Rationality

In this section, we discuss our revealed preference tests of individual rationality in detail. Readers less interested in the technical aspects of our tests
may prefer to bypass this portion of the paper and proceed to Section 5.
The most basic question to ask about choice data is whether it is consistent with individual utility maximization. If participants choose allocations
subject to standard budget constraints (as in our experiment), classical revealed preference theory provides a direct test. Afriat’s (1967) theorem
shows that choices in a finite collection of budget sets are consistent with
maximizing a well-behaved (piecewise linear, continuous, increasing, and
concave) utility function us (πs , πo ) if and only if they satisfy the Generalized Axiom of Revealed Preference (GARP). Hence, to assess whether our
data are consistent with utility-maximizing behavior, we only need to check
whether our data satisfy GARP, which requires that if π = (πs , πo ) is indirectly revealed preferred to π 0 , then π 0 is not directly revealed strictly
preferred (p0 · π ≥ p0 · π 0 ) to π.
Although testing conformity with GARP is conceptually straightforward,
there is an obvious difficulty: GARP provides an exact test of utility maximization – either the data satisfy GARP or they do not. To account for
the possibility of errors, we assess how nearly individual choice behavior
complies with GARP by using Afriat’s (1972) Critical Cost Efficiency Index
(CCEI), which measures the fraction by which each budget constraint must
be shifted in order to remove all violations of GARP. By definition, the
CCEI is bounded between zero and one. The closer it is to one, the smaller
the perturbation of the budget constraints required to remove all violations
and thus the closer the data are to satisfying GARP and hence to perfect
consistency with utility maximization. The difference between the CCEI
and one can be interpreted as an upper bound on the fraction of income
that a subject is wasting by making inconsistent choices.
There is no natural threshold for the CCEI for determining whether subjects are close enough to satisfying GARP that they can considered utility
maximizers. To generate a benchmark against which to compare our CCEI

12

scores, we follow Bronars (1987), which builds on Becker (1962), and compare the behavior of our actual subjects to the behavior of simulated subjects
who randomize uniformly on each budget line. Such tests are frequently applied to experimental data. The power of Bronars’s (1987) test is defined to
be the probability that a randomizing subject violates GARP. Choi, Fisman,
Gale, and Kariv (2007) show there is a very high probability that even random behavior will pass the GARP test if the number of individual decisions
is sufficiently low, underscoring the need to collect choices in a wide range
of budget sets in order to provide a stringent test of utility maximization.
In a simulation of 25,000 subjects who randomize uniformly on each budget line when confronted with our sequence of 50 decision problems, all the
simulated subjects had GARP violations, so the Bronars criterion attains
its maximum value.
The Bronars (1987) test rules out the possibility that consistency is the
accidental result of random behavior, but it is not sufficiently powerful to detect whether utility maximization is the correct model. To this end, Fisman,
Kariv, and Markovits (2007) generate a sample of hypothetical subjects who
implement a CES utility function with an idiosyncratic preference shock that
has a logistic distribution
∗

∗

Pr(π ) = R

eγ·u(π )
γ·u(π)
p·π=1 e

where the precision parameter γ reflects sensitivity to differences in utility –
the choice becomes purely random as γ goes to zero (Bronars’ test), whereas
the probability of the allocation yielding the highest utility approaches one
as γ goes to infinity. The results provide a clear benchmark of the extent to
which subjects do worse than choosing consistently and the extent to which
they do better than choosing randomly, and demonstrate that if utility maximization is not in fact the correct model, then our experiment is sufficiently
powerful to detect it. We refer the interested reader to Fisman, Kariv, and
Markovits (2007) Appendix III for more detail.12
The CCEI scores in the ALP sample averaged 0.862 over all subjects,
which we interpret as confirmation that most subjects’ choices are approximately consistent. In comparison, the mean CCEI score of a sample of
12

Varian (1982, 1983) modified Afriat’s (1967) results and describes efficient and general
techniques for testing the extent to which choices satisfy GARP. We refer the interested
reader to Choi, Fisman, Gale, and Kariv (2007) for more details on testing for consistency
with GARP and other measures that have been proposed for measuring GARP violations.
In practice, all these measures yield similar conclusions.

13

25,000 random subjects (γ = 0) who made 50 choices from randomly generated budget sets in the same way as our human subjects is only 0.60. 74.2
percent of actual subjects have CCEI scores above 0.80, while 10.2 percent
of random subjects have scores that high. If we choose the 0.85 efficiency
level as our critical value, 64.1 percent of our subjects have CCEI scores
above this threshold, while 3.4 percent of the random subjects have CCEI
scores above 0.85.
There is, however, marked heterogeneity in the CCEI scores within and
across the demographic and economic groups. Subjects that completed college display greater levels of consistency than subjects with less education.
The magnitudes imply that, on average, subjects without college degrees
waste 2.6 percentage points more of their earnings by making inconsistent
choices relative to college graduates.13 We also find that men are more consistent than women, and that the choices of white and Hispanic subjects are
more consistent with utility maximization than those of African Americans
in our sample. Though all three differences are statistically significant, they
are small in magnitude; the average CCEI is above 0.8 for all the demographic and socioeconomic categories we consider.

5

Decomposing Distributional Preferences

5.1

The CES Utility Specification

Our subjects’ CCEI scores are sufficiently close to one to justify treating the
data as utility-generated, and Afriat’s theorem tells us that the underlying
utility function, us (πs , πo ), that rationalizes the data can be chosen to be increasing, continuous and concave. In the case of two goods, consistency and
budget balancedness imply that demand functions must be homogeneous
of degree zero. If we also assume separability and homotheticity, then the
underlying utility function, us (πs , πo ), must be a member of the constant
elasticity of substitution (CES) family commonly employed in demand analysis:
us (πs , πo ) = [α(πs )ρ + (1 − α)(πo )ρ ]1/ρ
(1)
13

Regression analysis of the relationship between CCEI scores and demographic and
economic characteristics is provided in the Online Appendix.

14

where 0 ≤ α ≤ 1 and ρ ≤ 1.14 The CES specification is very flexible,
spanning a range of well-behaved utility functions by means of the parameters α and ρ. The parameter α represents the weight on payoffs to self
versus other (fair-mindedness), while ρ parameterizes the curvature of the
indifference curves (equality-efficiency tradeoffs).
When α = 1/2, a subject is fair-minded in the sense that self and other
are treated symmetrically.15 Among fair-minded subjects, the family of
CES utility functions spans the spectrum from Rawlsianism to utilitarianism
as ρ ranges from −∞ to 1. In particular, as ρ approaches −∞, u(πs , πo )
approaches min{πs , πo }, the maximin utility function of a Rawlsian; as ρ
approaches 1, u(πs , πo ) approaches that of a utilitarian, πs + πo . Hence,
both the Rawlsian and the utilitarian utility functions, as well as a whole
class of intermediate fair-minded utility functions, are admitted by the CES
specification.
More generally, different values of ρ give different degrees to which equality is valued over efficiency. Specifically, any 0 < ρ ≤ 1 indicates distributional preference weighted towards efficiency (increasing total payoffs) because the expenditure on the tokens given to other, po πo , decreases when
the relative price of giving p = po /ps increases, whereas any ρ < 0 indicates distributional preference weighted towards equality (reducing differences in payoffs) because po πo increases when p increases. As ρ approaches
0, u(πs , πo ) approaches the Cobb-Douglas utility function, πsα πo1−α , so the
expenditures on tokens to self and other are constant for any price p — a
share α is spent on tokens for self and a share 1 − α is spent on tokens for
other.
The CES expenditure function is given by
ps πs =

g
(ps /po )r + g

where r = ρ/ (ρ − 1) and g = [α/(1−α)]1/(1−ρ) . This generates the following
14

The proper development of revealed preference methods to test whether data are consistent with a utility function with some special structure, particularly homotheticity and
separability, is beyond the scope of this paper. Varian (1982, 1983) provides combinatorial conditions that are necessary and sufficient for extending Afriat’s (1967) Theorem to
testing for special structure of utility, but these conditions are not simple adjustments of
the usual tests, which are all computationally intensive for large datasets like our own.
15
For α = 1/2 and any ρ, (π, π 0 ) is chosen subject to the budget constraint ps πs +
po πo = 1 if and only if (π 0 , π) is chosen subject to the mirror-image budget constraint
po πs + ps πo = 1.

15

individual-level econometric specification for each subject n:
i
pis,n πs,n
=

gn
i
i
(ps,n /po,n )rn

+ gn

+ in

where i = 1, ..., 50 indexes the decision round and in is assumed to be distributed normally with mean zero and variance σn2 . We normalize prices
at each observation and estimate demand in terms of expenditure shares,
which are bounded between zero and one, with an i.i.d. error term. 16 We
generate individual-level estimates ĝn and r̂n using non-linear Tobit maximum likelihood, and use these estimates to infer the values of the underlying
CES parameters α̂n and ρ̂n .

5.2

Fair-mindedness

We classify a subject as fair-minded if we cannot reject the hypothesis that
α̂n is equal to 0.5 at the 10 percent level. By this criterion, 330 subjects (32.9
percent) are fair-minded.17 In contrast, only 151 subjects (15.1 percent) are
selfish in the sense that we cannot reject the hypothesis that their estimated
α̂n is different from 1 at the 10 percent level.18 By this measure, fair-minded
subjects outnumber selfish ones by approximately 2 to 1.19
Figure 4 explores the extent to which heterogeneity in estimated α̂n parameters is explained by observable characteristics. We again partition the
subject pool into mutually exclusive categories to examine variation by age,
gender, education, and so forth. The means for all categories are clustered
between 0.6 and 0.71. The averages suggest that fair-mindedness generally
decreases with age, education, and household income. In particular, subjects
with less than a high school diploma are particularly fair-minded; and the
unemployed and, to a lesser extent, the disabled appear more fair-minded
16

For perfectly consistent subjects, there exists a (well-behaved) utility function that
choices maximize (as implied by Afriat’s Theorem) so the error term in our individual-level
regression analysis can only stem from misspecifications of the functional form. For less
than perfectly consistent subjects, the error term also captures the fact these subjects compute incorrectly, execute intended choices incorrectly, or err in other ways. Disentangling
these sources of noise is beyond the scope of this paper.
17
This definition involves both the estimated α̂n and the standard error associated with
that estimate. Among fair-minded subjects, estimated α̂n parameters range from 0.258
to 0.749. The vast majority of fair-minded subjects (93.6 percent) have estimated α̂n
parameters between 0.4 and 0.6.
18
Since α̂n cannot be greater than 1, we use a one-sided test.
19
We omit from our totals one subject who appears both selfish and fair-minded because
the standard error associated with the α̂n estimate is quite large. This subject made
inconsistent choices, as indicated by a CCEI of 0.293.

16

than employed subjects, retirees, and homemakers. Consistent with other
studies (cf. Croson and Gneezy 2009), we find that women are more fairminded than men, though the effect is quite small.20 We also find that
non-Hispanic whites are significantly less fair-minded than both African
American and Hispanic subjects.
In Table 4, we explore the associations between fair-mindedness and individual characteristics in a regression framework.21 In Columns 1 through 8,
we consider each set of demographic or economic categories in isolation. Results are consistent with the patterns observed in Figure 4: when we do not
control for other factors, gender, age, marital status, education level, household income, employment status, and (to some extent) religion are all significant predictors of where one falls on the spectrum from fair-mindedness
to selfishness. In Columns 9 and 10, we include all the individual characteristics in the same specification; in Column 10, we also include state
of residence fixed effects. The indicators for being African American and
having less than a high school education are both negative and significant
with and without state fixed effects, indicating that these groups are, on the
whole, more fair-minded than other Americans.
We again find that much of the observed heterogeneity in fair-mindedness
occurs within rather than across groups: demographic and socioeconomic
characteristics explain only 4.1 percent of the variation in α̂n . Adding state
fixed effects raises the amount of variation that is explained by observables
to 8.8 percent.

5.3

Equality-Efficiency Tradeoffs

The mean ρ̂n observed in our sample is −2.64, and the median is −0.184.
585 subjects (58.4 percent) have estimated ρ̂n parameters below 0. When
we classify subjects as focused on equality (or efficiency) based on a onesided statistical test of the hypothesis that ρ̂n is less than (greater than) 0,
the opposite pattern emerges. 285 subjects (28.4 percent) display a statistically significant level of efficiency focus, while 245 (24.5 percent) display
a statistically significant level of equality focus. As these numbers clearly
demonstrate, the American population includes large numbers of people
20

The mean α̂n is 0.67 among women and 0.69 among men (p-value 0.06). However,
using the binary indicator based on a test of the hypothesis that α̂n equals 1/2, we find
that women are 6.0 percentage points more likely to be fair-minded (p-value 0.05).
21
We report OLS regression results, but findings are unchanged if we adopt a Tobit
specification to account for censoring of α̂n at 1. The results are nearly identical because
relatively few subjects have very high estimated α̂n parameters).

17

holding divergent views on the relative importance of minimizing inequality
vis-a-vis maximizing efficiency. For more than half of our subjects, we can
reject the hypothesis that ρ̂n = 0, suggesting that the majority of Americans
have strongly held, but divergent, views on the tradeoff between equality and
efficiency.
In Figures 5 and 6, we disaggregate the estimated ρ̂n parameters by demographic and socioeconomic categories (Figure 5 presents means and Figure 6 presents medians). Three main results stand out. First, the youngest
subjects are substantially more efficiency-focused than all of the three older
quartiles. The median ρ̂n among subjects in the youngest quartile is 0.025,
while the median in older quartiles is −0.276. Second, non-Hispanic whites
are substantially less efficiency-focused than minorities. The median ρ̂n is
−0.321 among non-Hispanic whites in our sample, while the medians for
Hispanic and African American subjects are −0.037 and 0.092, respectively.
Finally, subjects from low income households are more efficiency-focused
than wealthier individuals. This last finding may help to explain the fact
that the increase in income inequality observed in the United States in recent
decades has not led to increased political support for redistributive policies.
In Tables 5 and 6, we explore the associations between equality-efficiency
tradeoffs and individual characteristics in a regression framework. Table 5
replicates the OLS specifications from Table 4 with ρ̂n as the dependent
variable. Given the skewed distribution of the estimated ρ̂n parameters,
Table 6 reports a number of alternative specifications: we report median
regressions in Columns 3 and 4, regressions in which the outcome variable
is the decile of the estimated ρ̂n distribution in Columns 5 and 6, and regressions in which the dependent variable is an indicator for having ρ̂n ≥ 0
(which we term ρhigh ) in Columns 7 and 8. Since estimates of ρ̂n are quite
noisy for relatively selfish subjects, we also report (in the even-numbered
columns) specifications which omit the 45 subjects who allocate themselves
an average of more than 99 percent of tokens.
Several robust associations, already hinted at by the patterns in Figures
5 and 6, stand out. First, the youngest quartile of subjects are significantly
more efficiency-focused than older individuals (in all specifications). The
coefficient in Column 7, for example, suggests that subjects in the youngest
quartile are 8.8 percentage points more likely to be focused on efficiency
in the sense of having ρ̂n of at least 0. Second, subjects with household
incomes in the lowest income quartile are also significantly more focused on
efficiency than the rest of the sample. Third, African American subjects are
more efficiency-focused than non-Hispanic whites (the omitted category).
Though the coefficient is only significant in 6 of the 8 specifications, the
18

point estimates are extremely large, suggesting, for example, that African
Americans are 15.1 percent more likely to have a ρ̂n of at least 0. Finally,
though the associations are not signification in all specifications, we also find
that women are substantially more equality-focused than men.
As with fair-mindedness, we find that much of the observed variation in
equality-efficiency preferences occurs within rather than between groups. Individual demographic and socioeconomic characteristics explain 4.36 percent
of the variation in ρ̂n in our sample. Thus, though some groups appear more
efficiency-focused than others, these between-group differences are modest
relative to the tremendous variation in efficiency orientation within the demographic and socioeconomic categories in our sample.

6

Distributional Preferences and Voting Behavior

In our final piece of analysis, we test whether distributional preferences, as
measured in our experiment, predict support for political candidates who
favor redistribution. Whether efficiency-focused distributional preferences
are associated with political support for government redistribution is an
open question.22 A vast literature on the partisan preferences of Americans
assumes that Democrats have a stronger preference for inequality-reducing
government policy than Republicans, a view that is validated based on survey responses to the General Social Survey (Hayes 2011). However, as
Kuziemko, Norton, Saez, and Stantcheva (2013) point out, this does not
necessarily imply that Democrats are more averse to inequality; they may
instead look more favorably on government intervention in general, and on
redistributive policies in particular. Indeed, when Kuziemko, Norton, Saez,
and Stantcheva (2013) remove government involvement from questions regarding inequality, they find that much of the partisan difference in distributional preferences disappears.
Our experiment provides an objective measure of the extent to which
individuals actually choose to sacrifice efficiency to reduce inequality, an
22

In the Online Appendix, we explore the relationship between fair-mindedness and
political preferences. An extensive literature explores the extent to which voters support
policies that are in their own perceived short-run and long-run economic interests (cf.
Alesina and La Ferrara (2005) and the references cited therein). We do not find a significant relationship between our experimental measure of fair-mindedness, α̂n , and either
voting behavior or party affiliation; nor do we find that less fair-minded individuals from
low (high) income households are more likely to lean toward the Democrats (Republicans).
However, because our measure of household income provides only a rough indicator of who
is likely to benefit from government redistribution, we do not view our results as evidence
that self-interest plays no role in voting decisions.

19

approach which contrasts markedly with research designs based on nonincentivized survey questions. Further, our measure of equality orientation
is removed from any association between redistribution and government intervention. To the best of our knowledge, there is no empirical evidence on
whether the equality-efficiency tradeoffs elicited through such incentivized
lab experiments predict voting behavior.23
We explore the link between equality-efficiency tradeoffs and political behavior by looking at voting decisions in the 2012 presidential election. Our
main dependent variable is an indicator for voting for Democrat Barack
Obama, a relatively pro-redistribution candidate, rather than Republican
Mitt Romney.24 We focus on the 766 subjects who participated in ALP
modules exploring participants’ choices in the 2012 election and who report
voting for either Barack Obama or Mitt Romney.25 We include a range
of demographic controls to account for the fact that, for example, African
Americans overwhelmingly voted for Obama for reasons that are plausibly
distinct from their distributional preferences.26 We employ a linear probability model with an indicator variable for having voted for Obama as the
outcome.27 We report results for all three measures of equality-efficiency
tradeoffs used in the preceding section: the estimated ρ̂n parameter; ρ̂n
deciles; and ρhigh , an indicator for being efficiency-focused in the sense of
having an estimated ρ̂n of at least 0.
In the first three columns of Table 7, we present specifications which
23
Durante, Putterman, and van der Weele (forthcoming) find that more politically
liberal university students support higher within-experiment tax rates. They present a
cleverly designed experiment that allows them to distinguish between three motives for
supporting income redistribution – own-income maximization (of those in lower income
brackets), risk aversion, and distributional preferences. The subjects in the experiments
are undergraduate students at Brown University. Their conclusion is that own-payoff maximization is the dominant motive for redistribution in the experiment, but distributional
preferences also play a key role in subjects decisions.
24
As one indication of their views on redistribution, in September 2012, media outlets
reported the discovery of a recording of Barack Obama (from 1998) stating that he “actually believe[d] in redistribution.” In response to the media coverage of the recording,
Mitt Romney indicated that he “disagree[d].”
25
Unfortunately, no information is available on the voting behavior of the 48 subjects
who participated in the relevant ALP survey module but did not report casting a ballot
for a major party candidate, so we cannot classify the candidates that they supported as
being either for or against redistribution.
26
Interestingly, without controls, the relationship between measured distributional preferences and voting is insignificant in all regressions, reflecting the fact that groups such
as African Americans and low income individuals tend to support Democratic candidates,
but are also more efficiency-focused in our experiments.
27
Results of probit estimation are nearly identical.

20

include only demographic controls, showing results for each of the three
transformations of ρ̂n . The most straightforward coefficient to interpret is
that on ρhigh in Column 3, which indicates that efficiency-focused subjects
(with ρ̂n ≥ 0) are 4.5 percentage points less likely to have voted for Obama
than Romney. While the coefficients on ρ̂n and its transformations are
negative across the three columns, none is significant. The relationship is
potentially confounded by large differences across regions in both equalityefficiency tradeoffs and voting patterns, however. For example, there is
a strong equality orientation in Southern states, which also tend to vote
Republican. In Columns 4 through 6 we repeat our analyses including state
fixed-effects to absorb differences across geography. The coefficients on ρ̂n
and its variants are now significant at either the 5 or 10 percent level (pvalues range from 0.02 to 0.07). The coefficient on ρhigh in Column 8 is
-0.068, implying a marginally larger impact of distributional preferences on
voting outcomes when geographic variation is accounted for. In Panel B,
we omit nearly selfish subjects who allocate an average of more than 99
percent of the tokens to self because estimates of ρ̂n are quite noisy for
these individuals. All of our point estimates are marginally higher and the
standard errors unchanged, leading to marginally higher levels of statistical
significance across all specifications.
We further explore the relationship between equality-efficiency tradeoffs
and political behavior by replicating our specifications using an indicator for
aligning with the Democratic party as an outcome variable. These specifications include 528 subjects who participated in ALP modules on politics and
identified themselves as either Republicans or Democrats.28 We report our
results in Table 8. All estimated coefficients on ρ̂n and its transformations
are negative, suggesting that more efficiency-focused subjects are less likely
to be Democrats. Both the decile of ρ̂n and, ρhigh the indicator for having
ρ̂n > 0, are significant at at least the 90 percent level with and without state
fixed effects (p-values range from 0.051 to 0.003). After controlling for individual characteristics and geographic fixed effects, the estimated coefficient
on ρ̂high suggests that efficiency-focused subjects are 10.4 percentage points
less likely to be Democrats. Thus, our results strongly suggest that the
political decisions of Americans are motivated by their equality-efficiency
preferences, and not just their own self-interest or their views about government. However, this pattern only emerges after one accounts for the
28

Results are similar when we include the 217 additional subjects who participated in
the politics module and identified themselves as Independents. 55 subjects participated
in the module but indicated their party affiliation as “other,” so their parties cannot be
classified as more or less equality-focused than the Democrats.

21

fact that poorer Americans and minorities are, overall, substantially more
focused on efficiency than the rest of the population.

7

Conclusion

In this paper, we take a first step in characterizing, via experiments administered through the American Life Panel, the distributional preferences
of the general population of the United States. While we observe a great
deal of heterogeneity in the selfishness of subjects, we document a much
higher rate of fair-mindedness than prior studies that involved primarily
university students. There is also considerable heterogeneity in subjects’
equality-efficiency tradeoffs. Some of the heterogeneity in subjects’ distributional preferences can be explained by observable attributes, at times in
unexpected ways. Wealthier subjects, for example, are relatively less fairminded; while low income subjects and African Americans are more focused
on efficiency. But overall the data indicate a high degree of heterogeneity
within each demographic or economic category.
These results are important in formulating, and understanding support
for, a range of social and redistributive policies. Distributional preferences
are critical inputs into any measure of social welfare — for example, optimal
taxation hinges on an understanding of the distributional preferences of the
population. Recent work in public finance (cf. Saez and Stantcheva 2013)
also highlights the potential role of distributional preferences in explaining
support for observed tax policies, which are not considered optimal from a
theoretical perspective given standard assumptions about individual utilities.
Thus, our findings may be useful in providing a positive explanation
of public opinion on policy issues related to redistribution. Most standard
models of self-interested political preferences predict that the increase in
income inequality observed in the United States over the last few decades
should have led to greater support for government redistribution. However,
no such shift has been observed in survey data (Kuziemko, Norton, Saez, and
Stantcheva 2013). Our findings partially explain this: voters are motivated
by their distributional preferences, so they may not vote for redistributive
policies which would make them better off individually. Moreover, our results show that lower income Americans are more focused on efficiency than
other groups; while, in related work, Kuziemko (in progress) and Fisman,
Jakiela, and Kariv (2013) present suggestive evidence indicating that there
may, in fact, be a causal relationship between negative income shocks and

22

efficiency focus. Taken together, these results may help to explain why the
increase in inequality observed in the United Stata has not led to any shift
in party platforms toward greater redistribution in recent years.
Our experiments are only a first step in a much larger agenda. Theories
of redistribution should evolve alongside empirical evidence, with more research in the spirit of Saez and Stantcheva (2013) to better understand the
implications of observed distributional preferences for optimal policy. Our
results show that lab experiments can make a positive contribution to this
discourse, providing measures of the extent to which fair-minded voters are
willing to sacrifice efficiency to combat inequality, and predicting their level
of support for government policies designed to achieve that objective.

23

References
Afriat, S. N. (1967): “The Construction of Utility Functions from Expenditure
Data,” International Economic Review, 8(1), 67–77.
(1972): “Efficiency Estimates of Production Functions,” International
Economic Review, 8, 568–598.
Ahn, D., S. Choi, D. Gale, and S. Kariv (forthcoming): “Estimating Ambiguity Aversion in a Portfolio Choice Experiment,” Quantitative Economics.
Alesina, A., and E. La Ferrara (2005): “Preferences for Redistribution in the
Land of Opportunities,” Journal of Public Economics, 89(5), 897–931.
Andreoni, J., and J. Miller (2002): “Giving According to GARP: An Experimental Test of the Consistency of Preferences for Altruism,” Econometrica,
70(2), 737–753.
Becker, G. S. (1962): “Irrational Behavior and Economic Theory,” The Journal
of Political Economy, 70(1), 1–13.
Bellemare, C., S. Kröger, and A. van Soest (2008): “Measuring Inequity
Aversion in a Heterogeneous Population Using Experimental Decisions and Subjective Probabilities,” Econometrica, 76(4), 815–839.
Bronars, S. G. (1987): “The Power of Nonparametric Tests of Preference Maximization,” Econometrica, 55(3), 693–698.
Camerer, C. (2003): Behavioral Game Theory. Princeton University Press,
Princeton, NJ.
Choi, S., R. Fisman, D. Gale, and S. Kariv (2007): “Consistency and Heterogeneity of Individual Behavior under Uncertainty,” American Economic Review,
97(5), 1921–1938.
Choi, S., S. Kariv, W. Müller, and D. Silverman (forthcoming): “Who Is
(More) Rational?,” American Economic Review.
Croson, R., and U. Gneezy (2009): “Gender Differences in Preferences,” Journal of Economic Literature, 47(2), 1365–1384.
Durante, R., L. Putterman, and J. van der Weele (forthcoming): “Preferences for Redistribution and Perception of Fairness: An Experimental Study,”
Journal of the European Economic Association.
Fisman, R., P. Jakiela, and S. Kariv (2013): “How Did the Great Recession
Impact Social Preferences?,” working paper,.
Fisman, R., S. Kariv, and D. Markovits (2007): “Individual Preferences for
Giving,” American Economic Review, 97(5), 1858–1876.
Forsythe, R., J. Horowitz, N. S. Savin, and M. Sefton (1994): “Fairness
in Simple Bargaining Games,” Games and Economic Behavior, 6(3), 347–369.

24

Harsanyi, J. C. (1955): “Cardinal Welfare, Individualistic Ethics, and Interpersonal Comparisons of Utility,” Journal of Political Economy, 63, 309–321.
(1978): “Bayesian Decision Theory and Utilitarian Ethics,” American
Economic Review, 68(2), 223–228.
Hayes, T. (2011): “American Attitudes Toward Economic Inequality,” working
paper.
Kuziemko, I. (in progress): “Redistributive preferences in an age of rising inequality,” upublished presentation,.
Kuziemko, I., M. I. Norton, E. Saez, and S. Stantcheva (2013): “How
Elastic Are Preferences for Redistribution? Evidence from Randomized Survey
Experiments,” NBER Working Paper 18865, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Rawls, J. (1971): A Theory of Justice. Harvard University Press, Cambrudge,
MA.
Saez, E., and S. Stantcheva (2013): “Generalized Social Marginal Welfare
Weights for Optimal Tax Theory,” Discussion Paper 18835, National Bureau of
Economic Research.
Varian, H. R. (1982): “The Nonparametric Approach to Demand Analysis,”
Econometrica, 50(4), 945–972.
(1983): “Non-Parametric Tests of Consumer Behaviour,” Review of Economic Studies, 50(1), 99–110.

25

Table 1: Distributional Preference Types

Equality-Focused
Intermediate
Efficiency-Focused
All Subjects

Fair-Minded
6.3
14.7
12.0
32.9

Intermediate
14.6
24.5
13.0
52.0

Selfish
3.6
8.0
3.5
15.1

All Subjects
24.5
47.1
28.4
100.0

The numbers indicate the percentage of subjects in each cell. We classify a subject as fairminded if we cannot reject the null hypothesis that α̂n = 1/2; similarly, a subject is classified as
selfish if we cannot reject the null that α̂n = 1 (both tests are at the 10 percent level, though
the test for selfishness is one-sided since α̂n = 1 at the boundary of the parameter space).
One subject who had many revealed preference violations is classified as both fair-minded
and selfish, and is therefore included in the intermediate category. We classify a subject as
equality-focused or efficiency-focused if we can reject the hypothesis that ρ̂n = 0 at the 10
percent level using a one-sided test. When we can reject the null in favor of the alternative
hypothesis that ρ̂n is less (greater) than 0, we classify a subject as being focused on equality
(efficiency).

Table 2: Subjects’ Progression through the Experiment

Logged in to experiment
Started incentivized decision problems
Completed entire experiment

1.00
0.89
0.85

Includes data on 1,172 ALP respondents who logged
in to the experiment.

26

Table 3: Summary Statistics on Experimental Subjects
Variable:
Female
Age
Completed high school
Some college
Completed college
Married
Widowed, separated, or divorced
African American
Hispanic or Latino
Non-Hispanic white
Protestant
Catholic
Not religious
Employed
Unemployed
Retired
Disabled
Homemaker
HH income (thousands of USD)
Lives in northeast (census region I)
Lives in midwest (census region II)
Lives in south (census region III)
Lives in west (census region IV)

Mean
0.58
49.12
0.91
0.29
0.31
0.61
0.21
0.11
0.18
0.68
0.24
0.24
0.23
0.56
0.10
0.17
0.08
0.06
54.98
0.18
0.20
0.35
0.27

S.D.
0.49
15.02
0.29
0.45
0.46
0.49
0.41
0.31
0.38
0.47
0.43
0.43
0.42
0.50
0.30
0.38
0.27
0.24
46.43
0.38
0.40
0.48
0.44

Median
.
50
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
45
.
.
.
.

Min.
.
19
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
2.5
.
.
.
.

Max.
.
91
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
206.25
.
.
.
.

N
1002
1002
1002
1002
1002
1002
1002
1000
1002
1000
994
994
994
1002
1002
1002
1002
1002
998
1002
1002
1002
1002

Data on race, household income, and religious affiliation is missing for (respectively) 2, 5, and 8
respondents.

27

Table 4: OLS Regressions of Estimated α̂n on Subject Characteristics

Female
Youngest quartile (age 37 or less)

(1)
-0.023∗
(0.013)
.

28

(2)
.

(3)
.

(4)
.

(5)
.

(6)
.

(7)
.

(8)
.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.
.

Oldest quartile (over 60)

.

Did not complete high school

.

-0.008
(0.015)
0.035∗∗
(0.016)
.

Completed college

.

.

African American

.

.

-0.054∗∗∗
(0.019)
0.029∗
(0.016)
.

Hispanic/Latino

.

.

.

Lowest income quartile

.

.

.

-0.08∗∗∗
(0.018)
-0.047∗∗∗
(0.015)
.

Highest income quartile

.

.

.

.

Employed

.

.

.

.

-0.033∗∗
(0.014)
0.012
(0.017)
.

Unemployed

.

.

.

.

.

Married

.

.

.

.

.

0.009
(0.018)
-0.048∗∗
(0.023)
.

Widowed, separated, or divorced

.

.

.

.

.

.

Catholic

.

.

.

.

.

.

0.037∗∗
(0.017)
0.012
(0.02)
.

Protestant

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

No religious preference

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

0.69∗∗∗
(0.01)
No
1002
0.003

0.67∗∗∗
(0.009)
No
1002
0.007

0.664∗∗∗
(0.011)
No
1002
0.016

0.694∗∗∗
(0.008)
No
1002
0.022

0.684∗∗∗
(0.009)
No
1002
0.008

0.672∗∗∗
(0.016)
No
1002
0.009

0.651∗∗∗
(0.015)
No
1002
0.006

Constant
State of Residence FEs
Observations
R2

.
-0.022
(0.017)
0.031∗
(0.018)
-0.014
(0.018)
0.677∗∗∗
(0.012)
No
1002
0.01

(9)
-0.015
(0.014)
-0.003
(0.016)
0.026
(0.018)
-0.046∗∗
(0.019)
0.009
(0.016)
-0.063∗∗∗
(0.019)
-0.018
(0.017)
-0.0004
(0.017)
-0.002
(0.018)
0.003
(0.017)
-0.026
(0.023)
0.002
(0.019)
-0.016
(0.021)
-0.029
(0.018)
0.006
(0.018)
-0.018
(0.018)
0.704∗∗∗
(0.029)
No
1002
0.041

(20)
-0.021
(0.014)
-0.004
(0.017)
0.025
(0.018)
-0.039∗∗
(0.02)
0.007
(0.016)
-0.066∗∗∗
(0.02)
-0.017
(0.019)
-0.002
(0.017)
-0.002
(0.018)
0.005
(0.017)
-0.03
(0.023)
-0.004
(0.019)
-0.011
(0.022)
-0.038∗
(0.019)
-0.003
(0.019)
-0.016
(0.018)
0.714∗∗∗
(0.03)
Yes
1002
0.089

Robust standard errors in parentheses. All regressions include controls for respondents who are missing data on race (2), household income
(5), or religious affiliation (8).

Table 5: OLS Regressions of Estimated ρ̂n on Subject Characteristics

Female

(1)
-0.773∗∗
(0.377)
.

(3)
.

(4)
.

(5)
.

(6)
.

(7)
.

(8)
.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.
.

Oldest quartile (over 60)

.

Did not complete high school

.

1.512∗∗∗
(0.396)
-0.413
(0.516)
.

Completed college

.

.

African American

.

.

0.562
(0.711)
-0.082
(0.5)
.

Hispanic/Latino

.

.

.

Lowest income quartile

.

.

.

1.042∗
(0.557)
0.958∗∗
(0.452)
.

Highest income quartile

.

.

.

.

Employed

.

.

.

.

0.823∗
(0.423)
-0.441
(0.517)
.

Unemployed

.

.

.

.

.

Married

.

.

.

.

.

0.694
(0.556)
1.018
(0.741)
.

Widowed, separated, or divorced

.

.

.

.

.

.

Catholic

.

.

.

.

.

.

-1.001∗∗
(0.451)
-1.471∗∗
(0.59)
.

Protestant

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

No religious preference

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

-2.188∗∗∗
(0.27)
No
1002
0.004

-2.939∗∗∗
(0.285)
No
1002
0.015

-2.786∗∗∗
(0.345)
No
1002
0.002

-2.908∗∗∗
(0.233)
No
1002
0.009

-2.791∗∗∗
(0.284)
No
1002
0.007

-3.062∗∗∗
(0.501)
No
1002
0.006

-1.719∗∗∗
(0.378)
No
1002
0.006

Youngest quartile (age 37 or less)

29

(2)
.

Constant
State of Residence FEs
Observations
R2

.
0.752
(0.509)
-0.247
(0.551)
0.067
(0.551)
-2.796∗∗∗
(0.371)
No
1002
0.005

(9)
-0.94∗∗
(0.396)
1.418∗∗∗
(0.414)
0.017
(0.599)
0.057
(0.673)
-0.096
(0.469)
0.747
(0.672)
0.111
(0.551)
1.137∗∗
(0.512)
-0.622
(0.533)
0.918∗
(0.543)
0.372
(0.725)
-0.013
(0.503)
-0.644
(0.626)
0.856
(0.58)
0.283
(0.576)
-0.132
(0.542)
-3.408∗∗∗
(0.841)
No
1002
0.044

(10)
-1.062∗∗∗
(0.402)
1.457∗∗∗
(0.43)
-0.096
(0.603)
0.417
(0.684)
-0.375
(0.485)
0.412
(0.722)
0.171
(0.624)
1.041∗∗
(0.525)
-0.722
(0.532)
0.651
(0.53)
0.003
(0.731)
-0.006
(0.522)
-0.33
(0.658)
0.603
(0.583)
0.369
(0.595)
-0.217
(0.555)
-3.013∗∗∗
(0.834)
Yes
1002
0.107

Robust standard errors in parentheses. All regressions include controls for respondents who are missing data on race (2), household income
(5), or religious affiliation (8).

Table 6: Additional Regressions of Estimated ρ̂n on Subject Characteristics

Dependent Variable:
Specification:
Subjects included:
Female
Youngest quartile (age 37 or less)
Oldest quartile (over 60)
Did not complete high school
Completed college
African American
Hispanic/Latino

30

Lowest income quartile
Highest income quartile
Employed
Unemployed
Married
Widowed, separated, or divorced
Catholic
Protestant
No religious preference
Constant
Observations

Estimated ρ̂n
OLS Regression
All
Non-Selfish
(1)
(2)
-0.94∗∗
-0.876∗∗
(0.396)
(0.415)
1.418∗∗∗
1.387∗∗∗
(0.414)
(0.428)
0.017
0.087
(0.599)
(0.621)
0.057
0.119
(0.673)
(0.678)
-0.096
-0.119
(0.469)
(0.49)
0.747
0.898
(0.672)
(0.683)
0.111
0.204
(0.551)
(0.566)
1.137∗∗
1.220∗∗
(0.512)
(0.529)
-0.622
-0.658
(0.533)
(0.564)
0.918∗
0.93
(0.543)
(0.567)
0.372
0.375
(0.725)
(0.747)
-0.013
0.023
(0.503)
(0.527)
-0.644
-0.613
(0.626)
(0.641)
0.856
0.996∗
(0.58)
(0.601)
0.283
0.349
(0.576)
(0.604)
-0.132
-0.034
(0.542)
(0.565)
-3.408∗∗∗
-3.749∗∗∗
(0.841)
(0.889)
1002
957

Estimated ρ̂n
Median Regression
All
Non-Selfish
(3)
(4)
-0.137∗∗
-0.117∗
(0.06)
(0.063)
0.163∗∗
0.149∗
(0.074)
(0.079)
-0.095
-0.085
(0.081)
(0.085)
0.123
0.133
(0.107)
(0.11)
0.144∗∗
0.147∗∗
(0.07)
(0.074)
0.313∗∗∗
0.339∗∗∗
(0.1)
(0.104)
0.042
0.062
(0.084)
(0.088)
0.259∗∗∗
0.239∗∗∗
(0.077)
(0.08)
0.005
-0.039
(0.08)
(0.085)
0.128∗
0.104
(0.074)
(0.078)
0.044
0.04
(0.109)
(0.114)
0.011
0.006
(0.086)
(0.091)
-0.111
-0.106
(0.099)
(0.104)
0.107
0.153∗
(0.084)
(0.088)
-0.126
-0.139
(0.082)
(0.087)
-0.135∗
-0.118
(0.081)
(0.085)
-0.382∗∗∗
-0.409∗∗∗
(0.127)
(0.135)
1002
957

Decile of ρ̂n
OLS Regression
All
Non-Selfish
(5)
(6)
-0.497∗∗∗
-0.381∗∗
(0.191)
(0.191)
0.675∗∗∗
0.594∗∗∗
(0.226)
(0.224)
-0.237
-0.199
(0.262)
(0.261)
0.38
0.498
(0.326)
(0.326)
0.295
0.278
(0.22)
(0.218)
0.657∗∗
0.827∗∗∗
(0.32)
(0.321)
-0.086
-0.01
(0.266)
(0.263)
0.484∗∗
0.525∗∗
(0.238)
(0.238)
-0.013
-0.003
(0.253)
(0.253)
0.025
0.006
(0.244)
(0.242)
-0.015
-0.002
(0.332)
(0.329)
-0.173
-0.112
(0.267)
(0.262)
-0.335
-0.251
(0.311)
(0.307)
0.46∗
0.655∗∗
(0.274)
(0.273)
-0.166
-0.076
(0.259)
(0.259)
-0.119
-0.02
(0.259)
(0.258)
5.455∗∗∗
5.045∗∗∗
(0.408)
(0.4)
1002
957

ρhigh
OLS Regression
All
Non-Selfish
(7)
(8)
-0.066∗∗
-0.048
(0.032)
(0.033)
0.088∗∗
0.081∗∗
(0.04)
(0.041)
-0.06
-0.055
(0.044)
(0.044)
0.101∗
0.118∗∗
(0.058)
(0.059)
0.046
0.047
(0.037)
(0.038)
0.151∗∗∗
0.176∗∗∗
(0.055)
(0.056)
0.019
0.031
(0.046)
(0.046)
0.078∗
0.084∗∗
(0.042)
(0.042)
0.031
0.036
(0.043)
(0.044)
-0.009
-0.015
(0.04)
(0.04)
0.003
0.005
(0.058)
(0.059)
-0.028
-0.021
(0.047)
(0.048)
-0.039
-0.027
(0.055)
(0.055)
0.056
0.082∗
(0.046)
(0.046)
-0.012
-0.006
(0.044)
(0.045)
-0.012
-0.00009
(0.044)
(0.045)
0.394∗∗∗
0.336∗∗∗
(0.069)
(0.07)
1002
957

Standard errors in parentheses (robust standard errors in Columns 1 and 2). All regressions include controls for respondents who are
missing data on race (2), household income (5), or religious affiliation (8). ρhigh is an indicator for being efficiency-focused in the sense
of having ρ̂n greater than or equal to 0. Non-Selfish subjects are those who allocate themselves less than 99 percent of the tokens, on
average.

Table 7: OLS Regressions of Likelihood of Voting for Obama in 2012

— Without State FEs —
(1)
(2)
(3)
Panel A: All Subjects
ρ̂n
Decile of ρ̂n
ρhigh (i.e. ρ̂n ≥ 0)

-0.003
(0.003)
.
.

Demographic Controls
State of Residence FEs
Observations

.

-0.009
(0.006)
.

.

Yes
No
766

-0.045
(0.033)
Yes
No
766

.

.
.

.

-0.012∗∗
(0.006)
.

Yes
No
734

Yes
No
734

Demographic Controls
Yes
State of Residence FEs
No
Observations
766
Panel B: Non-Selfish Subjects
ρ̂n
-0.004
(0.003)
Decile of ρ̂n
.
ρhigh (i.e. ρ̂n ≥ 0)

.

-0.057∗
(0.034)
Yes
No
734

— With State FEs —
(4)
(5)
(6)
-0.005∗
(0.003)
.

.

.
.

.

-0.013∗∗
(0.006)
.

Yes
Yes
766

Yes
Yes
766

-0.068∗∗
(0.034)
Yes
Yes
766

-0.006∗
(0.003)
.

.

.
.

.

-0.016∗∗
(0.006)
.

Yes
Yes
734

Yes
Yes
734

-0.077∗∗
(0.035)
Yes
Yes
734

Robust standard errors in parentheses. All regressions include controls for respondents who are missing data on race (2), household income (5), or religious affiliation
(8).

31

Table 8: OLS Regressions of Likelihood of Being a Democrat

— Without State FEs —
(1)
(2)
(3)
Panel A: All Subjects
ρ̂n
Decile of ρ̂n
ρhigh (i.e. ρ̂n ≥ 0)

-0.002
(0.003)
.

Demographic Controls
State of Residence FEs
Observations

.

-0.014∗
(0.007)
.

.

Yes
No
528

-0.075∗
(0.04)
Yes
No
528

.

.
.

.

-0.016∗∗
(0.007)
.

Yes
No
505

Yes
No
505

.

Demographic Controls
Yes
State of Residence FEs
No
Observations
528
Panel B: Non-Selfish Subjects
ρ̂n
-0.003
(0.003)
Decile of ρ̂n
.
ρhigh (i.e. ρ̂n ≥ 0)

.

-0.087∗∗
(0.041)
Yes
No
505

— With State FEs —
(4)
(5)
(6)
-0.005
(0.003)
.

.

.
.

.

-0.02∗∗∗
(0.007)
.

Yes
Yes
528

Yes
Yes
528

-0.104∗∗
(0.042)
Yes
Yes
528

-0.005
(0.003)
.

.

.
.

.

-0.023∗∗∗
(0.008)
.

Yes
Yes
505

Yes
Yes
505

-0.112∗∗
(0.044)
Yes
Yes
505

Robust standard errors in parentheses. All regressions include controls for respondents who are missing data on race (2), household income (5), or religious affiliation
(8).

32

Figure 1: Prototypical Fair-minded Distributional Preferences

33

Figure 2: Average Fraction of Tokens Allocated to Self (πs /(πs + πo ) by Sub-Group

34

Figure 3: Proportion of Efficiency-Focused Subjects, by Sub-Group

35

Figure 4: Estimated α̂n Parameters, by Sub-Group

36

Figure 5: Estimated Mean ρ̂n Parameters, by Sub-Group

37

Figure 6: Estimated Median ρ̂n Parameters, by Sub-Group

38

