NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MORE INSURERS LOWER PREMIUMS:
EVIDENCE FROM INITIAL PRICING IN THE HEALTH INSURANCE MARKETPLACES
Leemore Dafny
Jonathan Gruber
Christopher Ody
Working Paper 20140
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20140
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2014

We are grateful for helpful comments from the editor, referees, Joseph Doyle, Keith Ericson, Amanda
Starc, and seminar participants at Indiana University, the Boston University/Harvard/MIT Health Economics
Seminar, and the Health Economics Workshop at the University of Chicago. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w20140.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Leemore Dafny, Jonathan Gruber, and Christopher Ody. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

More Insurers Lower Premiums: Evidence from Initial Pricing in the Health Insurance Marketplaces
Leemore Dafny, Jonathan Gruber, and Christopher Ody
NBER Working Paper No. 20140
May 2014, Revised September 2014
JEL No. H51,I11,I18,L1
ABSTRACT
First-year insurer participation in the Health Insurance Marketplaces (HIMs) established by the Affordable
Care Act is limited in many areas of the country. There are 3.9 participants, on (population-weighted)
average, in the 395 ratings areas spanning the 34 states with federally facilitated marketplaces (FFMs).
Using data on the plans offered in the FFMs, together with predicted market shares for HIM participants
(estimated using 2011 insurer-state market shares in the individual insurance market), we study the
impact of competition on premiums. We exploit variation in ratings-area-level competition induced
by UnitedHealthcare’s decision not to participate in any of the FFMs. We estimate that the secondlowest-price silver premium (which is directly linked to federal subsidies) would have decreased by 5.4
percent, on average, had UnitedHealthcare participated. If all insurers active in each state’s individual
insurance market in 2011 had participated in all ratings areas in that state’s HIM, we estimate this
key premium would be 11.1% lower and 2014 federal subsidies would be reduced by $1.7 billion.
Leemore Dafny
Department of Management and Strategy
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208-2001
and NBER
l-dafny@kellogg.northwestern.edu
Jonathan Gruber
Department of Economics, E17-220
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
gruberj@mit.edu

Christopher Ody
Department of Management and Strategy
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
chris.ody@gmail.com

1. Introduction

The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA), passed in March 2010 and upheld
by the U.S. Supreme Court in June 2012, introduced dramatic reforms to the health insurance
industry. A number of benefit designs were banned, premium variation was limited, and online
marketplaces for the purchase of insurance were established in every state. Along with Medicaid
expansions and mandates for individuals to purchase and large employers to offer coverage,
these marketplaces are a key vehicle for expanding insurance coverage. Federal health insurance
subsidies are only available to those who purchase a policy through Health Insurance
Marketplaces (HIMs), formerly known as exchanges. HIMs are intended to promote competition
along “beneficial” dimensions (such as premiums and quality), while at the same time limiting
competition along dimensions thought to be socially undesirable (such as selection based on the
health of enrollees). Whether the federal health reform affordably expands insurance coverage
will depend in no small part on the success of HIMs.
The success of HIMs, in turn, will depend on attracting both consumers and insurers.
Competition can only have its salutary effects if there are competitors. Prior to the ACA, health
insurance markets were very concentrated. The average state HHI for the individual insurance
market was 4,100 in 2011, substantially higher than the Department of Justice’s threshold of
2,500 for “highly concentrated.”1 HIMs were designed to lower barriers to entry into the
insurance industry. By steering a pool of subsidy-eligible consumers to HIMs and mandating
that individuals carry insurance, policymakers hoped to create enough new demand to allow
entrants to achieve reasonable scale. HIMs also fulfill the role of “certifying” new entrants,
whose plans must satisfy federal standards in order to participate in these regulated marketplaces.
This federal stamp of approval serves to increase both consumer and supplier confidence in the
quality of entrants, a feat that has proved challenging in recent history. And by displaying
products online on a centralized website, HIMs reduce marketing, sales, and administrative costs.
In addition, the ACA provided subsidized loans to new, nonprofit insurance co-operatives known
as Consumer Operated and Oriented Plans, or CO-OPs.

1

Calculated using data from the Center for Consumer Information and Insurance Oversight (CCIIO), described in
Section 3.

1

In spite of these policies, there was limited participation in HIMs during 2014, their first year
of operation (and the only year for which data are presently available). In the discussion that
follows, we focus exclusively on the 34 federally-facilitated marketplaces (FFMs), as our
identification strategy and data pertains only to this set of marketplaces. Of the 102 top-three
insurers in the 34 federally-facilitated marketplaces (FFMs), 55 participated in the relevant state
HIM. A number of large national insurers, such as Aetna, Cigna, and Humana, participated in
only a limited number of HIMs.2 As we discuss in detail below, the nation’s largest insurer,
UnitedHealthcare (hereafter United), did not participate in any of the FFMs. There were some
new entrants, however. Across all FFMs, there were 36 new insurer-state “entries,” where entry
is defined as participation by an insurer that did not offer individual insurance in that state in
2011.3 Of these 36, 13 were CO-OPs.4
The combination of concentrated pre-HIM markets, substantial nonparticipation in the HIMs,
and limited entry imply highly concentrated marketplaces. Figure 1 gives the populationweighted distribution of insurers across the 395 federally delineated ratings areas in the 34 FFM
states.

Ratings areas are state-defined regions across which insurers may vary price and

participation.5 Seven percent of the population lives in areas with only one insurance option, and
about half live in areas with three or fewer options. On a population-weighted basis, there are on
average 3.9 insurers per market, with 2.9 incumbents (i.e., insurers who are not new to the
individual market), 0.3 CO-OP entrants and 0.7 non-CO-OP entrants.
In this study, we explore the effect of insurer participation in HIMs on 2014 premiums.
Prior empirical research finds that insurer consolidation has led to higher premiums for large
employer-sponsored plans (Dafny, Duggan, and Ramanarayanan 2012) and fully-insured, small
group plans (Guardado et al. 2013).

The degree and nature of competition, and hence the

2

Our numbers may not match those reported by the Department of Health and Human Services (or other sources) as
we attempted to identify plans offered by the same insurer under different names and link them to a single insurer.
3
Based on 2011 data, 33 of these 36 had not previously offered individual insurance in any FFM state. Most
“entrants” to the individual market are insurers who previously provided Medicaid-managed care in a given state.
4
There are 13 new, federally sponsored CO-OPs operating in 13 of the 34 FFMs. In 2014, each CO-OP operated in
only one state, with three exceptions. First, “CO-OPortunity Health” operates in both Iowa and Nebraska. Second,
“Health CO-OPerative SCW” and “Common Ground Healthcare CO-OPerative” operate in Wisconsin.
5
According to the Department of Health and Human Services, ratings areas “overlap with the issuer service areas in
many, but not all, cases. In general, the number of issuers or plans available in a rating area will be the number of
choices available to all individuals and families living in that rating area. Issuers are not required to offer a qualified
health plan in every rating area within a state, however, so the number of available issuers and qualified health plans
varies by rating area.” (Source: ASPE Issue Brief, Health insurance Marketplace Premiums for 2014, available at
http://aspe.hhs.gov/health/reports/2013/marketplacepremiums/ib_marketplace_premiums.cfm). Thus, ratings areas
are natural market definitions for insurance offered through exchanges.

2

quantitative relationship between market structure and premiums, may be different in the HIMs.6
On one hand, HIMs standardize some plan features and facilitate plan comparisons, creating a
more Bertrand-like pricing environment. If these design features enable this competitive ideal,
markups can be low in markets with as few as two insurers. On the other hand, the transparent
display of nonstandardized plan features (e.g., provider networks) and (eventually) plan quality
may spur product differentiation, higher markups, and potentially higher average premiums. In
addition, the existence of subsidies may dampen the price elasticity of some buyers, tempering
the relationship between competition and price (and implying more competitors are needed,
ceteris paribus, to generate competitive outcomes).
Our empirical work focuses on the premium for the second-lowest-priced silver plan within a
market. We refer to this premium as 2LPS. Federal subsidies are linked to the 2LPS, and past
evidence suggests that the lower tail of the premium distribution may be particularly important to
consumers (Ericson and Starc 2012a). The 2LPS exhibits a substantial amount of variation
nationally: among FFMs, the 90th percentile of 2LPS is 45% higher than the 10th percentile.
Existing cross-sectional analyses suggest that HIMs with more insurers have lower
premiums.7 Figure 2 illustrates that HIMs with more participants generally have lower 2LPS.
The graph shows the distribution of 2LPS by the number of HIM participants, along with a fitted
line from a univariate regression; while there is substantial variation around the line, the slope is
negative (correlation coefficient = -0.35).
This fact admits many interpretations. For example, insurers may prefer to participate in
geographic markets where medical costs are lower. To mitigate such endogeneity concerns, we
exploit United’s decision to uniformly avoid all 34 FFMs as a source of quasi-experimental
variation in ex-post marketplace concentration. United’s nonparticipation differentially affected
the competitive environment across markets, owing to its pre-ACA premium and product
characteristics as well as the participation decisions, premiums, and product characteristics of
rivals. It is also a policy-relevant source of variation, as insurers similar to United are likely
marginal nonparticipants: if expected profits for insurers increase, large insurers who shunned
the HIMS are likely to enter.
6

There are a number of additional reasons why extrapolating from Dafny, Duggan, and Ramanarayanan (2012) to
our scenario is difficult. For example, they study the large-group market, and the initial level of concentration in
these markets during their study period is significantly lower.
7
See, for example, http://aspe.hhs.gov/health/reports/2013/MarketplacePremiums/ib_marketplace_premiums.cfm.

3

We construct a measure of the change in market concentration resulting from United’s
decision to avoid FFMs. We then model 2LPS across rating areas as a function of this measure.
We find that premiums are highest in markets where United’s participation would have most
reduced concentration. Our findings are robust to a wide variety of specification checks.
We estimate that the population-weighted average 2LPS would have been 5.4% lower had
United entered all markets in the FFMs. If all insurers present in a state’s individual market in
2011 had entered the FFMs, we estimate that the weighted average 2LPS in the FFMs would
have been 11.1% lower. We also find that 2LPS is lower in markets with CO-OPs, although we
caution against a causal interpretation of this association due to the potential endogeneity of COOP locations.
These results suggest that additional competitors can have a large impact on premiums and
federal subsidies for HIM plans. Spiro and Gruber (2013) estimate that each 1% reduction in
2LPS reduces federal subsidies by 1.25%.

Back-of-the-envelope calculations imply that

attracting all incumbents to insurance markets would save an estimated $1.7 billion in federal
subsidies in 2014, and $105.2 billion over the 2014-2023 ten-year horizon, under the (admittedly
strong) assumptions that our findings are generalizable to state-based HIMs and that market
structures do not change.
The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides background on the
health insurance marketplaces, United’s nonparticipation decision, and prior research on
competition among health insurers. Section 3 describes the construction of our dataset and
discusses summary statistics. Section 4 presents the main analysis.

Section 5 provides a

falsification check of the results by examining the relationship between pre-HIM individual
market premiums and the instrument for HIM HHI. We also discuss robustness of the findings
to alternative specifications. Section 6 concludes.

4

2. Background

2.1 Health Insurance Marketplaces
HIMs are regulated online marketplaces for the purchase of health insurance. In this paper,
we study HIMs for individual policies.8 The ACA gave states three options with respect to the
development of their HIMs: (1) design and manage their own (so-called “state-based”
marketplaces)—selected by 16 states and DC; (2) let the federal government design and operate
the marketplace—selected by 27 states; (3) pursue a hybrid approach (“state–federal partnership”
marketplace)—selected by 7 states.
facilitated marketplaces (FFMs).

Options (2) and (3) together comprise the federally-

All HIMs became available as of October 1st, 2013 for

individuals to purchase coverage effective in January 2014.
The broad design of an HIM is the same in every state. Five tiers of products are offered.
The first tier consists of “catastrophic” high-deductible plans offered primarily to those under
age 30.9 The four remaining tiers are categorized by “actuarial value” (AV), defined as the share
of healthcare spending that an insurance plan pays for a typical enrollee. These tiers are
identified by precious metals (AV thresholds): bronze (0.6); silver (0.7); gold (0.8); and platinum
(0.9). The ACA requires all products sold on or off the HIMs in the individual and small-group
markets to conform to one of these tiers. In addition, all plans in these markets must satisfy
federal standards regarding “essential health benefits.”

Essential health benefits include

coverage of a specified set of services, restrictions on benefits limitations (such as annual
spending limits), and a maximum out-of-pocket exposure for enrollees of $6,350
(single)/$12,700 (family).
Subject to this standardization, insurers have wide latitude to design their products in almost
all states. For example, insurers may adjust features of patient out-of-pocket costs in any way
that satisfies the AV standard for a plan’s metal tier. Insurers can offer any plan design that is
within 2% of the actuarial-value target, as long as essential benefits are covered. Insurers may
also compete on network design, subject to broad restrictions on network adequacy.

The

resulting variation across plans is meaningful. On the pre-ACA Massachusetts exchange, which
8

HIMs for small-group policies exist—and are known by the acronym SHOP for the Small Health Options
Program—but as of this writing they do not yet comply with many requirements included in the ACA. Premium
and other data on SHOP plans are not readily available.
9
The catastrophic plan is also available to individuals who do not have the option to purchase insurance below the
mandate affordability threshold of 8% of income.

5

standardized benefits to a greater degree than required by the ACA, the most expensive plan
within a standardized benefits tier (and for a specific zipcode–age combination) was 50% more
expensive than the cheapest plan (Ericson and Starc 2013b).
Plans on the HIMs set their own premiums. While there is no explicit premium regulation,
there is regulation on the plan Medical Loss Ratio (MLR), the ratio of medical benefits paid out
to premiums collected. MLRs must exceed 80% in the individual and small-group market and
85% in the large-group market, which places limits on the ability of firms to make large profits.
In addition, premiums are community-rated, varying only by ratings area, family composition,
tobacco use, and age, with a maximum 3:1 ratio of the premiums for the oldest:youngest
enrollee.
All plans on an HIM must successfully complete the HIM’s “plan certification process.” The
process is uniform across FFMs and is described through public announcements by the Centers
for Medicare and Medicaid Services.10 Each plan must be certified as “qualified health plan”
(QHP) in the relevant state. QHPs must satisfy a set of standards regarding licensure, service
areas, network adequacy, and patient safety. They must also undergo a review of rates. States
may review QHP applications and provide recommendations to CMS regarding certification.
Individuals in the HIMs will in most cases be purchasing insurance products using a federal
tax subsidy. The ACA provides that households with income between 100% and 400% of the
federal poverty line may access tax credits to offset some of their premiums. These tax credits
offset the difference between premiums and a sliding-scale percentage of income, beginning at
2% of income for households with income equal to 100% of the poverty line and rising to 9.5%
of income between 300–400% of the poverty line. In some states, a federally funded Medicaid
expansion covers all those below 133% of the poverty line, so HIM participation starts at that
higher level; in states without Medicaid expansions, eligibility for HIM subsidies begins at 100%
of the poverty line. An estimated 4.8 million individuals have income below the federal poverty
line and are ineligible for subsidies and Medicaid.11

10

For 2015, this notice is available at http://www.cms.gov/CCIIO/Resources/Regulations-andGuidance/Downloads/2015-final-issuer-letter-3-14-2014.pdf.
11
Source: “The Coverage Gap: Uninsured Poor Adults in States that Do Not Expand Medicaid ,” Kaiser Family
Foundation Issue Brief, March 2014. http://kaiserfamilyfoundation.files.wordpress.com/2014/04/8505-the-coveragegap_uninsured-poor-adults-in-states-that-do-not-expand-medicaid.pdf

6

2.2 United’s Nonparticipation
A standard difficulty with any study assessing the impact of market concentration on price is
the endogeneity of market participation and market shares. In this setting, one concern with
regressing HIM premiums on market concentration arises from the possibility that participation
decisions (whether by incumbents or de novo entrants) may have been affected by expectations
about market premiums. Many of the large national insurers, such as Aetna, Humana, and Cigna
selectively entered the HIMs. For example, Aetna entered 16 of 34 FFMs.12
One exception is United, the nation’s largest commercial insurer. Once a midsize regional
insurer, United now has a national footprint, achieved largely through acquisitions.13 Its market
share varies widely across states, with no consistent geographic pattern. In the individual
insurance market, these shares range from < 1% in Montana, North and South Dakota, New
Hampshire, Maine, and Utah to over 20% in South Carolina, Missouri, West Virginia, and
Arizona.
The variation in United’s pre-HIM market position implies that its blanket nonparticipation
decision (discussed below) differentially affected the competitive landscape of each market.
United’s decision not to enter could affect 2LPS through two mechanisms (1) a “direct effect”
arising from the possibility that United could have offered one of the two lowest-priced silver
plans in a given market; and/or (2) an “indirect effect” due to rivals’ strategically lowering their
premiums to compete with United. We expect both effects to be larger in areas where United
would have been a more significant competitor on the HIMs. In areas where United had higher
pre-HIM market share in the individual insurance market, we can infer that its combination of
premium and product attributes was relatively attractive. Thus, its decision to stay out of the
market ought to have softened competition more considerably in these markets (the indirect
effect). If United’s premium tended to be on the low side in these markets as well, all else equal
we would also expect the direct effect to be larger in these areas. Our data on pre-HIM

12

These entry decisions are nonrandom. For example, Aetna's pre-exchange individual market share (per 2011
CCIO data, described below) was more than twice as high in the markets it entered as compared to those it did not.
Note that Aetna participates on seven exchanges using the Aetna brand name. In most other exchanges, it offers
plans under the brand name of Coventry, which it acquired in 2013.
13
Major plan acquisitions in the past decade include Oxford and Mid Atlantic Medical Services (MAMSI) in 2004,
PacifiCare in 2005, Sierra in 2008, and parts of HealthNet in 2009.

7

individual market premiums (described in Section 3 below) confirm that United’s relative rates
are lower in states in which they have a larger presence.14
Note that if United’s decision not to participate in a market provoked others who would not
otherwise have participated to do so—and if this is particularly likely where United had high preHIM share because the market opportunity is more substantial—then our estimated effects will
be downward-biased. Given the long application process associated with participating in the
first-generation FFMs, we believe this bias is likely to be small. For the same reason, the
indirect effect may also be low in the first year of the HIM operations, as rivals may not have had
ample time to adjust their premiums in light of United’s nonparticipation decision.
Figure 3 depicts a timeline for insurers’ applications and submissions to HIMs, along with
pertinent public statements United made about their participation plans. Per the Centers for
Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS), insurers had to submit their plan designs by the end of
March 2013 and premiums by May 3rd.15 However, there was likely some flexibility to adjust
premiums after that deadline, as in late June Kathleen Sebelius, secretary of the Department of
Health and Human Services (which oversees CMS), stated that rates were not yet finalized.16
The first public proclamation of limited participation by United appeared in January 2013,
when the Wall Street Journal reported that United was “expected to participate in 10 to 25 …
marketplaces … out of … 100.”17 As this total incorporates the small-business HIMs (SHOPs),
the implication is that United was expected to participate in 5–13 individual HIMs (out of the 51
HIMs, one in each state as well as Washington, DC). The article further quotes United’s CEO as
stating, “[United’s] level of interest in exchanges will be driven by how we assess each local
market—how the exchange and rules are set up state by state.” This statement foreshadows
United’s blanket decision to stay out of all the FFMs, which had uniform regulations. It is
therefore possible that some insurers accurately predicted United’s nonparticipation in at least
some states at this time.

14

Specifically, United’s relative price position (as measured by where its premium per member falls in the withinstate premium distribution) was lower in states where it had greater pre-exchange share.
15
http://www.cms.gov/CCIIO/Resources/Fact-Sheets-and-FAQs/Downloads/marketplace-timeline-narrative.pdf.
16
Sebelius asserted, “We will be negotiating rates across the country.” While HHS lacks the authority to “actively
negotiate” with plans (i.e., exclude plans if their rates are too high), HHS may have had other levers to negotiate
with insurers, and insurers would likely have been free to revise premiums downward at this point.
http://capsules.kaiserhealthnews.org/index.php/2013/06/sebelius-administration-is-negotiating-rates-in-federalexchanges/.
17
http://online.wsj.com/news/articles/SB10001424127887324468104578247332079234240.

8

On April 18th, 2013, a couple of weeks before HHS’s May 3rd Initial Qualified Health Plan
Submission Deadline, United’s CEO reiterated: “We will be very selective. … [We] do not
believe exchanges will be a significant factor … in our 2014 commercial market outlook.”
Given this statement occurred after the “participation deadline” of March 31 and before
premiums were finalized, this later announcement could have influenced pricing (the indirect
effect). Note, however, that even if rivals did not attempt to predict and incorporate United’s
decisions into their pricing decisions, the direct effect would still operate as a mechanism to
lower premiums.

2.3 Prior Research
2.3.1

Insurance Market Competition

This study builds on existing research on competition among private insurers. A number of
recent studies show that imperfect competition in various U.S. health insurance markets leads to
higher premiums. These include Starc (forthcoming) for the Medigap market, Starc and Ericson
(2012b) for the Massachusetts health insurance exchange, Dafny et al. (2012) for the large
employer market, and Guardado et al. (2013) for the fully-insured, small employer market.
Starc predicts that entry of a single additional large insurer would reduce the enrollmentweighted Medigap premium by 21 percent and expand the market by 50 percent. Starc and
Ericson build a model of consumer demand using enrollment data from the Massachusetts health
insurance exchange and simulate optimal insurer pricing under alternative competitive scenarios.
They find that pricing exceeds the levels predicted under perfect competition. Dafny et al.
(2012) quantify the impact of market concentration (as measured by HHI) on premium growth in
the large group segment, instrumenting for concentration using the predicted change in local
market HHI generated by a large, national merger in 1999. This merger had varying impacts on
local markets owing to differences in the market shares and geographic overlap of the merging
firms. They estimate premiums in the average market were approximately seven percentage
points higher by 2007 due to increases in local concentration between 1998 and 2006. Finally,
Guardado et al. (2013) use data on small-group premiums at the MSA-carrier level to study the
impact of a 2008 merger between Nevada’s 1st and 3rd-largest insurance carriers, United and
Sierra Health Services. As compared to plans in control MSAs (matched to the treatment MSAs

9

using propensity scores), metropolitan areas affected by the merger experienced premium
increases of 13.7 percent.
Our instrument is similar in spirit to that used by Dafny et al. We exploit variation in the
local impact of United’s national nonparticipation decision to identify the effect of exchange
market concentration on premiums. Whereas Dafny et al. study the effect of HHI on premium
growth, we have only one year of data and hence focus on premium levels. Our point estimates
are roughly one-third the size of those reported by Dafny et al. Because their estimate captures
the cumulative impact of changes in HHI over time, it is unsurprising that we find a smaller
single-year effect.

2.3.2

Exchange Research

As HIMs are a recent phenomenon, there is a limited amount of relevant prior research. We
briefly discuss the literatures on the three most direct predecessors to HIMs: the Massachussetts
Connector exchange, Medicare Advantage and Medicare Part D.
There are a number of recent papers examining the Massachusetts Health Connector, an
exchange established by the 2006 healthcare reforms in Massachusetts. In a series of papers,
Ericson and Starc study: (1) how changes in the degree of plan standardization required by the
exchange affected consumer choice, plans offered, and pricing (Ericson and Starc 2013b), (2)
what types of plans consumers choose (20% select the cheapest option; Ericson and Starc
2012a), and (3) the interaction between age-specific consumer price elasticities, imperfect
competition, and modified community rating (Ericson and Starc 2012b). Hackmann, Kolstad,
and Kowalski (2013) report that average costs and premiums per insured individual in
Massachusetts decreased following the imposition of the mandate to carry insurance coverage,
confirming adverse selection into the state’s individual insurance market prior to 2006.
Another predecessor of HIMs is the market for privately-provided Medicare plans, known
today as “Medicare Advantage”. Like HIMs, competition among plans can affect prices and
subsidies. Unlike HIMs, market participants compete against traditional Medicare, and often use
the same provider reimbursement rates as traditional Medicare. Medicare Advantage premiums
(after subsidies, which all Medicare eligible enjoy) cannot fall below zero. In addition, profit
margins are restricted. Thus, plans may provide beneficiaries with additional benefits beyond
those offered in traditional Medicare. Of greatest relevance to our work, a growing body of
10

evidence suggests that Medicare Advantage markets are imperfectly competitive, with a large
share of increases in government subsidies accruing to providers, rather than being competed
away through more generous enrollee benefits (See, for example, Song, Landrum and Chernew
2012; Song, Landrum and Chernew 2013; Cabral, Geruso and Mahoney 2013; and Duggan,
Starc and Vabson 2014).
There is a substantial and growing body of literature on Medicare Part D, a marketplace with
many similarities to the HIMs. In both settings, the government subsidizes purchases and creates
rules to manage how competition among firms takes place. This literature focuses heavily on
whether enrollees make good choices, how limitations in consumer decision-making affect firm
behavior, and how alternative choice architecture could improve consumer welfare. (See, for
example, Abaluck and Gruber 2011, 2013; Ericson forthcoming; Ketcham et al. 2012; Kling et
al. 2012; Lucarelli, Prince, and Simon 2012; Zhou and Zhang 2012; and Heiss et al. 2012).
Overall, the Medicare Part D literature suggests that even with robust entry, poor optimization by
enrollees mitigates the salutary effects of competition.

3. Data and Methodology
We draw on a number of sources to create a dataset of plans offered in the 395 ratings areas
(across 34 FFMs), along with measures of ratings-area-level market structure and local health
spending. Because United’s nonparticipation decision was uniform only across FFMs, we limit
attention to these. We also construct a dataset of enrollment and premiums at various units of
geography, depending on the source.

3.1 Key Dependent and Independent Variables
Data on plans were downloaded from the healthcare.gov website.18 The plan data contains
insurer identifiers, plan metal tier, ratings areas in which a plan is offered, and premiums for a
27-year-old. Our key dependent variable, 2LPS, is the premium for the second-lowest-price
silver plan in a ratings area. Plan premiums for other ages and family structures are a constant
percentage of the 27-year-old single premium.19
18

Source: https://www.healthcare.gov/health-plan-information/.
States had the opportunity to design their own state-specific age curves for defining how premiums would vary by
age. None in our sample did so.
19

11

We focus on the 2LPS for two reasons. First, federal subsidies are linked to the 2LPS in each
“ratings area,” the geographic market utilized on the HIMs. More specifically, subsidies are set
so that 2LPS minus the subsidy is no more than x% of income, where x ranges between 2 and 9.5
and increases with income as described in section 2. Those with household incomes above 400%
of the federal poverty line are not eligible for subsidies. Recently-released enrollment data from
the FFMs shows that 85 percent of enrollees in 2014 received government subsidies.20 The
Congressional Budget Office projects that 76 percent of HIM enrollees in 2020 will receive
subsidies, accounting for $93 billion of the $197 billion estimated cost of ACA’s coverage
expansions.21 Thus, 2LPS is a key driver of the overall costs of the ACA.
Second, there is evidence that the lower segment of the premium distribution is particularly
important to consumers. As noted above, Ericson and Starc (2012a) report that a substantial
number of consumers who purchased insurance on the Massachusetts exchange in 2007–2009
selected the least expensive plan. In 2014, 65 percent of FFM enrollees chose a silver plan, and
20 percent chose bronze plans.22 More pragmatically, given the number of plans, and our
inability to judge which of these will prove relevant in each marketplace, a measure like the
mean or median is less informative. For completeness, however, we also report results using
such measures.
Our key independent variable for measuring competition is

, a predicted Herfindahl–

Hirschman Index. Because the market is new, we must predict market shares in order to
compute a predicted HHI. To do so, we match insurers appearing in the FFM data with stateinsurer enrollment data (in the individual insurance market) for 2011. These data are collected
and reported by the Center for Consumer Information and Insurance Oversight (CCIIO) for the
purpose of enforcing the Minimum Loss Ratio (MLR) regulations.
as its share among those insurers who are

For insurer i in ratings area m, we define

active within that ratings area in the exchange, under the assumption that insurers split the
market proportionally to their ex ante (i.e., 2011) state shares. Based on the limited empirical
evidence available, it appears that pre-exchange shares are highly correlated with exchange

20

http://aspe.hhs.gov/health/reports/2014/MarketPlaceEnrollment/Apr2014/excel/workbook.xls
http://www.cbo.gov/sites/default/files/cbofiles/attachments/45231-ACA_Estimates.pdf
22
Ibid. 15 percent chose catastrophic, gold or platinum plans.
21

12

shares.23 This methodology gives new entrants a share of zero. (In Section 5.2, we discuss the
robustness of our results to alternative share allocations for entrants.) Denoting the set of
∑∈

, we construct

insurers in market m as
Next, we construct ∆

.

, the change in HHI resulting from United’s nonparticipation. The

predicted share of each insurer had United entered the market is denoted
predicted HHI is

. United’s share had it entered the FFMs is

insurers other than United,

.

, and the
. Note that for all

The increase in HHI from United’s

nonparticipation can then be expressed as:
∆

(1)
∆
(2)

∈

1

∈

The effect of increasing United’s share on ∆
∆
(3)

is:

2

This expression shows that, theoretically, United’s nonparticipation has a nonmonotonic effect
on ∆

. If United is very large and its competitors are all small, ∆
and can even become negative. As a practical matter, ∆

will decrease in
in our data is almost

always increasing in United’s share, and is only negative for one observation. We censor this
observation at zero in our main results; dropping it has little impact on the findings.
An alternative to ∆

is United’s pre-exchange share. The advantage of using HHI is

that it captures the relative importance of United’s rivals: a 10% United share matters more in a
23

Emerging evidence on exchange enrollment suggests that pre-exchange shares are good indicators of exchange
shares. The Huffington Post collected enrollment data for eight states (CA, CT, MA, MN, NV, NY, RI, WA).
Using their reported data (which excludes some small players) for states other than MA (which had an exchange
prior to 2011), we calculated predicted exchange market shares using 2011 CCIO data (and excluding United).
Insurers that entered in 2014 but were not present in 2011 are assigned a share of 0 in 2011. Insurers present in
2011 but not participating in the exchanges are excluded. The correlation between our predicted shares and the
actual 2014 shares was 0.63. (Data source: http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2014/01/27/health-insuranceobamacare_n_4661164.html.)

13

market with just one rival (∆

= 1800) than in a market with, say, 3 equally-sized rivals (each

with pre-exchange market share of 30 percent, yielding ∆

=533).

As a robustness check,

however, we also examine results using United’s pre-exchange share in place of ∆

.

3.2 Additional Controls
We supplement our dataset with a number of controls that may affect healthcare costs,
insurance preferences, or the competitive environment in a ratings area. The first of these
measures is hospital price, constructed using 2007–2009 hospital-level data from the Centers for
Medicare & Medicaid Services’ Healthcare Cost Report Information System (HCRIS) dataset.24
Hospitals account for roughly one-third of spending by private insurance plans, hence hospital
prices are a significant determinant of premiums. We follow the methodology in Dafny (2009),
which calculates price as the net inpatient revenue per case-mix adjusted, non-Medicare
admission.25 Although it would be preferable to exclude Medicaid admissions from this price
measure, as hospitals are paid largely fixed rates for these patients, the HCRIS data on Medicaid
revenues is exceedingly noisy.
Per Dafny and Ramanarayanan (2012), nonprofits with significant market share charge lower
premiums, ceteris paribus, than for-profits. We control for this by including the expected market
share of nonprofit insurers, Share NFP, using the same methodology to assign shares that we
used to calculate HHI. We account separately for the presence of a nonprofit CO-OP using a
dummy variable (which varies at the ratings-area level).26 Both Share NFP and CO-OP are
likely to be endogenous. However, the similarity of the results with and without controls
tempers concerns that their inclusion biases the effect of interest (i.e., how competition affects
price).
Last, we include a parsimonious set of demographic controls in our main specification: per
capita income for 2011 from the Bureau of Economic Analysis, and percent Black and percent
Hispanic from Census data. Although we considered many other demographic controls (such as
24

Cost Report estimates for hospital prices shift from year to year. For example, the non-Medicare admissionweighted correlation in prices for facilities in 2007 and 2009 is 0.73. We therefore pool three years (deflating to a
common year using the CPI) to improve the precision of our estimates.
25
We use each hospital’s Medicare Case-Mix Index (CMI) to adjust for admissions severity; non-Medicare CMI is
not reported. Critical Access Hospitals and other hospitals not paid under Medicare’s Prospective Payment System
are excluded from the sample.
26
Our methodology assigns zero share to entrants, hence the need for a separate variable. In addition, nonprofit COOPs are of independent interest as they are new entrants partially funded by government loans.

14

percent diabetic and percent uninsured) and market-level controls (such as area hospital market
concentration), and (as discussed in Section 5.2 below) the key results are robust to inclusion of
these controls, we did not retain them in our preferred specification for two reasons. First, the
coefficient estimates display classic signs of multicollinearity, and second, multiple demographic
controls absorb degrees of freedom that are particularly scarce in our falsification tests, which
rely on state and MSA-level data.
Notably, we present estimates excluding all controls to illustrate their impact on the results.
All regressions are weighted using the 2011 ratings-area population estimates as weights.27

3.3 Addressing Limitations of the Instrumental Variables Approach
To satisfy the exclusion restriction, our instrument must be correlated with predicted
exchange HHI, but uncorrelated with other determinants of premiums.28 There are two primary
mechanisms by which this assumption could be violated. First, United’s market share may itself
capture underlying market conditions in a way that is reflected in premiums. For example,
United may be able to compete more effectively in high-cost insurance markets where its ability
to negotiate tough deals with providers can be most valuable. To address this concern, we use
pre-HIM data to show that there is no pre-existing correlation between the instrument and
insurance premiums.
Ideally, we would like to have a measure of pre-exchange premiums for individual policies at
the ratings-area level. Unfortunately, these data do not exist. Therefore, we consider four
distinct alternatives, each with strengths and limitations.

We construct two measures of

premiums from the 2011 Medical Expenditure Panel Survey Insurance Component (MEPS-IC).
The first is the average estimated single enrollee (as opposed to family) premium for privatesector establishments.29 The MEPS-IC publishes this data for large MSAs and state “residuals”

27

The coefficients of interest are smaller, but remain statistically significant in unweighted models.
A sufficient condition for United’s non-entry to be an exogenous decision is for it to have been driven by United
having a particularly high fixed cost to entering any FFMs. If, by contrast, United’s non-participation was driven by
price shocks that were unobserved to the econometrician, then the fact that United chose not to enter but that Aetna,
Cigna and Humana did enter in some markets should lead us to update our priors about prices in markets in which
United had been dominant. Note that this source of endogeneity biases our estimates downward – i.e. if United
shunned all of the FFMs because of negative profit shocks to the markets in which it was likely to be dominant, then
we would expect lower prices in market which had been United heavy. To test for this possibility, we confirmed our
results are robust to excluding the states in which United had the most enrollees (i.e. larger states in which United
had had a presence, like Texas, Florida and Michigan).
29
The MEPS reports raw premiums without any case-mix adjustment.
28

15

(i.e., non-MSA areas). Therefore, the strength of this measure is that it is available at a relatively
fine level of geography; our 34 states contain 79 MEPS-IC markets.30 However, employer
premiums are imperfectly correlated with individual-market premiums—in spite of the fact that
both reflect local market cost and utilization trends—limiting the value of evidence that
employer premiums are uncorrelated with ∆

(the falsification exercise).31 Hence, we also

present results using the average estimated single enrollee premium for small employers only,
which is more closely linked to the individual market.32 The limitation of this second measure is
that it is only available at the state level, owing to MEPS-IC confidentiality restrictions.
Our third measure of pre-exchange premiums is the average 2011 individual market premium
by state, as reported by CCIIO. (This source is also used to calculate our pre-exchange market
shares, as described above.) This average premium is available for the most relevant market
segment (the individual market), but only at the state level. The fourth and final measure of
premiums comes from the Large Employer Health Insurance Dataset (LEHID) for 2009, the
most recent year for which we have this data. LEHID is a proprietary dataset containing
information on the health insurance plans (and associated premiums) offered by a sample of very
large employers. The details of this data, as well as its comparability with other sources, are
discussed in Dafny (2010). LEHID’s main strengths are that it is available at a relatively
disaggregated level of geography (our 34 states contain 98 LEHID markets),33 and that it
includes a rich set of variables we can use to control for plan and employee characteristics.
However, the data are older and reflect an even more distant market segment from the individual
market than the MEPS-IC all-employer sample.34

30

MSAs and ratings areas do not perfectly match. We assign each ratings area to the MSA with the highest share of
the ratings area's population. We follow the same procedure for assigning ratings areas to LEHID markets.
31
Most employer-sponsored plans are self-insured, whereas all individual plans are fully-insured. Self and fullyinsured plans are subject to different regulations and premium taxes, and market participants may differ across the
two segments. For more details, see Dafny et al (2012). The correlation between state-level employer premiums
and small employer premiums in the MEPS is 0.61.
32
Most small group plans are fully-insured, and therefore subject to the same regulations as individual policies. In
addition, state-level regulations regarding community rating (when present) are often the same for individuals and
small groups.
33
There are 139 geographic markets defined by LEHID. Most reflect metropolitan areas or non-metropolitan areas
within the same state (e.g. Chicago, Northern Illinois except Chicago, Southern Illinois), although a few cross state
boundaries.
34
To improve the precision of our estimates for ∆HHI, we pool LEHID data from 2007–2009 and include both self
and fully-insured enrollees when constructing insurer shares. When constructing LEHID premiums, we use only
2009 and only fully-insured enrollees, as the fully insured segment is more similar to the individual market than the
self-insured segment. The falsification results are not sensitive to this decision.

16

A second concern with our identifying assumption is that variation in ∆

comes not only

from variation across states in United’s individual insurance market share, but also from the
decisions of other insurers to participate on the HIMs in each ratings area. This arises from the
fact that United’s predicted share for each ratings area is defined as the ratio of its state-level
share to the sum of state-level shares of all insurers participating on the exchange in that ratings
area. The advantage of defining ∆

in this way (rather than using all insurers’ pre-exchange

state-level shares) is that it provides a more accurate estimate of United’s likely market share in a
ratings area. Some insurers are not active in all areas of a state, and this is likely a principal
driver of their decision not to participate on the HIMs in these areas. The disadvantage is that
participation may also depend on unobserved factors correlated with exchange premiums. For
example, more insurers may wish to participate in areas where HIMs are likely to attract healthy
enrollees, generating a spurious negative correlation between premiums and concentration. To
the extent that these confounding factors vary at the state level, state fixed effects will address
this concern. In Section 5.2, we confirm that the reduced-form coefficient of interest is indeed
robust to inclusion of state fixed effects.35
We also construct a measure of ∆HHI that mitigates concerns about the endogeneity of
within-state insurer participation decisions; this is accomplished by constructing insurer shares
using purely ex-ante data (i.e., not conditioning upon which incumbent individual market
insurers actually offered plans in a given market). We cannot rely on the CCIIO state-level data,
as doing so would result in only 34 unique values for ∆HHI (and correspondingly noisy
estimates). The MEPS-IC cannot be readily used to calculate insurer market shares, as there is
no data field identifying the insurance carrier for each plan. Hence, we utilize the LEHID data
(which, as previously noted, reflects the large group market) and data from InterStudy, a
proprietary source of insurer enrollment data by MSA.36 For both sources, we limit the data to
fully-insured private insurance plans.37 The LEHID data yields 98 unique market observations,
and the InterStudy data contains 79 MSAs.

35

Our preferred specifications do not include state fixed effects, however, as these absorb a significant amount of
the variation in ∆
.
36
We attempted to create additional observations for “state residuals.” However, most states have MSAs that cross
state boundaries, making it impossible to infer market shares for state residuals. Adding in the state residuals for
which this is not a problem does not substantively change the results.
37
The InterStudy data also contain enrollment for self-insured plans and commercial Medicaid. We examined
whether the results are robust to (1) including the self-insured lives, and (2) including Medicaid lives and adding a

17

3.4 Summary Statistics
Table 1 presents population-weighted summary statistics for the 395 ratings areas
(“exchange markets”) in FFM states. Exchange markets are highly concentrated: the average
number of insurers per market is only 3.9. Predicted HHIs are correspondingly very high, with
an average of 7,323, much greater than the DOJ/FTC threshold of 2,500 for “very concentrated.”
We caution that these HHIs are overstated because our methodology does not allocate share to
entrants (who do not appear in the CCIIO data). Nearly 30% of people live in markets with one
to two insurers, and half live in markets with three or fewer insurers.38 Despite the relatively
small number of insurers, most ratings areas feature a large number of plans: the mean is 50.9
(including all metal tiers), and 17.2 for silver plans only. The predicted share of nonprofit
insurers averages 61%. One in three markets contains a CO-OP.
Figure 4 is a histogram depicting the number of ratings areas with different ranges of ∆

.

The figure reveals that the predicted impact of United on market concentration is large and varies
significantly across markets. The population-weighted mean of ∆

is 1,644, which is similar

in magnitude to the change in HHI that would result from a transition from three to two evenly
sized firms.
Figure 5 presents information on the identities of the firms that offer one of the two lowest
silver premiums in exchange markets. The Blues offer the plurality of low-premium exchange
plans (57%), which is unsurprising given their high market shares in pre-exchange individual
insurance, low premiums, and near-universal participation in HIMs.39 As a first hint that COOPs are associated with lower 2LPS, we find they are often represented in the bottom two.
Significantly, for-profit incumbents (i.e., firms like United) offered 20% of these low-priced
plans.

separate control for Medicaid’s share of covered lives. In both cases, the main results remain qualitatively similar,
but the coefficient on ∆
ceases to be significant at conventional levels.
38
Because more populous markets tend to have more competitors, the average market is less competitive than the
population-weighted numbers suggest. The unweighted average number of insurers and HHI are 2.8 and 8,320,
respectively.
39
Dafny and Ramanarayanan (2012) find evidence suggesting the largest nonprofit Blues have lower premiums than
comparably sized for-profit Blues.

18

4. The Relationship between Market Structure and Prices

4.1 Are Prices Correlated with Market Structure?
We begin by examining whether 2

is correlated with our endogenous measure of

competition. More specifically, we estimate the following equation using data at the ratings-area
level:
2

(4)

.

is our estimate of market competition and

is a vector of optional controls, specifically

ln(Hospital Price), ln(Per Capita Income), Share NFP, CO-OP, Percent Black and Percent
Hispanic. All observations are weighted by the 2011 ratings-area population. Results from this
endogenous regression are presented in the first two columns of Table 2. The first column
excludes the control variables, while the second column includes them. In both specifications,
greater concentration is positively and significantly correlated with 2LPS. The results imply a
one-standard-deviation decrease in HHI (equal to 0.2, per Table 1, which is slightly larger than
the mean decrease in HHI that would result if United entered all ratings areas) is associated with
a reduction in 2LPS of 5.6–7.2 percent. Of course, given the endogeneity concerns raised above,
we are hesitant to place a causal interpretation on the findings.

4.2 Does Competition Have a Causal Effect on Premiums?
Next, we investigate whether competition has a causal effect on premiums. We posit that
United’s decision not to participate in any of the FFMs is a source of plausibly exogenous
variation in exchange market structure. We use
for

, as defined in Section 3.1, to instrument

. In the following three subsections, we (1) confirm that
; (2) show that

as an instrument for

is correlated with

is correlated with 2LPS; and (3) estimate equation 4 using
.

4.2.1 First Stage Model
To evaluate whether

is indeed predictive of changes in

following model:
(5)

19

, we estimate the

Results are presented in the third and fourth columns of Table 2, first excluding and then
including the controls described above. Across both specifications, changes in
into

translate

nearly one for one, and the coefficient estimates are highly statistically significant. A

number of the controls, such as income, racial composition, and share NFP, are significant
predictors of HHI.

4.2.2 Reduced Form
The reduced-form model relates exchange premiums to the instrument, i.e.,
2

(6)

.

The results, presented in the fifth and sixth columns of Table 2, imply that premiums are higher
in markets where United’s nonparticipation has a larger effect on predicted market competition.
For example, in a market with the median weighted
40

3.6 percent lower.

, we predict 2LPS would have been

The remaining variables enter with the expected signs. We discuss them

further in the following section.

4.2.3 Instrumental Variables
Finally, we estimate the IV regression
2

(7)
instrumenting for

with

,
. The results, presented in the final two columns of Table

2, suggest a meaningful impact of United’s nonparticipation on premiums. Given the first-stage
coefficient estimates are close to 1, the coefficients are very similar in magnitude to the reducedform estimates in the adjacent columns. The results are also fairly similar to the OLS results
from the first two columns, potentially mitigating endogeneity concerns with the OLS results.
To gauge the magnitude of the results, we examine how premiums would change under
two scenarios: (1) United enters all FFM ratings areas; and (2) all incumbent insurers enter all
FFM ratings areas in the states in which they offered individual insurance in 2011. Using the
coefficient in column (8) (the specification with controls) as our central estimate, we calculate
that population-weighted 2LPS would have been 5.4 percent lower under scenario (1) and 11.1
percent lower under scenario (2). We caution that the latter estimate requires making projections
40

Using the estimate of 0.293 from column 6 (the specification with controls), together with the median weighted
of 0.12, yields exp(0.293 *0.12)= 1.036

20

far out of sample, where the assumption of a linear effect of changes in HHI is less likely to be
valid.
The estimate for the effect of CO-OP on premiums is of independent policy interest. 2LPS is
8.1% lower in markets with CO-OPs; however, as we discuss in Section 5.2 below, CO-OP
location may be endogenous. The coefficients on the remaining controls enter with plausible
signs and magnitudes. A 1% increase in inpatient hospital prices is associated with a ~0.2% in
insurance premiums. This is the same proportion of private healthcare expenditures attributable
to inpatient care for privately insured, nonelderly patients.41
Our reduced form estimates combine the “direct” and “indirect” effects previously
described. To gauge the plausibility of our combined estimate and to attempt to disentangle the
two, we performed two different exercises. As a first exercise, we simulated the effects of
adding a randomly selected participant (from the set of all participants, in all ratings areas) as an
“entrant” into each ratings area.

We normalized the entrant’s premiums to account for

differences in the mean and variance of premiums across states, and we repeated the exercise
1,000 times to obtain average effects and standard errors. Details are provided in the Appendix.
The results suggest that adding a randomly-selected entrant to all markets reduces the weightedaverage 2LPS by 4.5 percent, on average. As a second exercise, we removed each of the three
largest FFM participants from the data and recalculated 2LPS. Arguably, these insurers are the
closest analogs to United. The resulting increases in 2LPS averaged 4.5 percent.42 Overall, these
results suggest that the magnitudes we obtain are sensible, and that the premium increases we
estimate could be driven entirely by the direct effect.

41

Figure is from the 2012 Health Care Cost and Utilization Report, Health Care Cost Institute, September 2013.
Removing Aetna (which participated primarily through its Coventry brand, which offers Medicaid HMOs), from
the calculation of 2LPS results in a weighted average increase in 2LPS (across the markets in which it participated)
of 2.5 percent. Removing Humana or Wellpoint (separately) increases weighted average 2LPS by 5.9 and 5.2
percent, respectively. A simple average across these estimates is 4.5 percent. We caution that the specific market
participation decisions of these insurers appear to be endogenous (see footnote 13), hence this exercise is largely
descriptive.
42

21

5. Robustness

5.1 Falsification Exercise
As noted earlier, there are potential concerns about the endogeneity of our instrument. In this
section, we present a series of falsification tests designed to examine those concerns.
Our first test documents that

is uncorrelated with pre-period premiums, which should

allay concerns that the share of the market held by United is correlated with omitted
determinants of exchange premiums. Pre-period premium data does not exist at the ratings-area
level. We therefore use several sources of premium data, some available at the state level, some
at roughly the MSA (and MSA residual) level, and one at the LEHID market level. Given the
higher level of aggregation (relative to the ratings area), our statistical tests will have lower
power, making it harder to reject the null of no correlation between

and pre-period

premiums. Hence, we compare the results from these regressions with those obtained from
estimating our primary reduced-form regression (equation 6) using the same geographical market
definitions. Table 3 presents these results. To increase the comparability of estimates across
different dependent and independent variables, we standardize both the dependent and
independent variables (by subtracting the mean and dividing by the standard deviation). All
specifications are weighted and include the set of controls from prior models.
Column (1) presents results using MEPS MSA-level data on premiums for employersponsored plans. Specification 1 (i.e., the top specification) examines whether our reduced-form
relationship between 2

and

from Column (6) of Table 2 is present when the data are

aggregated to the MSA level. The point estimate is smaller than our estimate from the ratingsarea data (i.e., 0.194 vs. 0.336), and statistically significant at p<0.10. In contrast, specification 2
(i.e., the bottom specification) contains no evidence of a statistically significant relationship
between MEPS employer premiums in the pre-period and

. The point estimate is near

zero, albeit with large standard errors. The difference between the coefficient estimates in
specifications 1 and 2 is not statistically significant at conventional levels.
Columns (2) and (3) repeat the same analysis using state-level pre-period premium data; as
discussed above, both the MEPS small-employer premium data and the CCIIO individual
insurance data are only available at the state level. Given the high level of aggregation, it is
unsurprising that the coefficients from specification 1 (while very similar in magnitude to that in
22

column 1) are not statistically significant at conventional levels in either column (2) or column
(3). For both dependent variables, the coefficient estimates from specification 2 are near zero,
although with 34 observations our standard errors are quite large and two-sided tests of
coefficient equality easily accept the null.
Column (4) repeats the analysis again using LEHID market definitions and premiums. The
LEHID specifications include controls for the underlying plan and enrollee characteristics.
These include plan design factor, which reflects the actuarial value of observed plans in the
relevant market, and demographic factor, a summary measure capturing characteristics of the
insured LEHID population (e.g. family size and gender).43
The point estimate in specification 1 is again two-thirds as large as our central estimate and
remains significant at p<0.10. The coefficient estimate on
zero; there is no evidence that

in specification 2 is again near

is significantly correlated with pre-period LEHID

premiums. Here, the coefficients from specifications 1 and 2 are distinguishable at p=0.16.
The other major concern raised above was that our instrument conditions on insurers who
choose to participate in state HIMs. To address this point, we turn to the LEHID and InterStudy
datasets, which allow us to construct measures of

using purely ex-ante estimates of market

share. Column (4) replaces only the dependent variable with premiums calculated from LEHID,
and utilizes the LEHID market as the unit of observation. Column (5) also replaces

with a

LEHID-based version that uses pre-exchange market shares for all incumbents. The point
estimates for specification 1 are virtually the same as those reported in Columns 1-4, although
the standard error is larger in column (5). In specification 2, there is no evidence that

is

correlated with pre-period LEHID premiums.
Finally, the last column of Table 3 uses

constructed from InterStudy MSA market

shares for all employers. We are only able to estimate specification (1), as we lack InterStudy
premium data. The coefficient estimate is similar in magnitude to the other columns and
statistically significant at p<0.10.
In summary, there is some evidence (albeit weaker and noisier) that
2

is correlated with

even when the data are aggregated to higher levels of geography. By contrast, there is no

evidence that

is correlated with pre-exchange premiums: the point estimates in the

43

We also include the market-level shares of plan types (Indemnity, Preferred Provider Organization, Health
Maintenance Organization, and Point of Service), as well as the share of plans denoted as “consumer-directed” (i.e.,
high-deductible plans).

23

falsification exercises in specification 2 are always near 0. However, the coefficients from the
exchange and pre-exchange periods are not statistically distinguishable from one another. We
also find that substituting our version of

with a measure that does not depend on

incumbents’ exchange participation decisions has little impact on the reduced-form point
estimates.

5.2 Robustness Checks
Table 4 presents results of our reduced-form equation using other measures of premiums: the
mean premium across all silver plans offered in a ratings area; the median premium across the
silver plans; and the mean of within-insurer mean silver premium (i.e., a mean calculated using
one observation per insurer, so as to avoid overweighting insurers with many plans). For this
analysis, we exclude the state of Virginia, which has some extreme premium outliers.44 The first
column presents the results obtained using this sample and our primary dependent variable,
2LPS. Our conclusions are robust to using these other dependent variables. The point estimates
are somewhat smaller, but the differences across specifications are not statistically significant.
There are a number of possible causes for the smaller estimated magnitudes obtained using these
alternative premium measures.
First, the alternative premium measures have smaller standard deviations than 2LPS,
suggesting that there is less variation to explain. Second, some of the variation in 2LPS is related
to the sheer number of plans offered in a ratings area. Even if plan premiums are in expectation
the same (e.g., drawn at random from the same distribution of prices), adding more plans will
lower 2LPS without affecting many other measures of premiums. Third, the coefficients could
be interpreted as evidence that the effect of stronger competition is particularly great for plans in
the low-priced silver segment. Finally, one may also infer that United’s larger impact on 2LPS
implies it has a greater direct than indirect impact on exchange premiums.
Table 4 also shows that CO-OPs are significantly related to 2LPS, but not to other measures
of premiums. We take this, along with the relatively large share (in Figure 5) of markets in
which CO-OPs are among the two lowest-price firms, as suggestive evidence that CO-OPs are
decreasing 2LPS more through the direct effect (i.e., by being one of the two lowest-price firms
44

Three Virginia insurers (Optima, Aetna, and Innovation Health) have premiums that are extreme outliers. The
mean silver premium (for a 27-year-old) across these three insurers is 885. This compares to a mean of 256 for the
rest of the country.

24

in the market) than indirect effect (i.e., they may not—in the first year—have inspired
competitors to reduce their premiums.) Due to the potential endogeneity of CO-OP locations,
and the lack of an instrument for their presence, the CO-OP results are merely suggestive.
Additional research on the impact of CO-OPs would be valuable, as the budget compromise of
January 2013 eliminated funding to support prospective CO-OPs and slashed funds for current
CO-OPs.45
Our results are robust to a series of other specification choices. In Appendix Table 1, we
present reduced-form results from models including several additional controls (measured at the
ratings-area level, except where otherwise noted), share of the population located in an urban
area, share obese, share diabetic, whether a state is expanding Medicaid, share aged less than 19,
share uninsured, Medicare fee-for-service spending per capita (to capture variation in utilization
of healthcare services), hospital market concentration, and 2011 state MLRs.

Variable

construction and sources are described in the notes to Appendix Table 1. Adding these additional
controls has a minimal impact on the coefficients of interest. In Appendix Table 2, we present
results from a series of other specification choices: (1) excluding HIMs w/ 5+ insurers; (2)
adding dummies for # of exchange insurers; (3) excluding the top and bottom 5% of ∆HHI; (4)
excluding the top and bottom 5% of 2LPS; (4) allocating entrants 5% share; (6) including state
fixed effects. The point estimates for the effect of ∆HHI on 2LPS range from 0.151 to 0.669,
with most remaining near 0.3 and all statistically significant at the 5% level. Finally, we also
estimate a reduced-form model replacing ∆HHI with United’s pre-exchange market share. This
alternative instrument is also a significant predictor of 2LPS (with p<0.01), but the implied effect
of United’s presence on 2LPS is smaller. The smaller estimated effect is expected given that
share is a less accurate indicator of United’s effect on market competition than predicted change
in HHI.

45

By December 2012, the federal government had awarded $2 billion in loans, out of $6 billion initially set aside by
ACA. In January 2013, Congress eliminated all but ~ $200 million of the remaining funds, and this sum was
designated to support the 24 CO-OPs already existing at that time. Thirteen of these CO-OPs offered plans in 2014.
Source: “Health Policy Brief: The CO-OP Health Insurance Program,” Health Affairs, February 28, 2013. Available
from: http://healthaffairs.org/healthpolicybriefs/brief_pdfs/healthpolicybrief_87.pdf.

25

6. Conclusion

In this study, we evaluate the impact of insurer participation and competition in the FFMs on
premiums. We find that exchange premiums are responsive to competition. To contend with the
endogeneity of exchange market structure, we exploit the decision by United to forgo
participation in the FFMs. This decision differentially impacted markets due to United’s preexchange market position.
We estimate that the population-weighted average second-lowest silver premium would have
been reduced by 5.4% had United entered all markets. If all insurers present in a state had
entered all ratings areas in that state’s exchange, we predict FFM premiums would have been
11.1% lower. We also find that markets with CO-OPs have lower premiums. A portion of this
association is attributable to a “direct effect” because CO-OPs are often among the two lowestprice silver plans in a market; their premiums directly lowered the weighted average 2LPS by 2.1
percent.46
The magnitude of the relationship between HHI and exchange premiums is roughly one-third
that obtained by Dafny et al. (2012) for the large-employer group market. Although the estimates
are not perfectly comparable (in particular, the Dafny et al. estimate reflects the cumulative
effect of changes in HHI on premium growth over a few years’ time), the similar order of
magnitude suggests that the competitive dynamic characterizing early exchange markets is akin
to that of the mature, but imperfectly competitive, large-group market. This suggests that HIMs
have not (to date) produced a Bertrand-like outcome in which a small number of players can
drive premiums down to cost.
Future entry, firm learning, consumer learning and greater plan standardization may change
this assessment. There is room for significant learning on both sides of this market. For example, over
time consumers are likely to learn how to better compare different plan attributes, like premiums,
actuarial value and network design. Tools to facilitate these comparisons and to help consumers prioritize
attributes will also improve. Changes in the shapes of consumer demand curves will in turn affect
pricing. Relatedly, insurers’ uncertainty about who their competitors will be, what the pool of consumers
will look like, and what kinds of products will be attractive to those consumers will resolve. While
impossible to sign definitively, most of these forces are likely to make the cross-price elasticities of
46

To obtain this estimate, we recalculated 2LPS without CO-OPs in the sample of markets with a CO-OP and
compared it to actual 2LPS.

26

demand across insurers higher for a given market structure. Under these circumstances, margins will
decline faster with a move from one to two insurers. Once pricing nears the competitive level, however,
additional competitors will have a smaller incremental effect.

Given the incipiency of these markets, this study is but a first step in what will surely become
a deeper and broader literature on insurance HIMs and the nature and significance of competition
among exchange participants. There is substantial room for further research on how competition
affects pricing and other outcomes in this market. Future studies will be easier to execute once
information about consumer enrollment decisions has been released, and once the market is in
longer-term equilibrium.

These conditions will allow researchers to apply well-established

supply-side methodologies to studying competition on the HIMs. Such research will permit
more-nuanced conclusions and recommendations regarding the impact of competition and
competition-related policies on various outcomes of interest. Given the large federal role in
developing and regulating the HIMs, and in subsidizing the purchase of plans offered on the
HIMs, research on how competition affects consumer choice and insurer behavior is of critical
importance.

27

References

Abaluck, Jason and Jonathan Gruber. 2011. “Choice Inconsistencies among the Elderly:
Evidence from Plan Choice in the Medicare Part D Program.” The American Economic
Review, 101(4): 1180–1210.
Abaluck, Jason and Jonathan Gruber. 2013. “Evolving Choice Inconsistencies in Choice of
Prescription Drug Insurance.” Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Capps, Cory S. 2009. “Federal Health Plan Merger Enforcement Is Consistent and Robust.”
November.
Cabral, Marika, Geruso, Michael and Neil Mahoney. 2013. "Does Medicare Advantage Benefit
Patients or Insurance Providers? Evidence from the Benefits Improvement and Protection
Act." Working Paper.
Dafny, Leemore S. 2009. “Estimation and Identification of Merger Effects: An Application to
Hospital Mergers.” Journal of Law and Economics. 52(3): 523–55
Dafny, Leemore S. 2010. “Are Health Insurance Markets Competitive?” American Economic
Review, 100(4): 1399–1431.
Dafny, Leemore, Mark Duggan, and Subramaniam Ramanarayanan. 2012. "Paying a Premium
on Your Premium? Consolidation in the US Health Insurance Industry." American
Economic Review, 102(2): 1161–85.
Dafny, Leemore S. and Subramaniam Ramanarayanan. 2012. “Does It Matter If Your Health
Insurer Is For-Profit? Effects of Ownership on Premiums, Medical Spending, and
Insurance Coverage.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 18286.
Dafny, Leemore S., David Dranove, Frank Limbrock, and Fiona Scott Morton. 2011. “Data
Impediments to Empirical Work on Health Insurance Markets.” B.E. Journal of
Economic Analysis & Policy. 11(2): Article 8.
Department of Health and Human Services, “Health Insurance Marketplace Premiums for 2014,”
ASPE Issue Brief, September 25, 2013.
28

Duggan, Mark, Starc, Amanda and Boris Vabson. 2014. "Who Benefits when the Government
Pays More? Pass-Through in the Medicare Advantage Program", NBER Working Paper
No. 19989.
Ericson, Keith M. Forthcoming. “Consumer Inertia and Firm Pricing in the Medicare Part D
Prescription Drug Insurance Exchange.”

American Economic Journal:

Economic

Policy.
Ericson, Keith M. and Amanda Starc. 2012a. "Heuristics and Heterogeneity in Health Insurance
Exchanges: Evidence from the Massachusetts Connector." American Economic Review,
102(3): 493–97.
Ericson, Keith M. and Amanda Starc, 2012b. “Pricing Regulation and Imperfect Competition on
the Massachusetts Health Insurance Exchange.” National Bureau of Economic Research
Working Paper No.18089.
Ericson, Keith M., and Amanda Starc. 2013a. “Designing and Regulating Health Insurance
Exchanges: Lessons from Massachusetts.” Inquiry, Winter 2012–2013.
Ericson, Keith M and Amanda Starc. 2013b. “How Product Standardization Affects Choice:
Evidence from the Massachusetts Health Insurance Exchange.” National Bureau of
Economic Research Working Paper No. 19527.
Guardado, Jose, David W. Emmons, and Carol K. Kane. 2013. “The Price Effects of a Large
Merger of Health Insurers: A Case Study of UnitedHealth-Sierra” Health Management,
Policy and Innovation, 1 (3) 16-35
Hackmann, Martin B., Jonathan T. Kolstad, and Amanda E. Kowalski.

2013. “Adverse

Selection and an Individual Mandate: When Theory Meets Practice.” National Bureau of
Economic Research Working Paper No. 19149.
Heiss, Florian, Adam Leive, Daniel McFadden, and Joachim Winter. 2012. “Plan Selection in
Medicare Part D: Evidence from Administrative Data.” Technical Report, National
Bureau of Economic Research.

29

Ketcham, Jonathan D., Claudio Lucarelli, Eugenio J. Miravete, and M. Christopher Roebuck.
2012. “Sinking, Swimming, or Learning to Swim in Medicare Part D.” The American
Economic Review, 102(6): 2639–2673
Kling, Jeffrey R., Sendhil Mullainathan, Eldar Shar, Lee Vermeulen, and Marian V. Wrobel.
“Comparison Friction: Experimental Evidence from Medicare Drug Plans.” The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(1): 199–235.
Lucarelli, Claudio, Jeffrey Prince, and Kosali Simon. 2012. "The Welfare Impact of Reducing
Choice in Medicare Part D: A Comparison of Two Regulation Strategies." International
Economic Review, 53(4): 1155–1177.Song, Zirui, Landrum, Mary B. and Michael E.
Chernew. 2012. “Competitive Bidding in Medicare: who Benefits from Competition?”
American Journal of Managed Care, 18(9): 546–552.
Song, Zirui, Landrum, Mary B. and Michael E. Chernew. 2013. “Competitive bidding in
Medicare Advantage: Effect of benchmark changes on plan bids,” Journal of Health
Economics, 32(6).
Spiro, Topher and Jonathan Gruber. 2013. “The Affordable Care Act’s Lower-Than-Projected
Premiums Will Save $190 Billion.” Available from:
http://www.americanprogress.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/10/SpiroACASavingsbrief.pdf.
Starc, Amanda. Forthcoming.

“Insurer Pricing and Consumer Welfare: Evidence from

Medigap.” RAND Journal of Economics.
Zhou, Chao and Yuting Zhang. 2012. “The Vast Majority of Medicare Part D Beneficiaries Still
Don't Choose the Cheapest Plans that Meet Their Medication Needs.” Health Affairs,
31(10): 2259–2265.
“2012 Health Care Cost and Utilization Report.” 2013. Health Care Cost Institute, Inc.
Washington, D.C.: HCCI, September, pp. 1–25. Available from:
http://www.healthcostinstitute.org/ files/HCCI_HCCUR2012.pdf.

30

“Health Policy Brief: The CO-OP Health Insurance Program.” 2013. Health Affairs, February
28. Available from:
http://healthaffairs.org/healthpolicybriefs/brief_pdfs/healthpolicybrief_87.pdf.

31

Appendix: Simulating the Effect of an Entrant of 2LPS

We performed a simulation exercise to determine the impact of introducing one entrant to
every market on weighted average 2LPS. Restated, we take each existing market, add an entrant,
and calculate the change in 2LPS. The exercise contains five steps:

1. We create a dataset containing the lowest silver premium offered by every insurer
participating in each ratings area (N=1,109). For each state, we then calculated the mean and
standard deviation of the distribution of participants’ lowest silver premiums.
2. We select an entrant for each of the 395 ratings areas by drawing 395 insurers from the
dataset of 1,109 insurer x ratings areas and then assuming that entrant made all of its silver
offerings available in the new market.
3. We re-normalized the entrant’s premiums so as to make them similar to the premiums in
state the insurer is entering (the “entering state”), rather than the state from which it was
drawn (the “home state”). More specifically, we studentize the entrant’s premiums by
subtracting the home state’s mean and dividing by the home state’s standard deviation
determined in step 1. We then renormalize the studentized premiums by multiplying by the
entering state’s standard deviation and adding the entering state’s mean determined in step
1.47
4. We recalculate 2LPS in each ratings area, and produce a weighted average change in 2LPS
across all 395 ratings areas.
5. We repeated steps 1-4 1,000 times.

As reported in the text, we find that adding a randomly-selected insurer to all markets decreases
the population-weighted 2LPS by 4.5 percent, on average. The 5th percentile of the distribution
of weighted average premium reductions is 3.8 percent, and the 95th percentile is 5.3 percent.
These numbers are relatively similar to our estimate of 5.4 percent for the effect of United’s nonentry, which as previously noted includes a (likely small) indirect effect.
47

Note that one could calculate a state mean and standard deviation from a number of different samples. We use the
sample of lowest premiums across insurers as our focus is on lower order statistics of premiums. For example, using
all silver premiums would overweight the significance of many plans that will not affect 2LPS and are unlikely to
attract enrollees.

32

Table 1: Summary Statistics for Federally Facilitated Marketplaces
Variable
Mean
St Dev
Min
Number of Insurers
3.9
2.0
1
Number of Plans
50.9
29.6
7
Number of Silver Plans
17.2
10.3
2
Price of 2nd Lowest Price Silver Plan (2LPS)
214
37
138
Under 65 Population
443,830
759,394
7,391
Income per Capita ($)
39,519
7,176
19,049
Hospital Price ($)
6,597
1,392
3,447
COOP Present on Exchange
0.33
0.47
0.00
Share Non-Profit
0.61
0.38
0.00
% Black
0.16
0.12
0.00
% Hispanic
0.15
0.15
0.01
United Market Share (if Participating in Exchange)
0.16
0.12
0.00
Predicted Exchange HHI (United is not participating)
HHI
0.73
0.20
0.32
Predicted Exchange HHI (if United were participating)
0.57
0.17
0.24
HHIplus United
Implied ∆HHI
∆HHI
0.16
0.11
0.00

Max
9
169
48
395
7,612,795
65,173
11,906
1.00
1.00
0.75
0.96
0.98
1.00
0.99
0.49

Notes: N=395. The unit of observation is the ratings area. There are 395 ratings areas in the 34 states with federally
facilitated marketplaces. Price for the 2nd Lowest Price Silver Plan is the individual premium for a 27 year old.
Premiums move proportionally with age. Hospital Price is defined as net revenue per case-mix adjusted discharge,
excluding Medicare revenues and discharges, per Dafny (2009). It is constructed using Medicare's HCRIS database.
For each ratings area, we use the discharge-weighted average of prices for hospitals located in the area. Share NonProfit is constructed using the 2011 individual insurance market shares of non-profit insurers participating in the
exchange, as reported by CMS' Center for Consumer Information and Insurance Oversight (CCIIO). Summary
statistics for variables other than population are reported on a population-weighted basis.

Table 2: Main Results
Endogenous
Regression

HHI

Dep Var =
ln(2LCS)
(1)
(2)
0.274*** 0.348***
(0.040)
(0.041)

∆HHI

Reduced Form

Dep Var =
HHI
(3)
(4)

Dep Var =
ln(2LCS)
(5)
(6)

0.954***
(0.081)

ln(Per Capita Income)

0.058
(0.045)
0.183***
(0.038)
-0.086***
(0.017)
-0.077***
(0.022)
0.156**
(0.064)
-0.087*
(0.052)

ln(Hospital Price)
COOP in Market
Share Non-Profit
% Black
% Hispanic

R-sq

First Stage

0.105

0.290

0.259

Instrumental
Variables
Dep Var =
ln(2LCS)
(7)
(8)
0.260*** 0.336***
(0.079) (0.083)

0.871*** 0.248*** 0.293***
(0.079)
(0.079)
(0.078)
-0.138***
0.009
(0.049)
(0.048)
-0.011
0.179***
(0.041)
(0.041)
0.022
-0.078***
(0.019)
(0.019)
0.157***
-0.023
(0.023)
(0.023)
0.241***
0.240***
(0.069)
(0.068)
-0.281***
-0.186***
(0.055)
(0.054)
0.398

0.025

0.185

0.055
(0.048)
0.183***
(0.038)
-0.085***
(0.018)
-0.075***
(0.024)
0.159**
(0.066)
-0.091
(0.056)
0.105

0.289

Notes: N=395. All regressions are weighted by the ratings-area population under 65, as reported by the U.S. Census. The
instrument for HHI is ∆HHI.
Standard errors in parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<.01

Source of Pre Period Premiums
Source of ∆HHI
Specification 1 (Confirmation
that main results persist):
Dep Var = ln(2LCS), studentized
∆HHI (Studentized)
Specification 2 (Falsification):
Dep Var = ln(Pre Period
Premiums), studentized
∆HHI (Studentized)

Number of Observations
Unit of Observation
P-value for H0: identical effect
of independent variable on both
dependent variables

Table 3: Reduced Form Falsification Exercise
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
MEPS, small
MEPS, all firms
firms
CCIIO
LEHID
CCIIO
CCIIO
CCIIO
CCIIO

(5)

(6)

LEHID
LEHID

N/A
InterStudy

0.149*
(0.089)

0.194*
(0.113)

0.174
(0.180)

0.174
(0.180)

0.188*
(0.101)

0.179
(0.170)

0.029
(0.113)

0.011
(0.147)

0.039
(0.159)

0.018
(0.061)

-0.033
(0.104)

79
MSA

34
State

34
State

98
LEHID Market

98
LEHID Market

0.30

0.48

0.58

0.16

0.30

248
Ratings Area

Notes: All regressions are weighted by the ratings-area population under 65, as reported by the U.S. Census.
MEPS MSA definitions break states into MSAs and state residuals (i.e., areas outside the MSAs).
All specifications include the controls in the even columns in Table 2. Regressions with a LEHID dependent variable also control for plan type shares, plan design
factor, and demographic factor. The standard errors in column 6 are clustered at the MSA level (196 clusters).
Standard errors in parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01

Table 4: Reduced Form
Effect of ∆HHI on ln(Prices)
(Robustness to Alternative Measures of Prices)
(1)
(2)
(3)

∆HHI
ln(Per Capita Income)
ln(Hospital Price)
COOP in Market
Share Non-Profit
% Black
% Hispanic

R-sq

(4)

Dep Var =
ln(2LCS)

Dep Var = ln(Mean
Premium)

Dep Var =
ln(Median
Premium)

Dep Var = ln(Mean
of Within-Insurer
Mean Premiums)

0.293***
(0.079)
-0.013
(0.053)
0.197***
(0.043)
-0.079***
(0.019)
-0.018
(0.024)
0.260***
(0.070)
-0.187***
(0.054)

0.162***
(0.057)
0.058
(0.038)
0.169***
(0.031)
-0.009
(0.014)
-0.032*
(0.017)
0.175***
(0.050)
0.070*
(0.039)

0.182***
(0.062)
0.097**
(0.041)
0.151***
(0.033)
-0.002
(0.015)
-0.051***
(0.019)
0.218***
(0.055)
0.131***
(0.042)

0.175***
(0.055)
0.061*
(0.037)
0.161***
(0.030)
-0.000
(0.013)
-0.018
(0.017)
0.105**
(0.049)
0.049
(0.038)

0.190

0.173

0.185

0.160

Notes: N=383. All regressions are weighted by the ratings-area population under 65, as reported by the U.S. Census.
Samples exclude Virginia, which has very large pricing outliers. When Virginia is included, specifications utilizing a
mean premium (i.e., columns 2 and 4) yield statistically insignificant coefficients on ∆HHI.
Standard errors in parentheses * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<.01

Figure 1: Few Insurers in Many Markets
25%

% of Markets

20%

15%

10%

5%

0%
1

2

3
4
Number
of
Exchange
Insurers
Notes: N=395. Histogram reflects population-weighted share of markets.

5

6

Figure 2: More Insurers Means Lower Premiums

Notes: Scatter plot reflects 395 ratings areas, with circle sizes corresponding to population. Figure also contains
weighted regression line and and 95 percent shaded confidence interval.

Figure 3: Could United have Affected Rivals' Pricing?

1

http://online.wsj.com/news/articles/SB10001424127887324468104578247332079234240.

2

http://www.healthreformgps.org/resources/cms-extends-qhp-application-deadline/

3

http://www.lifehealthpro.com/2013/04/18/unitedhealth-to-be-very-selective-exchange-user

4

http://www.cms.gov/CCIIO/Resources/Fact-Sheets-and-FAQs/Downloads/marketplace-timeline-narrative.pdf

5

http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2013-05-30/unitedhealth-spurs-obama-exchanges-as-rules-stall-profit.html

6

Sebelius asserted, “We will be negotiating rates across the country.” While HHS lacks the authority to “actively

negotiate” with plans (i.e., exclude plans if their rates are too high), HHS may have had other levers to negotiate with
insurers, and insurers would likely have been free to revise premiums downward at this point
http://capsules.kaiserhealth news.org/index.php/2013/06/sebelius-administration-is-negotiating-rates-in federalexchanges/

Figure 4: Predicted Impact of United's Decision
100
90
Population Weighted
Average ΔHHI = 1644

Number of Raings Areas

80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
0 to
500

500 to 1000 to 1500 to 2000 to 2500 to 3000 to 3500 to 4000 to >4500
1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 35000 4000 4500
ΔHHI

Notes: N=395

Figure 5: Identity of 1st and 2nd Lowest-Priced Silver Insurers, by Category

NFP Blue
354

FP Blue
93

Incumbent
Notes: N=790

FP
157

NFP
53

COOP Other
97
36

Entrant

HHI
∆HHI
ln(Per Capita Income)
ln(Hospital Price)
COOP in Market
Share Non-Profit
% Black
% Hispanic
% Urban
% Obese
% Diabetic
Medicaid Expansion
% Less than 19
% Uninsured
ln(Medicare FFS)
HHI (Hospital)
MLR bite

R-sq

Appendix Table 1: Robustness To Inclusion of Extra Controls
Endogenous
Regression
First Stage
Reduced Form
Dep Var =
Dep Var =
Dep Var =
ln(2LCS)
HHI
ln(2LCS)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
0.348*** 0.283***
(0.041)
(0.044)
0.871*** 0.884*** 0.293*** 0.260***
(0.079)
(0.077)
(0.078)
(0.079)
0.058
0.195*** -0.138*** 0.263***
0.009
0.269***
(0.045)
(0.067)
(0.049)
(0.067)
(0.048)
(0.069)
0.183*** 0.206***
-0.011
0.050
0.179*** 0.220***
(0.038)
(0.037)
(0.041)
(0.038)
(0.041)
(0.039)
-0.086*** -0.079***
0.022
0.048** -0.078*** -0.067***
(0.017)
(0.020)
(0.019)
(0.020)
(0.019)
(0.021)
-0.077*** -0.093*** 0.157*** 0.164***
-0.023
-0.046**
(0.022)
(0.022)
(0.023)
(0.022)
(0.023)
(0.023)
0.156**
0.252** 0.241*** 0.265** 0.240*** 0.328***
(0.064)
(0.101)
(0.069)
(0.103)
(0.068)
(0.106)
-0.087* -0.308*** -0.281*** -0.017
-0.186*** -0.312***
(0.052)
(0.096)
(0.055)
(0.097)
(0.054)
(0.099)
-0.294***
-0.413***
-0.411***
(0.067)
(0.065)
(0.067)
-0.841*
-1.227**
-1.200**
(0.494)
(0.512)
(0.522)
-1.129
4.262***
0.071
(1.244)
(1.249)
(1.275)
0.029
-0.006
0.027
(0.019)
(0.020)
(0.021)
1.284***
1.347***
1.670***
(0.417)
(0.424)
(0.433)
0.898***
0.342
0.991***
(0.315)
(0.321)
(0.327)
0.225***
-0.294***
0.141*
(0.075)
(0.075)
(0.077)
0.141***
0.135***
0.178***
(0.039)
(0.040)
(0.041)
0.518***
0.464**
0.650***
(0.190)
(0.193)
(0.197)
0.290

0.388

0.398

0.548

0.185

0.339

Instrumental Variables
Dep Var =
ln(2LCS)
(7)
(8)
0.336*** 0.294***
(0.083)
(0.084)

0.055
(0.048)
0.183***
(0.038)
-0.085***
(0.018)
-0.075***
(0.024)
0.159**
(0.066)
-0.091
(0.056)

0.192***
(0.070)
0.205***
(0.037)
-0.081***
(0.021)
-0.094***
(0.023)
0.250**
(0.099)
-0.307***
(0.094)
-0.290***
(0.072)
-0.839*
(0.484)
-1.182
(1.267)
0.029
(0.019)
1.274***
(0.413)
0.890***
(0.313)
0.228***
(0.075)
0.138***
(0.042)
0.514***
(0.188)

0.289

0.388

Notes: N=395. All regressions are weighted by the ratings-area population under 65, as reported by the U.S. Census. The
instrument for HHI is ∆HHI. The odd columns are reproduced from Table 2. Additional controls are from the most recent year of
data available. % Urban is derived from the 2010 Census Urban and Rural Classification data. % Obese and % Diabetic are from
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention for 2010 and 2009, respectively. The state Medicaid expansion indicator is from
the Kaiser Family Foundation. % Less than 19 refers to the under-65 population in 2011, and is obtainted from the U.S. Census.
% Uninsured is from the Census's 2010 Small Area Health Insurance Estimates and refers to the population under 65. Combined
Part A and B spending per Medicare Fee For Service enrollee is from 2011 data reported by the Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid Services. HHI (Hospital) is calculated using 2011 American Hospital Association ownership data, combined with nonMedicare discharge data from the 2011 HCRIS data. MLR bite is equal to 0.85 minus the state's Medical Loss Ratio, calculated
using 2011 state MLR data. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<.01

∆HHI

Explanation
N
R-sq

Appendix Table 2: Robustness Checks of Reduced Form Model
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
0.293***
0.296***
0.187**
0.358***
0.151**
(0.078)
(0.087)
(0.078)
(0.099)
(0.061)

Original
395
0.185

Excludes
Adds dummies Excludes 5%
ratings areas
for # of firms tails of ∆HHI
with 5+ firms
343
395
367
0.166
0.290
0.162

Excludes 5%
tails of
ln(2LPS)
357
0.120

Notes: All regressions are weighted by the ratings-area population under 65, as reported by the U.S. Census.
Standard errors in parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<.01

(6)
0.422***
(0.089)

(7)
0.659***
(0.141)

Give entrants
5% share

State FEs

395
0.202

395
0.706

