                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   DOES FINANCING SPUR SMALL BUSINESS PRODUCTIVITY? EVIDENCE FROM
                        A NATURAL EXPERIMENT

                                           Karthik Krishnan
                                           Debarshi Nandy
                                             Manju Puri

                                         Working Paper 20149
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w20149


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2014




We would like to thank seminar participants at the 2013 Boston Area Finance Symposium, the 2013
CAFRAL Conference on Contemporary Issues in Banking and Finance, the 2013 FIRS annual meetings,
the 2013 NBER Productivity, Innovation, and Entrepreneurship meetings, the 2013 SFS Cavalcade,
Brandeis University, Duke University, Northeastern University, and Virginia Tech. Karthik Krishnan
gratefully acknowledges summer research support provided by the D’Amore-McKim School of Business.
The research presented in this paper was conducted while the authors were Special Sworn Status Researchers
at the Boston Research Data Center (RDC) of the U.S. Census Bureau. The research results and conclusions
expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily indicate concurrence of the U.S. Census Bureau
or the National Bureau of Economic Research. All results in this paper have been reviewed to ensure
that no confidential information is disclosed. Any errors and omissions are the responsibility of the
authors.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Karthik Krishnan, Debarshi Nandy, and Manju Puri. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Does Financing Spur Small Business Productivity? Evidence from a Natural Experiment
Karthik Krishnan, Debarshi Nandy, and Manju Puri
NBER Working Paper No. 20149
May 2014
JEL No. G21

                                             ABSTRACT

We analyze how increased access to financing affects firm total factor productivity (TFP) by exploiting
a natural experiment following interstate banking deregulations which increased access to bank financing.
We find that firms' TFP increases after their states implement these deregulations. Using a regression
discontinuity approach based on Small Business Administration’s funding eligibility criteria, we show
that TFP increases following the deregulations are significantly greater for financially constrained
firms. Our results suggest that greater access to financing allows financially constrained firms to invest
in productive projects that may otherwise not be taken up.


Karthik Krishnan                                    Manju Puri
Northeastern University                             Fuqua School of Business
D'Amore-McKim School of Business                    Duke University
Hayden 413, 360 Huntington Avenue                   1 Towerview Drive, Box 90120
Boston, MA 02115                                    Durham, NC 27708-0120
k.krishnan@neu.edu                                  and NBER
                                                    mpuri@duke.edu
Debarshi Nandy
International Business School
Brandeis University
415 South Street
Waltham, MA, 02454
dnandy@brandeis.edu
Does Financing Spur Small Business Productivity? Evidence from
                                  a Natural Experiment


1    Introduction

Access to adequate …nancing is an important issue for …rms, particularly for younger and smaller

entrepreneurial …rms. Given the important role that small businesses and entrepreneurial …rms

play in the process of creative destruction - it is not surprising that alleviating …nancial constraints

for entrepreneurial start-ups and small business is an important policy concern across the world.

More recently, the …nancial crisis of 2008 clearly demonstrated how critical access to bank …nancing

is, at both the …rm and economy-wide levels. While prior studies have shown how availability of

…nancing a¤ects entrepreneurial …rm starts and closures (e.g., Black and Strahan (2002), Kerr and

Nanda (2009)), no study has directly analyzed the link between increased access to bank …nancing

and …rm productivity, particularly for smaller …rms where access to …nancing is critical. This is

important given the result in a recent paper by Robb and Robinson (2013) that, counter to existing

wisdom, most start-ups rely heavily on some form of bank-debt …nancing.

    There are two important limitations that studies relating increased bank …nancing to …rm pro-

ductivity need to overcome. First, bank …nancing is considerably more important for private …rms,

and data on the performance of such …rms is not easily accessible. Second, reverse causality and

endogeneity issues hinder proper interpretation of regression coe¢ cients relating increased access of

bank …nancing to …rm productivity. A positive relation between increased access to bank …nancing

and productivity can be interpreted in di¤erent ways. One interpretation is that more productive

…rms seek additional bank …nancing. Another interpretation is that increased access to bank …-

nancing can enhance productivity of …rms. Yet another alternative interpretation is that there are

potentially unobservable factors which might a¤ect both access to …nancing and productivity. Dis-

entangling these e¤ects requires a natural experiment setting where one can consider an exogenous

shift in the availability of bank …nancing.

    In this paper, we exploit such a natural experiment and contribute by analyzing how an increase

in access to bank …nancing following interstate bank branching deregulations a¤ects the productivity

of …rms in the United States. We overcome the data availability issue described above by using data


                                                   1
on private and public manufacturing …rms from the U.S. Census Bureau’s Longitudinal Research

Database (LRD). This database contains detailed data for small and large manufacturing …rms in

the U.S. over a long time-series from 1976 to 2005, which allows us to calculate productivity and

performance measures at the …rm level. We deal with the reverse causality concern by exploiting

an exogenous shift in …rms’ access to bank …nancing as a result of interstate bank branching

deregulations. In particular, over the 1990s, U.S. states began allowing out-of-state banks to set up

and acquire local bank branches. This shift led to an overall increase in interstate banking and thus

allowed greater access to …nancing for …rms. Consistent with the prior literature (e.g., Rice and

Strahan (2010)), which has shown that these deregulations were exogenous, we also show that these

deregulations were not driven by the prior productivity of …rms. In our main analyses, we utilize

a regression discontinuity (RD) framework that distinguishes between …nancially constrained and

unconstrained …rms. We argue that private …rms that are just above or just below the threshold

for …nancial support from the U.S. Small Business Administration (SBA) are similar in all respects

except for the degree of …nancial constraint they face. Since …rms that are just above the threshold

are not eligible for SBA funding, they are more …nancially constrained relative to those just below

the threshold. This allows us to analyze the causal impact of …rm …nancial constraints on the

relation between access to …nancing and productivity.

       Rice and Strahan (2010) suggest that the interstate banking deregulations in the U.S. reduced

the cost of …nancing. A natural question that follows is whether this increased access to cheaper

bank …nancing following the deregulations is dissipated by …rms taking on unproductive or less

productive pet projects or whether this increases …rms’ability to undertake additional productive

projects that they were unable to take on prior to the deregulation.1 We use total factor productivity

(TFP) of …rms as our metric of analysis to address this question. Since our measure of total factor

productivity re‡ects the di¤erence between expected output, given the technology in place, and

the actual output produced by the …rm, gains in productivity as a result of increased access to

…nancing is not simply a result of increase in the scale of operations, but rather the result of access

to additional productive projects that allows a …rm to become more e¢ cient. Thus, increased

access to …nancing should therefore lead to the highest increase in productivity for those …rms that
   1
    Note that throught this paper, increased access to …nancing refers to both access to greater volume of bank loans
as well as bank …nancing at more favorable terms.



                                                         2
were initially …nancially constrained.

   We start by investigating whether …rms in states that implement the Interstate Banking and

Branching E¢ ciency Act of 1994 (IBBEA) and deregulate interstate banking within their borders

to a greater extent achieve higher productivity. Similar to several other papers that have used the

LRD database to study various corporate events (see, e.g., Schoar (2002), Maksimovich, Philips,

and Prabhala (2011), Chemmanur, Krishnan, and Nandy (2011)), we use total factor productivity

(TFP) as our measure of …rm e¢ ciency. TFP measures the residual growth in a …rm’s output

after accounting for the growth in output attributable to the various factors of production and the

production technology in place.

   We …rst show that the number and out-of-state ownership of bank branches increased in states

following the interstate bank branching deregulation, supporting our premise that in deregulating

states, the IBBEA led to an increase in access to bank …nancing. Following Rice and Strahan

(2010), we create a variable called Deregulation index, which increases with the extent of interstate

branching deregulation in a state. We then show that productivity of …rms increases in those

states that allow greater interstate banking within their borders (i.e., have a greater value for

Deregulation index). This result is robust to controlling for various state, …rm, and industry level

control variables. We show that the increase in TFP is not due to a trend e¤ect, i.e., TFP is

‡at in the periods immediately prior to the interstate bank branching deregulations. Further, our

main results disappear in placebo tests where we check whether TFP increases when we assume

the deregulation to start one year prior to or one year after the actual deregulation year. As an

additional robustness test, we also conduct our analysis using alternative measures of performance

such as labor productivity and sales growth and …nd qualitatively similar results to the ones we

…nd using the TFP measure.

   We then investigate the mechanism through which increased access to …nancing leads to greater

TFP. Using a sharp regression discontinuity (RD) approach, we test whether …rms that are close

to but do not satisfy the eligibility criteria for alternative funding sources; in particular, support

from the Small Business Administration (SBA), experience a greater increase in the average 3-year

TFP after the bank branching deregulations than …rms that just satisfy the eligibility criteria.

The U.S. Small Business Administration (SBA) provides a number of …nancial assistance programs



                                                  3
for small businesses.2 We exploit the fact that the SBA provides …nancial support to …rms up

to a certain size cuto¤ as a way to distinguish …rms that are more …nancially constrained from

those that are less …nancially constrained. For manufacturing …rms, the size cuto¤ is a prespeci…ed

level of employment that varies with the …rm’s North American Industry Classi…cation System

(NAICS) industry a¢ liation. We restrict our attention to the set of …rms that have employment

within 10 percent of this cuto¤ level (where employment is measured immediately prior to the

interstate bank branching deregulation in the …rm’s state). The advantage of this restriction is

that …rms just above and just below the SBA threshold are unlikely to di¤er substantially in

terms of other characteristics but di¤er in terms of their access to SBA …nancing. In particular,

…rms just above the SBA employment threshold are ineligible for SBA funding and are thus more

…nancially constrained relative to …rms just below the SBA employment threshold. It follows that,

if productivity increases following bank branching deregulations are primarily driven by …rms that

are …nancially constrained, then TFP increases for …rms just above the SBA threshold should be

greater than TFP increases for …rms just below the SBA threshold after the deregulation.

       Our results for sharp RD analysis are consistent with this expectation. We …nd that …rms

ineligible for SBA support indeed experience a greater increase in the average TFP from before to

after interstate bank branching deregulations compared to otherwise similar …rms that are eligible

for SBA support. This test therefore provides strong support for the argument that …nancially

constrained …rms bene…t the most from increased access to …nancing. Further, since the control

…rms (SBA eligible …rms) are similar to the set of treatment …rms (SBA ineligible …rms) that are

…nancially constrained (since we look at a narrow 10% band around the employment eligibility

criterion), this methodology provides additional assurance that our results are not driven by other,

potentially unobservable, di¤erences between …rms. We also conduct this analysis with the set of

…rms whose employment is within 30% of the SBA employment threshold, within 50% of the SBA

employment threshold, as well as our entire sample, and obtain similar results to those described

here. Further, we also conduct our sharp RD analysis in a non-parametric framework (e.g., Imbens

and Lemieux (2008) and Imbens and Kalyanaraman (2012)) and …nd similar results to those using

the regression framework described above.
   2
    In 2006, the total value of …nancial support provided by the SBA to small businesses was $78.1 billion, which
grew to $90.45 billion in 2009, indicating that the SBA represents a signi…cant source of …nancial support for smaller
…rms.See http://www.sba.gov.


                                                          4
    Second, we employ a "quasi" regression discontinuity methodology, where we test, in a panel

data setting, whether the relation between the extent of interstate bank branching deregulation

(i.e., Deregulation index) and …rm level TFP is a¤ected by …rm …nancial constraint (proxied by

SBA eligibility). Unlike the sharp RD test described above, the quasi RD test is a di¤erences-

in-di¤erences approach that interacts our Deregulation index with a dummy variable for …rms

being above the SBA threshold at the time of the deregulation in their state. The bene…t of this

methodology is that, unlike the sharp RD analysis, we can utilize the cross-state variation in the

extent of interstate bank branching deregulation in the state of the …rm. Moreover, we can conduct

this test in a panel setting rather than in a cross-sectional setting of the sharp RD analysis. Our

quasi-RD anlaysis results are consistent with those of the sharp RD analysis. In particular, …rms

just above the SBA eligibility threshold experience higher TFP increases in states with a greater

extent of interstate banking deregulation, whereas …rms just below the SBA eligibility threshold

do not. For both the sharp and quasi RD analyses, we conduct a variety of robustness checks,

including controlling for di¤erent powers of the assignment variable, and conducting placebo tests

by falsifying the discontinuity point. Our results are robust to these tests.

    We also use …rm size measured immediately prior to the deregulation as another proxy for

…nancial constraint. We use various size measures for this analysis, including sales (total value

of shipments), assets (capital stock), and total employment. We …nd that the positive relation

between the extent of bank branching deregulations in a state and …rm TFP is stronger for smaller

…rms, consistent with the idea that …rms that are more …nancially constrained bene…t the most

from increased access to …nancing.3 To dig deeper into whether …nancial constraints are indeed

driving our results, we test whether our TFP results are stronger for …rms in industries that are

more …nancially constrained. We measure industry level …nancial constraint based on the mea-

sure suggested by Rajan and Zingales (1998). This measure is based on a free cash ‡ow measure

calculated using Compustat at the industry level. We …nd that industries classi…ed as more depen-

dent on external …nance experience substantially greater increases in TFP for …rms in states with

greater extent of interstate bank branching deregulation than industries classi…ed as less dependent

on external …nance.
   3
     These results are consistent with those in Rice and Strahan (2010), who …nd that deregulation of interstate bank
branching restrictions is associated with a higher probability that small …rms borrow from banks.




                                                         5
       We are one of the …rst studies in the literature to address whether increased access to …nancing

has a causal e¤ect on …rm-level TFP growth.4 There is a vast literature which has looked at

whether …nance creates productivity growth (e.g., Hicks (1969)) or follows growth (e.g., Robinson

(1952)), but since …nance and growth are endogenously determined, identifying the direction of

causality has been a major hurdle in this literature. We address this by exploiting the interstate

bank branching deregulations as a natural experiment. Existing literature that has utilized banking

deregulations have analyzed entrepreneurship and startup activity (Black and Strahan (2002), Kerr

and Nanda (2009)), growth within a country (Jayaratne and Strahan (1996), Guiso, Sapienza, and

Zingales (2004)), access to credit (Cetorelli and Strahan (2006)), loan pricing (Rice and Strahan

(2010)), and allocation of credit between poor and better performing …rms (Bertrand, Schoar, and

Thesmar (2007)).5 ’6 Our results add to these studies by causally establishing that greater access to

…nancing leads to higher …rm level TFP, particularly for …nancially constrained …rms. The banking

deregulations alleviated such constraints leading to an increase in their TFP.

       A related strand of literature has documented how access to particular types of …nancing such

as venture capital and angel …nancing can impact the survival and productivity of small and

entrepreneurial …rms (e.g., Puri and Zarutskie (2012), Chemmanur, Krishnan, and Nandy (2011),

Kerr, Lerner, and Schoar (2013)). These papers show that for young startup …rms, access to VC

or angel …nancing can a¤ect productivity and the lifecycle of these …rms. However, only a small

proportion of startups get VC or angel …nancing. Our paper shows that increased access to bank

…nancing is important in a¤ecting the productivity of smaller and …nancially constrained …rms.

This is crucial from a policy perspective if the objective is to promote the growth of startups

especially given that most young …rms rely heavily on bank …nancing (Robb and Robinson (2013)).
   4
      A notable exception is Bertrand, Schoar, and Thesmar (2007) who show that improvements in performance of
French …rms followed after the government reduced state intervention in banking and reduced subsidized loans for
poorly performing …rms. However, our results are primarily driven by a positive shock to credit availability which led
to increased competition in banking as a result of the interstate bank branching deregulation in the U.S., rather than
due to the abolition of subsidized credit availability to poor quality borrowers as in Bertrand, Schoar, and Thesmar
(2007).
    5
      Also related to this broad literature, Butler and Cornaggia (2011) analyze how …nance a¤ects agricultural pro-
ductivity. They …nd a large shift in corn productivity of farmers in response to the ethanol-induced shift in demand,
and that this productivity improvement was most pronounced in counties with high levels of bank deposits.
    6
      Fracassi, Germaise, Kogan, and Natividad (2013) analyze business microloans for U.S. subprime borrowers in a
regression discontinuity framework. They …nd that the ability to obtain loans increases …rms’ survival probability,
sales, and job creation rate. Unlike us, however, they do not analyze productivity and performance of …rms following
greater access to …nancing. Further, unlike us, they do not analyze how …nancial constraints a¤ect the impact of
access to …nance on productivity.



                                                          6
        Another strand of literature uses international data to assess the role of …nance in development

and growth. Rajan and Zingales (1998) use cross-country data and …nd evidence consistent with

the idea that …nancial development promotes economic growth for industries that are more depen-

dent on external …nance. Levine, Loayza, and Beck (2000) …nd that a greater extent of …nancial

intermediation in a country has a positive e¤ect on economic growth. Guiso, Sapienza, and Zin-

gales (2004) use Italian data to show that better developed …nancial markets in a geographic region

in Italy leads to greater startup activity by younger entrepreneurs and leads to greater economic

growth in that region. We add to the …ndings of this literature by showing …rm-level productiv-

ity improvements following increased access to …nancing in the U.S. Finally, this paper is related

to the broader literature on …nancing constraints of …rms (e.g., Fazzari, Hubbard, and Peterson

(1988), Kaplan and Zingales (1997, 2000), Moyen (2004), Denis and Sibilkov (2010), and Denis and

McKeon (2012)).



2        Interstate Banking Regulations in the U.S.

Various regulations in the US restricted intra as well as interstate banking dating back to the

19th century. The McFadden Act of 1927 restricted cross-state banking and state level regulations

prevented banks from intra-state expansions. Although banks tried to get around these regulations

by forming multi-bank holding companies (MBHCs), the Douglas Amendment to the 1956 Bank

Holding Company (BHC) Act e¤ectively prevented banks’ expansion across state borders, unless

states explicitly permitted such expansion. However, states gradually dismantled these restrictions

and many states had laws in place allowing interstate banking by 1992, which primarily took the

form of allowing out-of-state banks to buy in-state banks. However, interstate bank branching was

still not allowed until the passage of the Interstate Banking and Branching E¢ ciency Act of 1994

(IBBEA).7

        The passage of IBBEA e¤ectively permitted bank holding companies to operate branches across

state lines. However, states were given the ability to erect roadblocks to branch expansion, e¤ec-

tively allowing states to dissuade interstate branching based on the following four dimensions.
    7
    See Kerr and Nanda (2009) and Rice and Strahan (2010) for detailed descriptions of banking regulations in the
U.S. over this period.




                                                       7
   1. Age restriction: States could require that a bank seeking to enter its boundaries should have

         existed for a minimum number of years, subject to a maximum restriction of 5 years.

   2. De novo interstate branching restriction: States could disallow de novo interstate bank branch-

         ing.

   3. Individual branch acquisition restriction: States could make interstate acquisition of banks

         more di¢ cult by requiring that all branches of an in-state target bank be acquired by an

         out-of-state bidder bank.

   4. Statewide cap on deposits restriction: States could restrict the fraction of deposits an out-of-

         state bank could acquire in that state. The IBBEA originally set this restriction on deposit

         concentration at 30%, but states have the discretion to increase or decrease the cap.


       These provisions provided states with tools to e¤ectively constrain interstate bank branching.

Many states successfully utilized these provisions to bar out-of-state banks from setting up branches

within their borders. The IBBEA was passed in 1994, but states had the discretion to set up their

interstate bank branching regulations under the IBBEA anytime before 1997. As a result, these

deregulations were implemented in a staggered manner, thereby allowing us to exploit them to ana-

lyze how an increase in access to …nancing as a result of these deregulations a¤ect the productivity

and performance of …rms. Following Rice and Strahan (2010), our primary measure of deregulation

is Deregulation Index, which is a measure of the extent of deregulation of interstate bank branching

in a state. The index can take values between one to …ve, one being the least deregulated, i.e.,

where all four restrictions described above were placed to prevent interstate branching; and …ve

is the least restricted, where none of the restrictions were placed. This index increases by one if

the restriction decreases by one (of the four described above). In particular, we add one to this

index if the state does not impose a minimum age requirement, if the state permits acquisition of

individual bank branches, if the state permits denovo branching, and if the state imposes a deposit

cap that is the same as or larger than the IBBEA default (i.e., 30%). This index takes the value

zero for all years before the state implements interstate bank branching deregulation.8
   8
    We also conduct our TFP analyses using a dummy variable that is one in the years after the state of a …rm
deregulates interstate bank branching as the proxy for access to …nancing. Our results are qualitatively similar to
those reported here.



                                                        8
        Certain states o¤ered these four provisions with reciprocity (see, e.g., Johnson and Rice (2008)).

This requirement allowed a particular action by an out-of-state bank so long as the laws of the home

state of that out-of-state bank were reciprocal, permitting the same level of interstate banking. We

thus also create a Deregulation & reciprocity index, which is Deregulation Index plus one for states

that do not require reciprocity (thus increasing the pool of out-of-state banks that can expand

within their territory). Table 1 reports the state level interstate bank branching laws and the dates

on which they were implemented. The data for this table is obtained from Johnson and Rice (2008)

and Rice and Strahan (2010).



3        Data, Sample Selection, and Construction of Variables

The primary data used in this study is obtained from the LRD, which maintained by the Center of

Economic Studies at the U.S. Census Bureau.9 The LRD is a large micro database that provides

plant-level information for …rms in the manufacturing sector for each year. In the census years (1972,

1977, 1982, 1987, 1992, 1997, and 2002), the LRD covers the entire universe of manufacturing plants

in the Census of Manufacturers (CM). In non–census years, the LRD tracks approximately 50,000

manufacturing plants every year in the Annual Survey of Manufacturers (ASM), which covers all

plants with more than 250 employees with probability one. In addition, it also includes smaller

plants that are randomly selected every …fth year to complete a rotating …ve-year panel. Therefore,

all U.S. manufacturing plants with more than 250 employees are included in the LRD database on

a yearly basis from 1972 to 2005, and smaller plants with fewer than 250 employees are included

in the LRD database every census year and are also randomly included in the non–census years,

continuously for …ve years, as a rotating …ve year panel.10 Most of the data items reported in

the LRD (e.g., the number of employees, employee compensation, and total value of shipments)

represent items that are also reported to the IRS, increasing the accuracy of the data.

        To verify longitudinal links of …rms in the Census data, we also use two alternate data sources

maintained by the U.S. Census Bureau, namely the Standard Statistical Establishment List (SSEL),
    9
     See McGuckin and Pascoe (1988), who provide a detailed description of the Longitudinal Research Database
(LRD) and the method of data collection.
  10
     Given that a random sample of smaller plants is continuously present in our sample, our data is not substantially
skewed toward larger …rms; smaller …rms are well represented in the data. The rotating sample of smaller plants is
sampled by the Census Bureau each year in the non-census years in order to minimize such a bias in the data.



                                                          9
and the Longitudinal Business Database (LBD).11 The major advantage of using the LRD relative

to the LBD for this study is the following: assets, sales, operating costs, investments, and other

such …rm-level information are mostly not covered in the LBD. Thus, our overall metric of …rm

e¢ ciency–i.e., total factor productivity (TFP)–can only be constructed for the LRD panel.

    We focus our analysis on private …rms, since they are expected to respond more to increased

access in bank …nancing, than publicly traded …rms. To this end, we identify all public …rms (as

de…ned by CRSP) for every year in our sample and remove them from the LRD by using either

the Compustat-SSEL bridge or a name and address matching methodology as outlined in previous

studies (e.g., Chemmanur, Krishnan, and Nandy (2011)). Thus, in any given year within our

sample, we are left with only private …rms, representing 570,596 …rm-years of data for 137,009

…rms.12


3.1    Measurement of Total Factor Productivity (TFP)

The primary measure of …rm e¢ ciency used in our analysis is total factor productivity, which is

calculated from the LRD for each individual establishment at the annual three-digit North Amer-

ican Industrial Classi…cation System (NAICS) industry level. Firm-level TFP is then calculated

as a weighted sum of plant TFP for each year. Increasingly, several articles in the …nance and

economics literature have used TFP to measure …rm e¢ ciency; see, e.g., Lichtenberg and Siegel

(1990), McGuckin and Nguyen (1995), Maksimovic, Philips, and Prabhala (2011), and Chemma-

nur, He, and Nandy (2010), among others. We obtain measures of TFP at the establishment level,

by estimating a log-linear Cobb-Douglas production function for each industry and year. Industry

is de…ned at the level of three-digit NAICS codes.13 Individual plants are indexed i, industries j,
  11
     The SSEL is the Business register of the US Census Bureau, which records the name, address, and some other
details of every single establishment in the US. Similar to the LRD, the LBD is created from the SSEL and is also a
panel data set that tracks the set of U.S. business establishments from 1975 to the present. While the LRD is limited
to the manufacturing sector, the LBD encompasses all industry sectors.
  12
     It should be noted that both the SSEL and the LRD provide establishment-level (i.e., plant-level) data. For
the purpose of our analysis we aggregate this data to the …rm level using standard techiniques used in the literature
previously (for example, see Chemmanur, He, and Nandy (2010)) and numerical identi…ers for plants and …rms
provided in the LBD and LRD, which we discuss further below.
  13
     As a robustness check, we reestimate the production function in several di¤erent ways. First, we use two- and
three-digit SIC industry classi…cations. Second, we estimate TFP with value-added production function speci…cations
and separate white- and blue-collar labor inputs. Third, we divide each annual four-digit SIC industry into two groups
based on capital intensity–i.e., establishments with capital intensity greater than the median capital intensity for that
annual industry group are put in one category, while those with capital intensity less than the median are put in
another category. We then estimate the production function for each category separately. In all cases we …nd
qualitatively equivalent results.


                                                           10
for each year t in the sample:



                     ln (Yijt ) =   jt   +   jt ln (Kijt )   +   jt ln (Lijt )   +   jt ln (Mijt )   + "ijt :     (1)

We use the LRD data to construct the variables in the production function as closely as possible.

Output (Y) is constructed as plant sales (total value of shipments in the LRD) plus changes in

the value of inventories for …nished goods and work-in-progress.14 Since we appropriately de‡ate

plant sales by the annual industry-speci…c price de‡ator, our measure should be proportional to

the actual quantity of output.

       Labor input (L) is de…ned as production-worker-equivalent man-hours–that is, the product

of production-worker man-hours, and the ratio of total wages and salaries to production-worker

wages. We also reestimate the TFP regression by specifying labor input to separately include

non-production workers, which yields qualitatively similar results. Values for capital stock (K) are

generated by the recursive perpetual inventory formula. We use the earliest available book value

of capital as the initial value of net stock of plant capital (this is either the value in 1972, or the

…rst year a plant appears in the LRD sample). These values are written forward annually with

nominal capital expenditure (appropriately de‡ated at the industry level) and depreciated by the

economic depreciation rate at the industry level obtained from the Bureau of Economic Analysis.

Since values of all these variables are available separately for buildings and machinery, we perform

this procedure separately for each category of assets. The resulting series are then added together

to yield our capital stock measure.

       Finally, material input (M) is de…ned as expenses for the cost of materials and parts purchased,

resales, contract work, and fuel and energy purchased, adjusted for the change in the value of

material inventories. All the variables are de‡ated using annual price de‡ators for output, materials,

and investment at the three-digit NAICS level from the Bartelsman and Gray National Bureau of

Economic Research (NBER) Productivity Database.15 De‡ators for capital stock are available

from the Bureau of Economic Analysis.16 Plant-level TFP is then computed as the residuals of

regression (1), estimated separately for each year and each three-digit NAICs industry. Therefore,
  14
     More accurately, we use log of one plus revenue and cost measures so as not to exclude …rms that have zero values
for these variables.
  15
     See Bartelsman and Gray (1996) for details.
  16
     See Lichtenberg (1992) for a detailed description of the construction of TFP measures from LRD variables.


                                                             11
the average TFP (i.e., the average of the residuals) in any three-digit NAICs industry-year is zero by

construction. Plant-level TFP measures are then aggregated to the …rm level by a value-weighted

approach, where the weight on a plant is the ratio of its output (total value of shipments) to the

total output of the …rm.17 The …rm-level TFP is then winsorized at the …rst and 99th percentiles.18


3.2      Other Variables Used in the Analysis

In this subsection we discuss the construction and measurement of the di¤erent …rm-speci…c vari-

ables as well as other proxies used in our analysis. The LRD contains detailed information at the

plant level on the various production function parameters, such as total value of shipment, employ-

ment, labor costs, material costs, new capital investment for the purchase of buildings, machinery,

equipment, etc. Using this detailed information, we …rst construct the variables of interest at the

plant-level, and then aggregate the plant level information to …rm-level measures.

       Capital Stock is constructed via the perpetual inventory method, discussed in Section 3.1.

Capital Expenditure is the dollar value the …rm spends on the purchase and maintenance of plant,

machinery, and equipment, etc. Material Cost is the expense for the cost of materials and parts

purchased, resales, contract work, and fuel and energy purchased. Salaries and Wages is the

total production-worker wages plus total non-production-worker wages plus total supplemental

labor costs, which include both legally required supplemental labor costs as well as voluntary

supplemental labor costs of the …rms. Total Production Cost is calculated as the sum of materials

cost plus rental and administrative expenditures. All values in the LRD are in thousands of dollars

(in 1998 real terms), and all plant-level measures are winsorized at the 1st and 99th percentile.

       We de…ne Assets as the natural logarithm of capital stock of the …rm. We construct the

industry Her…ndahl Index based on the market share measure of each …rm in the LRD. Market

share is de…ned as the …rm’s market share in terms of sales at the annual three-digit NAICS level.

The Her…ndahl Index is calculated by summing up the square of each …rm’s market share (in sales)

at the annual three-digit NAICS level. A higher Her…ndahl Index means that the industry is more
  17
     As a robustness check, we also used the ratio of its capital stock to the total capital stock of the …rm and the
ratio of plant employment to …rm employment as weights. In all cases, our results remain qualitatively unchanged.
  18
     Another concern is whether technology shocks can a¤ect TFP and inputs simultaneously which in turn may
bias our results (see, e.g., Olley and Pakes (1996) and Levinsohn and Petrin (2003)). We address this concern by
recalculating TFP based on the methodology proposed by Levinsohn and Petrin (2003) and …nd qualitatively similar
results.



                                                         12
concentrated. Firm age is calculated as the time from the birth to current year of the oldest plant

of a …rm. We use the LBD to calculate the …rm age, since it is derived from the U.S. Business

Register …les that has data on the universe of U.S. establishments for all years.

    We also de…ne External Financial Dependence of a …rm’s industry based on the measure of

external …nancial dependence proposed by Rajan and Zingales (1998) and used in Cetorelli and

Strahan (2006). To construct this measure, we take all …rms on Compustat between 1978 and 2005.

We exclude “young”Compustat …rms, that is, …rms that had gone public only recently. A measure

of external …nancial dependence for such …rms is likely to be nonrepresentative of the typical needs

of a …rm in a given sector. We de…ne …rms as young if they appear in Compustat for 10 years or

less. We then sum across all years each …rm’s total capital expenditures (Pre-Xpressfeed Compustat

item # 128) minus cash ‡ow from operations. Cash ‡ow from operations equals revenues minus

nondepreciation costs (Pre-Xpressfeed Compustat item # 110) plus decreases in inventories and

accounts receivable plus increases in accounts payable.19 This sum equals the total external funds

needed to …nance investments. A negative value for this sum means that the …rm had free cash

‡ow available for disbursement to shareholders or to pay down debt. A positive value for this sum

means that the …rm needed to raise additional capital to …nance its investment. We then divide

this free cash ‡ow …gure by total capital expenditure. After constructing this ratio for each …rm,

we use the median value for all …rms in each three-digit NAICS category and de…ne a dummy called

External Financial Dependence as one if this value is positive for the industry and zero otherwise.

    In addition to the …rm-speci…c and industry-wide controls mentioned above, we also use separate

variables for our "sharp" regression discontinuity and "quasi" regression discontinuity analyses. The

U.S. SBA provides a number of …nancial assistance programs for small businesses. To analyze the

e¤ect of the deregulation on …nancially constrained …rms, we exploit the fact that the SBA provides

…nancial support to …rms up to a certain size cuto¤. For manufacturing …rms, this size cuto¤ is

a prespeci…ed level of employment that varies with the North American Industry Classi…cation

System (NAICS) industry a¢ liation of the …rm.20 For a …rm, the variable SBA Eligible is one

if, in the closest year prior to the year of the interstate bank branching deregulation, the number
  19
     Thus, we subtract investments in net working capital from cash ‡ow. The numerator of external …nancial
dependence equals the negative of “free cash ‡ow.” Note also that the Compustat items mentioned in the text are
only de…ned for cash ‡ow statements with codes 1, 2, or 3. For format code 7, we use the sum of items #123, 125,126,
106, 213, and 217.
  20
     Size eligibility standards to receive SBA …nancial support are listed at the SBA Web site: http://www.sba.gov/.


                                                        13
of employees in the …rm is smaller than the required SBA threshold level to be eligible for SBA

…nancing, and zero otherwise. Firms immediately above the threshold will not be eligible for SBA

…nancing, and thus will be more …nancially constrained compared to …rms immediately below

the threshold. The variable SBA Ineligible is thus de…ned as one minus SBA Eligible. We also

create a Normalized Employment variable which is de…ned as the …rm’s total employment in the

closest year to the year of the deregulation (used to create the SBA Eligible variable) divided by

the SBA employment threshold value for the three-digit NAICS industry of the …rm. Note that,

by construction, SBA Eligible=1 i¤ Normalized Employment<=1. We also de…ne Log normalized

employment as the natural log of Normalized employment. Finally, in our sharp RD analysis, we

also use Change in average TFP, which is de…ned as the di¤erence between the average TFP in the

3 years immediately after the deregulation year and the average TFP in the 3 years immediately

preceding the deregulation year in the state of the …rm.



4     How Does Increased Access to Financing A¤ect Productivity?

4.1   Descriptive Statistics

Panel A of Table 2 reports the summary statistics using the pooled LRD data in our sample. Note

that, due to U.S. Census Bureau disclosure requirements, we cannot report median values for our

data. We thus report a quasi-median which is the average value of all observations between the 45th

and 55th percentile and is very close to the actual median value of each variable. Our sample of

LRD …rms has a mean asset value of $10.5 million and a quasi-median value of $1.4 million. Mean

sales in our sample is around $31 million, whereas quasi-median sales is around $6 million. Mean

and quasi-median capital expenditure in the sample are around $801,600 and $93,000 respectively.

This capital expenditure re‡ects both new purchases of capital equipment as well as expenditures

incurred for maintenance of existing facilities. These …gures, particularly the quasi-median values

suggest that our sample includes many small …rms, which would potentially be a¤ected more by

banking deregulations. We also report the statistics separately for the years before and after the

interstate bank branching deregulations in a state. In addition, we report in Table 2, summary

statistics for production costs, materials cost, employment, salaries and wages, and Her…ndahl

index. Panel B of Table 2 reports mean and quasi-median sales values based on sales quintile bins.


                                                14
This panel illustrates the substantial heterogeneity in …rm size in our data, with the quasi-median

sales in the …rst quintile at $235,000 and that for the …fth quintile at $27.9 million. Later in the

paper, we conduct our TFP analysis for each of this sales bins.

    The passing of the IBBEA led to an increase in the number of bank establishments in states due

to expansion by out-of-state banks. An increase in bank establishments after deregulation therefore

led to an increase in the availability of …nancing in those states that implemented IBBEA. We start

by showing that the deregulation indeed led to an increase in bank branches. We use data from the

U.S. Census Bureau’s Census of Finance, Insurance, and Real Estate (FIRE) and the Longitudinal

Business Database (LBD). The FIRE database (in combination with the LBD) contains bank

establishment level data for economic census years (i.e., years ending with 2 or 7).

    Panel C of Table 2 reports the level of bank establishments in 1987, 1992, 1997, and 2002.21

Column (1) of this panel reports the total number of bank establishments in each of the economic

census years. We depict these numbers graphically in Figure 1, and overlay this with the number

of bank branches and o¢ ces data from the FDIC’s Historical Statistics of Banking (HSOB). We

see that the numbers from the LBD/FIRE data are similar to those from the HSOB data. The

number of bank establishments increased substantially from 1987 to 2002. Columns (2) and (3)

report the split of the banking establishments between out-of-state and in-state establishments

(which we can obtain from the LBD/FIRE data). As seen in the table and in Figure 1, between

1987 and 1992, the increase in the number of in-state and out-of-state banking establishments are

on a roughly parallel path. From 1992 to 2002, the number of in-state bank establishments are,

to some extent, decreasing, potentially due to acquisitions by out-of-state banks. The number of

in-state bank establishments at the end of 2002 (44,568) is slightly less than the number of in-state

bank establishments in 1987 (46,929), suggesting no growth in this subset of banks. On the other

hand, there is substantial growth in the number of out-of-state bank establishments during the

period from 1992 to 2002. Moreover, this growth is substantially larger than the decrease in the

number of in-state bank establishments, indicating that out-of-state banking establishments grew

through both acquisitions and denovo bank branching. This is consistent with a signi…cant increase
  21
     Note that the FIRE/LBD data have information to compute the state of ownership of a banking unit (which we
term as establishment, consistent with the literature using this data). However, it does not allow us to distinguish
between denovo branches and BHC-owned branches and o¢ ces. All establishments owned by out-of-state entities are
grouped together.



                                                        15
in the out-of-state ownership of bank establishments in the late 1990s and early 2000s following the

IBBEA.


4.2     Productivity Changes After Interstate Bank Branching Deregulation

We use …rm-level TFP as a comprehensive measure of productivity and analyze how the TFP of a

…rm changes after the state in which the …rm is located adopts interstate bank branching deregula-

tion brought about by the IBBEA. We employ a …rm …xed e¤ects regression framework to analyze

these e¤ects. In these regressions, we control for time-varying observable characteristics of the …rm

and industry as well as year …xed e¤ects. In all regressions, we report standard errors clustered at

the state level.22 We implement this approach through the following regression speci…cations:



                            Yit =     t   +   i   + Xit + Deregulation_indexit + "it                                 (2)



                Yit =   t   +   i   + Xit +       1 Bef oreit (4; 1)   +   2 Deregulation_indexit   + "it            (3)

       where Yit is our variable of interest (i.e., …rm TFP); Xit is a control for Log assets (where asset

is measured as the one year lagged value of total capital stock), Log assets squared, log of …rm age,

and the one year lagged industry Her…ndahl index ; Deregulation_indexit is our main measure of

interstate banking deregulation.23 In equation (3), we introduce Bef oreit (4; 1), which is a dummy

variable that equals one if the year is within four years prior to the interstate bank branching

deregulation in the state of the …rm and zero otherwise. Conceptually, this variable captures the

di¤erence in the TFP for …rms between the four years prior to …nancing deregulation in a state of

a …rm and the years prior to the four years before the deregulation.24 The dynamic pattern of the
                                                                                                            0
e¤ect of interstate bank branching deregulation on TFP is captured by the coe¢ cients                           s in the

above equations. In all speci…cations, i indexes …rms, t indexes years,                  i   are …rm …xed e¤ects, and

 t   are year …xed e¤ects. The above speci…cations are estimated on the entire panel of private …rms
  22
     We also conduct our analyses by clustering on state-year. However, since the Deregulation index is persistent over
time, we report the results for regressions clustered by state. We thank the anonymous referee for this suggestion.
  23
     Our results remain qualitatively similar if we replace capital stock with total employment as the control variable
for size.
  24
     This also serves an important part of validating our identi…cation strategy. As noted by Roberts and Whited
(2011), this helps in serving as a test for the key assumption in di¤erence-in-di¤erence regressions, namely, that of
parallel trends. In this test, the coe¢ cient on the Bef oreit (4; 1) variable should be insigni…cant from zero.


                                                              16
in the LRD.25 We drop variable subscripts i and t in the discussion that follows for parsimony.

       Panel A of Table 3 reports the results of our TFP …xed e¤ects regressions. Column (1) reports

the results of the basic speci…cation in equation (2). We …nd that the coe¢ cient estimate on the

Deregulation index variable is positive and statistically signi…cant at the 1 percent level. Speci…cally,

the results indicate that a one inter-quartile change in the Deregulation index increases the TFP of a

…rm by 0.6 percent. As in Schoar (2002), we interpret the economic e¤ect of this coe¢ cient estimate

as follows: holding input costs constant, a certain percentage increase in productivity translates

to an equal percentage increase in revenues, ceteris paribus. An increase in revenues leads to a

more than proportional increase in pro…ts, since the elasticity of pro…ts to productivity is greater

than one. Intuitively, an increase in productivity holding all else constant leads to higher revenues

without changing costs. For our case, a 0.6 percent increase in TFP corresponds to a 3 percent

increase in pro…ts, assuming a 20 percent pro…t margin. Further, since pro…ts are revenues minus

costs, the smaller the pro…t margin, the higher the elasticity of pro…ts to productivity. Thus, a lower

pro…t margin will actually predict a higher percent increase in pro…ts for a given percent increase

in TFP. For instance, reducing the pro…t margin to 10 percent increases the e¤ect of interstate

bank branching deregulation on pro…ts to 6 percent.26 Thus, …nancial deregulation of interstate

bank branching has an economically meaningful impact on …rm productivity and performance.

Moreover, as we document in later sections, this relation is even stronger for smaller and …nancially

constrained …rms.

       One critique of our methodology is that perhaps our results are driven by states that time

their interstate bank branching deregulations to coincide with higher productivity gains. Further,

the coe¢ cient estimates on Deregulation index in the previous regressions may simply re‡ect an

increasing TFP trend across all …rms. Thus, our argument that these deregulations present an

exogenous shift in …nancing availability needs to be tested. One way that we rule out such timing

and trend explanations is by introducing the Before(4,1) dummy variable in Column (2) of Panel A
  25
     In unreported tests, we …nd that for the set of publicly traded …rms, the coe¢ cient estimate on Deregulation
index is not signi…cantly related to TFP, based on model (2). Moreover, the coe¢ cient on Deregulation index is
statistically di¤erent for coe¢ cients estimated using model (2) for samples of public and private …rms.
  26
     A simple example will help clarify these calculations. Assuming that cost is constant at $1 and margin (i.e., pro…t
to sales ratio) is 20%, sales should be $1.25. Since a 0.6 percent increase in productivity translates to a 0.6 percent
increase in sales, sales should increase by 1.25*0.006 = $0.0075. Thus, pro…ts also increase by $0.0075, since cost is
constant. Percentage increase in pro…ts is calculated as 100*(0.0075/0.25) = 3%. Using a similar calculation, we can
show that percentage change in pro…ts increases as margin decreases.



                                                          17
of Table 3, based on the speci…cation in equation (3) (see, e.g., Bertrand and Mullainathan (2003)).

If the deregulations are due to states trying to time productivity or if our results above represent

secular trend in productivity, then the coe¢ cient estimate on Before(4,1) should be positive and

statistically signi…cant. In Column (2), we …nd that the coe¢ cient estimate of the Before(4,1)

dummy is not statistically signi…cant. This result alleviates concerns that our prior results are

driven by reverse causality or trends in TFP.

   We also conduct additional tests in this section to ensure that our results in Table 3 are not

driven by potential biases in the sample or due to alternative explanations. Black and Strahan

(2002) …nd that greater access to …nancing leads to more incorporations and Kerr and Nanda

(2009) …nd that increase in …nancing availability increases new startup activity as well as closures

of these newer …rms. To rule out the possibility that our results are driven by new …rm births

after the deregulation of interstate bank branching in various states, we exclude …rms born after

interstate bank branching deregulations in our …rst robustness test. The results for this regression

are reported in Column (3) of Panel A of Table 3 and are qualitatively similar to our base results.

Thus, our TFP results are not driven by new …rm births and deaths after …nancial deregulation.

   We also consider the possibility that survivorship bias can a¤ect our results. In particular, if

many …rms die after the …nancial deregulation, then the set of …rms that survive after deregulation

would seem to perform better than the set of …rms before deregulation. We can mitigate such a

bias by restricting our attention to the sample of …rms that survive after deregulation. In Column

(4) of Panel A of Table 3, we report the results for the sample of …rms where we exclude all …rms

that die within our sample period which should mitigate any potential survivorship biases in the

sample. The results in Column (4) indicate that in this survivorship bias mitigated sample, the

e¤ect of Deregulation index on TFP continues to be positive and statistically signi…cant. We also

conduct our TFP …xed e¤ects regression using the Deregulation & reciprocity index, which accounts

for the reciprocity requirements imposed by various states when they deregulated interstate bank

branching, as the measure of increased access to …nance. The result of this regression, reported

in Column (5) of Panel A of Table 3 is consistent with those reported above and indicates that a

greater extent of interstate bank branching deregulation is associated with an increase in …rm TFP.

   We also conduct additional robustness checks of the TFP analysis reported above. In order to

assess the impact of the deregulation within a short horizon around the law change, we restrict

                                                18
our sample for the TFP regression to the time period within …ve years of the deregulation and

…nd similar results.27 The result of this regression, reported in Column (1) of Panel B of Table 3,

are consistent with those reported in Panel A of Table 3, that is, Deregulation index is positively

related to …rm TFP.

       We also further address potential reverse causality concerns regarding the passage of interstate

bank branching deregulations in the U.S. in this section. If our results re‡ect a treatment e¤ect of

interstate bank branching deregulations by states, then our results should disappear if we falsely

assume that our treatment (i.e., interstate bank branching deregulation) occurs one year prior to

or one year after the actual deregulation year (see, e.g., Roberts and Whited (2011)).28 For these

tests, we keep the sample restricted to …ve years around the actual deregulation year (to assess the

impact of the falsi…cation in a …nite horizon). Thus, we repeat our TFP regressions under such

false de…nitions of the Deregulation index. Columns (2) and (3) in Panel B of Table 3 report the

results of this placebo analysis where the Deregulation index variable is the actual index for one

year after to the actual deregulation and one year prior to the actual deregulation, respectively, and

zero otherwise. Our results indicate that the coe¢ cient estimate on the falsi…ed Deregulation index

is statistically insigni…cant. The results of this test as well as the insigni…cant coe¢ cient estimate

on the Before(4,1) dummy in Column (2) reassure us that interstate bank branching laws were not

implemented to coincide with other unobservable characteristics that would have also boosted …rm

productivity. Further, these results also provide evidence that reverse causality does not drive our

results.

       Since TFP is not an accounting measure, and we cannot directly link the TFP of a given …rm

to its pro…tability without additional assumptions. One may question whether changes in TFP

indeed translate into changes in pro…tability or changes in output. As a robustness check for our

main results, we use alternative measures of performance, including value added per worker or

Labor Productivity, which is de…ned as total sales minus production costs divided by the number

of workers; and Sales Growth, which is change in sales from the previous year to the current

year divided by the previous year’s sales. These measures do not have the desirable theoretical

properties of TFP, but they do have familiar statistical properties, since they are not computed
  27
    Our results are qualitatively similar if we restrict the sample period to within three years of deregulation.
  28
    We also conduct the falsi…cation tests by rede…ning the Deregulation index as that for two years before and after
the actual year. Our results remain qualitatively similar to those reported here.


                                                         19
from a regression.

    We report the results of the regressions with Labor Productivity and Sales Growth as dependent

variables in Columns (4) and (5) in Panel B Table 3 and …nd similar results to those using TFP. In

particular, we …nd that Labor Productivity and Sales Growth are higher for …rms located in states

with greater extent of interstate bank branching deregulation. These results, particularly that

for Sales Growth, suggests that one potential mechanism through which TFP increases following

bank branching deregulation is increased performance due to greater access to more productive and

positive NPV projects. We explore this argument in detail in the next section.29


4.3    Financial Constraint and the E¤ect of Increased Access to Financing on
       Productivity: Regression Discontinuity Analyses

We now consider the channel through which increased access to …nancing leads to greater pro-

ductivity. We hypothesize that TFP increases after interstate banking deregulations are primarily

driven by …rms that are …nancially constrained. Such …rms are unable to grow or improve their per-

formance as they are unable to undertake additional productive projects in the absence of adequate

…nancing. However, since the interstate bank branching deregulations lead to an exogenous increase

in the availability of …nancing, …rms that are …nancially constrained will bene…t the most following

the deregulation, as it would then allow them to take on additional projects thus improving their

productivity.

    Identi…cation of the impact of …nancial constraint on the the e¤ect of …nancing on productivity is

achieved by a novel methodology. We distinguish between …nancially constrained and unconstrained

…rms using an exogenous discontinuity in the eligibility of …rms that can apply for Small Business

Administration (SBA) …nancing. SBA support-eligible …rms have access to an additional source

of …nancing, and thus are less …nancially constrained than non-SBA support-eligible …rms. The

important identifying assumption here is that …rms just above and just below the SBA …nancing

threshold are similar in most respects other than being eligible for SBA …nancing. This allows
  29
     We also conduct our TFP regressions using state level controls such as log of GDP, GDP growth, log of state
income, log of state population, log of state employment, state level TFP, and log of state level capital stock.
Moreover, we also control for various controls used in Rice and Strahan (2010), for instance, the relative strength of
insurance industry versus the banking industry and the extent of small banks in a state, which might be related to
the implementation of interstate bank branching deregulations in that state. Our results after including these various
control variables are qualitatively similar to those reported here.



                                                         20
us to compare …rms that are unlikely to di¤er signi…cantly on characteristics other than access

to an additional source of …nancing (SBA …nancing). As a result, …rms that are SBA ineligible

(i.e., immediately above the SBA threshold) are more …nancially constrained relative to …rms that

are SBA eligible (i.e., immediately below the SBA threshold). Thus, if …nancial constraints are

indeed driving our results, we should …nd that SBA ineligible …rms experience a greater increase

in productivity as a result of increased access to …nancing after the deregulation of interstate bank

branching than SBA eligible …rms.30


4.3.1      Sharp Regression Discontinuity Analysis

In this section, we conduct our analysis in a "sharp" regression discontinuity (RD) framework.

The advantage of this methodology is that we conduct our analysis using a rigorous and well-

established RD framework. To do so, however, we have to transform the data in a manner that

requires us to give up the cross-state variation of the Deregulation index.31 In particular, for

each …rm, we calculate the change in the average 3-year TFP around the year of the interstate

branching deregulation in that …rm’s state. This variable, as described in the data section, is called

Change in average TFP. The sharp RD design thus measures the change in TFP around branching

deregulations for SBA ineligible …rms compared to the change in TFP for SBA eligible …rms (SBA

eligibility being our proxy for …nancial constraint). The sharp RD design we follow has been widely

used in the academic literature in the past starting with Thistlewaite and Campbell (1960) to more

recent literature such as Lee (2008).

       We start by showing how Change in average TFP varies across …rms that have Normalized Em-

ployment values just above and just below the SBA eligibility threshold. Recall that Normalized

Employment is de…ned as the employment prior to the interstate bank branching deregulation di-

vided by the SBA employment threshold value for the …rm’s industry. Thus, a …rm becomes eligible

for SBA …nancing above the threshold point of 1 for Normalized Employment. Figure 2 reports the

results of local polynomial smoothing estimations of Change in average TFP after deregulation on
  30
     A useful feature of this method of identifying …nancially constrained …rms is that we would expect larger …rms to
be less …nancially constrained, ceteris paribus. Thus, the "size-e¤ect" of a continuous increase in employment, if any,
works against …nding a relation between our measure of …nancial constraint (based on the SBA threshold) and the
sensitivity of productivity to access to …nancing. Further, we control for the continuous version of the size variable
in our RD regressions.
  31
     We will incorporate the cross-state variation in the Deregulation index using a "quasi" RD design that we describe
in the next section.


                                                          21
the Normalized Employment variable around the SBA eligibility threshold point.The …gure illus-

trates our main result in this section. It shows that the Change in average TFP after interstate

bank branching deregulation "jumps" up for …rms right above the SBA eligibility threshold (which

is 1 on the x axis in the graph). In other words, we see that …rms that have relatively fewer al-

ternative …nancing options experience greater increases in TFP after bank branching deregulation

relative to …rms that have more …nancing options. Our non-parametric (local linear estimator) and

parametric models described below statistically estimate the jump depicted in the …gure.

   Figure 3 reports the results of local polynomial smoothing estimations of changes in yearly …rm

level TFP after deregulation on the Normalized Employment variable around the SBA eligibility

threshold point. Rather than using average 3 year TFP change (as in Figure 2) however, we conduct

the local polynomial smoothing regressions separately for after and before the …rst deregulation year

for …rms just above and just below the SBA threshold. We then subtract the estimators for each

normalized employment bin for the "after" deregulation estimators from the "before" deregulation

estimators. Figure 3 thus uses using panel (…rm-year level) data, whereas Figure 2 using cross-

sectional (…rm level) data. The results from Figure 3 are consistent with that in Figure 2. It shows

that the change in yearly TFP after interstate bank branching deregulation "jumps" up for …rms

right above the SBA eligibility threshold.

   We …rst conduct the RD analysis in a local linear regression framework based on the procedure

recommended by Imbens and Lemieux (2008) including the calculation of the optimal bandwidth

(based on Imbens and Kalyanaraman (2011). The result of this non-parametric framework is

reported in Panel A of Table 4. We …nd that the Change in average TFP is higher for SBA

ineligible …rms than for SBA eligible …rms (estimate=0.023, signi…cant at the 1 percent level). The

non-parametric framework estimates the e¤ect of SBA eligibility on TFP change for …rms just

above and just below the threshold, consistent with the spirit of RD analysis. However, due to the

smaller number of observations used, it could be biased.

   We then conduct the sharp RD analysis in a regression framework, where the dependent variable

is the Change in average TFP. In addition to Log assets as a size control, we use Log normalized

employment and Log normalized employment squared to control for the impact of the continuous

assignment variable. Further, we control for year, 3-digit NAICS industry, and state …xed e¤ects

in these regressions. In addition, we also control for the average 3-year pre-deregulation TFP. We

                                                 22
start by conducting this analysis using the sample of …rms that is within a 10 percent employment

band around the SBA threshold, i.e., for the set of …rms with Normalized employment between 0.9

and 1.1 (which we call the 10% sample). The result of this analysis is reported in Column (1) of

Panel B of Table 4. We …nd that SBA ineligible …rms experience a 7.1 percent increase in average

productivity following deregulation. This, in turn, corresponds to an increase in pro…tability of

36 percent (using the methodology from Schoar (2002) discussed earlier). Further, to the extent

that …rms within a 10 percent band around the SBA threshold are similar in all respects other

than the eligibility for SBA funding, our results are unlikely to come from potentially unobservable

di¤erences.

      We also conduct the above analysis for …rms with normalized employment within 30 percent

bracket (i.e., the 30% sample), 50 percent bracket (i.e., the 50% sample), and the full sample in

Columns (2), (3), and (4) of Panel B of Table 4, respectively. Our results are consistent across all

speci…cations, and indicate that SBA ineligible …rms experience a greater increase in average TFP

around the year of interstate bank branching deregulation.

      We proceed to do various robustness checks for the results in Table 4. First, we conduct these

regressions controlling for various powers of Log normalized employment for the full sample (Lee

and Lemieux (2010)). We also conduct these tests by controlling for interaction terms between SBA

ineligible and various powers of Log normalized employment. The results of these tests are reported

in Columns (1) to (5) of Table 5, and show that, consistent with prior results, the coe¢ cient

estimate on SBA ineligible is positive and statistically signi…cant.

      Next, in Table 6, we conduct placebo analyses by moving the discontinuity point by minus 20

percentage points (i.e., discontinuity is falsely speci…ed at Normalized employment of 0.8) and by

plus 20 percentage points (i.e., discontinuity is falsely speci…ed at Normalized employment of 1.2).

We expect that our results will not show up for the falsi…ed version of these variables. Columns

(1) and (2), estimated for the 10% sample around the falsi…ed thresholds, are consistent with this

expectation, supporting our identi…cation of constrained …rms using SBA thresholds.32

      One concern may be that …rms may try to obtain federal funding by arti…cially restricting their

size levels to comply with SBA requirements. McCrary (2008) argues that such active sorting may

undermine the identi…cation requirements of the regression discontinuity design. To rule out this
 32
      We also conduct this analysis using +/- 30 percentage point o¤set and …nd similar results as those reported here.


                                                           23
concern, we graphically and statistically analyze the density function of the normalized employment

variable around the threshold point. Visual analysis of the density function, reported in Figure

4, indicates a smooth density function of normalized employment at the threshold point. We

then conduct the statistical test recommended in McCrary (2008) to ensure that our identi…cation

strategy is valid. The test is implemented as a Wald test of the null hypothesis that the discontinuity

in the density function of the assignment variable is zero at the threshold point. The test does not

…nd a statistically signi…cant jump or drop in the density function of the normalized employment

at the threshold point, thereby validating our identi…cation strategy.33


4.3.2      Quasi-Regression Discontinuity Analysis

In this section, we use the SBA discontinuity to identify cross-sectional variation in the e¤ect

of the treatment (i.e., interstate bank branching deregulations) on the outcome variable (TFP).

Since the methodology here interacts a dummy variable for a discrete jump in …nancial constraint

at the prede…ned SBA threshold with the impact of interstate bank branching deregulation on

productivity, we refer to this as the "quasi" regression discontinuity (RD) approach.

       We conduct our TFP regression using the sample of …rms that is within the 10% employment

band around the SBA threshold. We include interaction terms between Deregulation index and

SBA eligible as well as between Deregulation index and SBA ineligible. In addition, we include an

interaction term between the Log normalized employment and Deregulation index to control for

any impact of the continuous change in employment on the sensitivity of TFP to interstate banking

deregulation. The size controls include one year lagged value of Log employment, one year lagged

value of Log employment squared, and one year lagged value of Log assets. The results, reported in

Column (1) of Table 7, are consistent with those in the previous section. SBA ineligible …rms expe-

rience a greater increase in TFP than SBA eligible …rms if their state deregulates interstate bank

branching to a greater extent. In particular, the coe¢ cient estimate on Deregulation index*SBA in-

eligible is positive and signi…cant while the coe¢ cient estimate on Deregulation index*SBA eligible

is insigni…cant. Economically, a one inter-quartile change in Deregulation index for SBA ineligible

…rms is associated with a 2 percent increase in TFP. Moreover, the di¤erence in the coe¢ cient
  33
    The estimator for this test is calculated in two steps. First, one obtains a …nely gridded histogram. Second, one
smoothes the histogram using local linear regression separately on either side of the cuto¤ point. The test statistic
is based on the estimates of the density function from local linear regressions from the two sides of the cuto¤ point.


                                                         24
estimates of Deregulation index*SBA ineligible and Deregulation index*SBA eligible is statistically

di¤erent at the 5 percent level.

      In Column (2) of Table 7, we report the tests of the quasi-RD model using the Deregulation &

reciprocity index for the 10% sample, and …nd similar results as those in Column (1). We repeat

this analysis after restricting the sample to bands of 30 percent and 50 percent around the SBA

threshold restriction and …nd similar results in Columns (3) and (4) of Table 7. Finally, in Column

(5) of Table 7, we use the entire sample and …nd the our main result from Column (1) holds here as

well. Thus, our results point to greater …nancial constraints driving the positive relation between

increased availability of …nancing as a result of interstate bank branching deregulations and …rm

TFP.

      We also conduct various robustness checks for this analysis. First, we test whether our results

are robust to various speci…cations of higher powers of Log employment, as well as the interaction

between higher powers of Log normalized employment and Deregulation index. These results are

reported in Columns (1) through (4) of Table 8 for the full sample. We …nd that our results

from Table 7 are robust to the speci…cation of the functional form of the assignment variable and

employment controls.

      Next, in Table 9, we conduct placebo analyses by moving the discontinuity point by minus 20

percentage points and by plus 20 percentage points. We expect that our results will not show up

for the falsi…ed version of these variables. Columns (1) and (2), estimated for the 10% bracket

around the falsi…ed thresholds, are consistent with this expectation, supporting our identi…cation

of …nancially constrained …rms using SBA thresholds.34


4.4      Financial Constraint and the E¤ect of Increased Access to Financing on
         Productivity: Firm Size Interaction Tests

Firm size has been used as a proxy for …nancial constraint, as smaller …rms typically face a greater

number of constraints in sourcing capital. Thus, we analyze whether our results documenting TFP

gains after interstate bank branching deregulations vary based on …rm size. We use various proxies

for …rm size including sales (i.e., total value of shipments), assets (capital stock), and employment.

We divide our sample by size quintile bins based on these measures and report our regression results
 34
      We also conduct this analysis using +/- 30 percentage point o¤set and …nd similar results as those reported here.


                                                           25
in Table 10. The size variable used to classify …rms in the size quintile bins is measured as of the

closest year prior to the interstate bank branching deregulation in the state of the …rm. Thus, we

only use the set of …rms that exist in the sample prior to deregulation for these tests. We then run

our TFP regressions with Deregulation index interacted with a dummy variable for each of the …ve

size quintiles. We name the dummy variables for size quintiles as Size quintile 1 to Size quintile 5,

where the former refers to the smallest size quintile and the latter refers to the largest.

   Panel A of Table 10 report the regression results for size quintile bins based on sales. In Column

(1) in Panel A of Table 10, the coe¢ cient estimate on Deregulation index*Size quintile 1 is economi-

cally large and statistically signi…cant at the 1 percent level. The economic magnitude suggests that

the TFP for small …rms increases by 5.4 percent for a one inter-quartile range increase in interstate

bank branching deregulations. Using the methodology for interpreting changes in productivity as

changes in pro…tability (described earlier), this change in TFP corresponds to a 27 percent increase

in pro…ts. The coe¢ cient estimates on Deregulation index*Size Quintile 2, Deregulation index*Size

Quintile 3, Deregulation index*Size Quintile 4, and Deregulation index*Size Quintile 5 variables

are considerably smaller and statistically di¤erent than that for Deregulation index*Size Quintile

1 (0.008, 0.004, 0.002, and 0.003 vs. 0.027, respectively). The di¤erence between the coe¢ cient

estimates on Deregulation index*Size Quintile 1 and Deregulation index*Size Quintile 5 is statis-

tically signi…cant at the 1 percent level. Column (2) of Panel A, Table 10 reports the results of

these regressions using the Deregulation & reciprocity index, which incorporates the e¤ect of the

reciprocity requirement. The results in this regression are similar to those in Column (1).

   Our results are similar when we repeat these tests with size bins based on assets. In Columns

(3) and (4) of Panel A of Table 10, using size bins de…ned using total assets, we again …nd that the

TFP of smaller …rms increases substantially more than that of larger …rms after the deregulation of

interstate bank branching. We also conduct our size-based interaction tests based on employment

bins using the following cuto¤s: 1 to 10 employees, 11 to 20 employees, 21 to 50 employees, 51

to 100 employees, and greater than 100 employees. We interact Deregulation index with each of

these employment bins. Panel B of Table 10 reports the results with the employment bins. We

…nd that our results mirror the results using total value of shipments and capital stock. Smaller

…rms by employment experience a greater increase in TFP after the deregulation of interstate bank

branching. In particular, Column (1) indicates that, economically, smaller …rms (i.e., those with 10

                                                  26
employees or less) experience a 1.6 percent increase in productivity for a one inter-quartile increase

in Deregulation index, which corresponds to a 8 percent increase in pro…ts; whereas large …rms (i.e.,

those with greater than 101 employees) experience a 0.6 percent increase in productivity, which

corresponds to a 3 percent increase in pro…ts. The di¤erence between the coe¢ cient estimate of

Deregulation index *(Emp>=1 & <=10) with that of Deregulation index* (Emp>=101) is statisti-

cally signi…cant at the 5 percent level. Further, as reported in Column (2), our results are similar

when we interact the Deregulation & reciprocity index with each employment bin dummy. In par-

ticular, smaller …rms by employment have a greater increase in TFP compared to larger …rms after

interstate bank branching deregulations.

   In summary, the results in this section suggest that smaller (and thus more …nancially con-

strained) …rms gain substantially more from greater access to …nancing as a result of interstate

bank branching deregulations than larger (and less …nancially constrained) …rms. We use three

di¤erent proxies for size, i.e., sales, assets, and employment, and …nd that our results hold for all

three size proxies.


4.5   Financial Constraint and the E¤ect of Increased Access to Financing on
      Productivity: External Financial Dependence of Industry Interaction Tests

We also use the measure of external …nancial dependence based on industry accounting variables

used in Rajan and Zingales (1998) and Cetorelli and Strahan (2006) to further analyze how the

e¤ect of greater access to …nancing on …rm TFP varies with …nancial constraints. Thus, we interact

Deregulation index in our TFP regressions with the High External Financial Dependence dummy

for the …rm’s industry. We also include Deregulation index interacted with a Low External Financial

Dependence dummy variable. The Low External Financial Dependence dummy is de…ned as one

minus the High External Financial Dependence dummy.

   The results of the interaction tests are reported in Column (1) of Table 11 and support the

inference from the results in the previous two subsections. In particular, while both interaction

terms have positive and signi…cant coe¢ cient estimates, the estimate on Deregulation index *High

External Financial Dependence is economically and statistically larger than that on Deregulation

index *Low External Financial Dependence. The results suggest that …rms in highly …nancially con-

strained industries have a 1.6 percent increase in TFP, whereas those in less …nancially constrained

                                                 27
industries have a 0.6 percent increase in TFP for a one inter-quartile range increase in interstate

bank branching. Further, as reported in Column (2), our results are similar when we interact the

Deregulation & reciprocity index with the High External Financial Dependence and Low External

Financial Dependence dummies. The results here provide further support to the idea that greater

access to …nancing allows …nancially constrained …rms to implement more productive and higher

NPV projects.



5    Conclusion

We analyze how increased access to …nancing a¤ects …rm productivity using a large sample of man-

ufacturing …rms obtained from the U.S. Census Bureau’s Longitudinal Research Database (LRD).

We exploit the exogenous shift in access to …nancing due to interstate bank branching deregulations

that took place in the 1990s and relate these deregulations to …rm level total factor productivity

(TFP). Our results indicate that …rms’productivity increased subsequent to their states allowing

out-of-state banks to establish local bank branches. We …nd that …rms that are close to but do not

satisfy eligibility criteria for …nancial support from the U.S. Small Business Administration (and

thus more …nancially constrained) have higher TFP increases after bank branching deregulation

and in states with a greater extent of bank branching deregulation than …rms that just satisfy

eligibility criteria (less …nancially constrained). TFP increases after bank branching deregulation is

greater for …rms that are …nancially constrained, such as smaller …rms and …rms that are in more

…nancially constrained industries (based on Rajan and Zingales (1998)). Our results support the

idea that greater access to …nancing may increase a …nancially constrained …rms’ access to addi-

tional productive projects that they may otherwise not be able to take up. Our results emphasize

that availability of …nancing is important not only for startup activity (as prior research suggests),

but also for the success of existing entrepreneurial and small …rms.

    This study contributes to the existing literature by analyzing the real performance e¤ects of

increased access to …nancing. Our analysis of the intensive margin of …rm-level outcomes (i.e., pro-

ductivity) is useful to understand the economic consequences of both increasing access to …nancing

as well as …nancial deregulation on existing …rms. Our results suggest that increased access to bank

…nancing allows smaller and …nancially constrained …rms to take up real investment opportunities


                                                 28
that they may not otherwise be able to have access to. In particular, we show that such increased

access to …nancing increases their productivity. This is crucial from a policy perspective if the

objective is to promote the growth of startups especially given that most small …rms rely heavily

on bank …nancing.




                                               29
References

 [1] Bartelsman, E. J., and W. Gray, 1996, The NBER Manufacturing Productivity Database.

    Technical Working Paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.

 [2] Bertrand M., A. Schoar, and D. Thesmar, 2007, Banking deregulation and industry structure:

    evidence from the French banking reforms of 1985. Journal of Finance 62:597–628.

 [3] Bertrand M. and S. Mullainathan, 2003, Enjoying the Quiet Life? Corporate Governance and

    Managerial Preferences, Journal of Political Economy 111:1043-075.

 [4] Black, S. E. and P. E. Strahan, 2002, Entrepreneurship and Bank Credit Availability. Journal

    of Finance 57:2807–2833.

 [5] Butler, A. W. and J. Cornaggia, 2011, Does Access to External Finance Improve Productiv-

    ity? Evidence from a Natural Experiment, Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 99, Issue 1,

    January, pp. 184-203.

 [6] Cetorelli, N. and P. E. Strahan, 2006, Finance as a barrier to entry: bank competition and

    industry structure in local US markets. Journal of Finance 61: 437–461.

 [7] Chemmanur, T. J., S. He, and D. Nandy, 2010, The Going Public Decision and the Product

    Market. Review of Financial Studies 23:1855–1908.

 [8] Chemmanur, T. J., K. Krishnan, and D. Nandy, 2011, How Does Venture Capital Financing

    Improve E¢ ciency in Private Firms? A Look Beneath the Surface. Review of Financial Studies

    24:4037-4090.

 [9] Denis, D., and McKeon, S., 2012, Debt Financing and Financial Flexibility: Evidence from

    Pro-Active Leverage Increases, Review of Financial Studies 26:1897-1929.

[10] Denis, D., and Sibilkov, V., 2010, Financial Constraints, Investment, and the Value of Cash

    Holdings, Review of Financial Studies 23:247-269.

[11] Fazzari, S. M., R. G. Hubbard, and B. C. Peterson, 1988, Financing constraints and corporate

    investment. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1:141–195.


                                               30
[12] Fracassi, C., M. J. Germaise, S. Kogan, and G. Natividad, 2013, Business microloans for U.S.

    subprime borrowers, Working paper, UT Austin and UCLA.

[13] Guiso, L., P. Sapienza, and L. Zingales, 2004, Does local …nancial development matter? Quar-

    terly Journal of Economics 119:929–969.

[14] Hicks, John. R., 1969. A Theory of Economic History. Oxford, Calderon Press.

[15] Imbens, G. W., and T. Lemieux, 2008, Regression discontinuity designs: A guide to practice,

    Journal of Econometrics 142:615-635.

[16] Imbens, G. W., and K. Kalyanaraman, 2012, Optimal bandwidth choice for the regression

    discontinuity estimator, Review of Economic Studies 79:933-959.

[17] Jayaratne, J., and P. E. Strahan, 1996, The …nance-growth nexus: evidence from bank branch

    deregulation. Quarterly Journal of Economics 111:639–670.

[18] Johnson, C., and T. Rice, 2008, Assessing a decade of interstate bank branching, The Wash-

    ington and Lee Law Review 65:73–127.

[19] Kaplan, S. N., and L. Zingales, 1997, Do investment-cash ‡ow sensitivities provide useful

    measures of …nancing constraints? Quarterly Journal of Economics 112:169–215.

[20] Kaplan, S. N., and L. Zingales, 2000, Investment-cash ‡ow sensitivities are not valid measures

    of …nancing constraints. Quarterly Journal of Economics 115: 707–712.

[21] Kerr, W. R., and R. Nanda, 2009, Democratizing Entry: Banking Deregulations, Financing

    Constraints, and Entrepreneurship. Journal of Financial Economics 94:124–49.

[22] Kerr, W. R., J. Lerner, and A. Schoar, 2013, The Consequences of Entrepreneurial Finance:

    Evidence from Angel Financings. Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.

[23] Lee, D. S., 2008, Randomized Experiments from Non-Random Selection in U.S. House Elec-

    tions, Journal of Econometrics 142:675-697

[24] Lee, D. S., and T. Lemieux, 2010, Regression discontinuity designs in economics, Journal of

    Economic Literature 48:281-355.


                                                31
[25] Levine, R., N. Loayza, and T. Beck, 2000, Financial intermediation and growth: causality and

    causes. Journal of Monetary Economics 46:31–77.

[26] Levinsohn, J. and A. Petrin, 2003, Estimating Production Functions Using Inputs to Control

    for Unobservables, Review of Economic Studies 70:317–341.

[27] Lichtenberg, F. R., 1992, Corporate Takeovers and Productivity. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

[28] Lichtenberg, F. R., and D. Siegel, 1990, The E¤ect of Leveraged Buyouts on Productivity and

    Related Aspects of Firm Behavior. Journal of Financial Economics 27:165–94.

[29] Maksimovich, V., G. Phillips, and N.R. Prabhala, 2011, Post-merger restructuring and the

    boundaries of the …rm, 2011, Journal of Financial Economics 102:317-343.

[30] McCrary, J. 2008. Manipulation of the Running Variable in the Regression Discontinuity De-

    sign: A Density Test. Journal of Econometrics 142:698–714.

[31] McGuckin, R. H., and S. Nguyen, 1995, On Productivity and Plant Ownership Change: New

    Evidence from the Longitudinal Research Database. Rand Journal of Economics 26:257–76.

[32] McGuckin, R. H., and G. Pascoe, 1988, The Longitudinal Research Database: Status and

    Research Possibilities. Survey of Current Business 68:30–7.

[33] Moyen, N., 2004, Investment-cash ‡ow sensitivities: constrained versus unconstrained …rms.

    Journal of Finance 59: 2061–2092.

[34] Olley, S. and A. Pakes, 1996, The Dynamics of Productivity in the Telecommunications Equip-

    ment Industry, Econometrica 64:1263–1298.

[35] Puri, M., and R. Zarutskie, 2012, On the Lifecycle Dynamics of Venture-Capital and Non-

    Venture-Capital-Financed Firms. Journal of Finance 67:2247-93.

[36] Rajan, R.G., and L. Zingales, 1998, Financial dependence and growth. American Economic

    Review 88:559–586.

[37] Rice, T. and P. E. Strahan, 2010, Does Credit Competition A¤ect Small-Firm Finance?,

    Journal of Finance 65:861-889.


                                               32
[38] Robb, A. and D. Robinson, 2013, The Capital Structure Decisions of New Firms, Review of

    Financial Studies, forthcoming.

[39] Roberts M. R., and T. M. Whited, 2011, Endogeneity in Empirical Corporate Finance, Elsevier.

[40] Robinson, J., 1952, The Generalization of the General Theory, In: the Rate of Interest and

    Other Essays, London, MacMillan.

[41] Schoar, A, 2002, E¤ects of Corporate Diversi…cation on Productivity, Journal of Finance

    57:2379–403.

[42] Thistlethwaite, D., and D. Campbell, 1960, Regression-discontinuity analysis: an alternative

    to the ex post facto experiment, Journal of Educational Psychology 51:309–317.




                                               33
                                Table 1: Interstate Bank Branching Laws by States
       This table reports the changes in interstate bank branching laws in the U.S. from 1994 to 2005. This data is from
       Johnson and Rice (2008). The effective date of the state’s setting of interstate bank branching restrictions allowed
       under the Interstate Banking and Branching Efficiency Act (IBBEA) is in the first column, with some states having
       multiple effective dates as they imposed or removed restrictions gradually. The next five columns then report the
       actual restrictions set by each state as of each effective date.
                                                 De novo interstate          Individual branch
                                                                                                        Statewide
                                                branching restriction      acquisition restriction
                  Effective          Age                                                                  cap on       Reciprocity
    State                                       (Yes = State restricts     (Yes = State does not
                    Date          restriction                                                            deposits      requirement
                                                 de novo interstate         allow acquisition of
                                                                                                        restriction
                                                     branching)                  branches)
Alabama           5/31/1997            5                  Yes                        Yes                   30%                No
Alaska             1/1/1994            3                  Yes                        No                    50%                No
Arizona           8/31/2001            5                  Yes                        No                    30%                Yes
Arizona            9/1/1996            5                  Yes                        Yes                   30%                Yes
Arkansas           6/1/1997            5                  Yes                        Yes                   25%                No
California        9/28/1995            5                  Yes                        Yes                   30%                No
Colorado           6/1/1997            5                  Yes                        Yes                   25%                No
Connecticut       6/27/1995            5                  No                         No                    30%                Yes
Delaware          9/29/1995            5                  Yes                        Yes                   30%                No
DC               6/13/1996            No                  No                         No                    30%                No
Florida            6/1/1997            3                  Yes                        Yes                   30%                No
Georgia           5/10/2002            3                  Yes                        Yes                   30%                No
Georgia            6/1/1997            5                  Yes                        Yes                   30%                No
Hawaii             1/1/2001           No                  No                         No                    30%                No
Hawaii             6/1/1997            5                  Yes                        Yes                   30%                No
Idaho            9/29/1995             5                  Yes                        Yes                    No                Yes
Illinois          8/20/2004           No                  No                         No                    30%                Yes
Illinois           6/1/1997            5                  Yes                        Yes                   30%                No
Indiana            7/1/1998            5                  No                         No                    30%                Yes
Indiana            6/1/1997           No                  No                         No                    30%                Yes
Iowa               4/4/1996            5                  Yes                        Yes                   15%                No
Kansas            9/29/1995            5                  Yes                        Yes                   15%                No
Kentucky          3/22/2004           No                  Yes                        Yes                   15%                Yes
Kentucky          3/17/2000           No                  Yes                        Yes                   15%                No
Kentucky           6/1/1997            5                  Yes                        Yes                   15%                No
Louisiana          6/1/1997            5                  Yes                        Yes                   30%                No
Maine              1/1/1997           No                  No                         No                    30%                Yes
Maryland          9/29/1995           No                  No                         No                    30%                No
Massachusetts      8/2/1996            3                  No                         No                    30%                Yes
Michigan         11/29/1995           No                  No                         No                     No                Yes
Minnesota          6/1/1997            5                  Yes                        Yes                   30%                No
Mississippi        6/1/1997            5                  Yes                        Yes                   25%                No
Missouri          9/29/1995            5                  Yes                        Yes                   13%                No
Montana          10/1/2001    5     Yes       Yes         22%      No
                                                       Increases   No
                                                         1% per
Montana          9/29/1995   N/A                           year
                                                       from 18%
                                                         to 22%
Nebraska         5/31/1997    5      Yes       Yes        14%      No
Nevada           9/29/1995    5    Limited   Limited      30%      No
New                                                                Yes
                 1/1/2002    No      No        No        30%
Hampshire
New                                                                Yes
                 8/1/2000     5      No        No        30%
Hampshire
New                                                                No
                 6/1/1997     5     Yes       Yes        20%
Hampshire
New Jersey       4/17/1996   No     Yes       No         30%       No
New Mexico        6/1/1996    5     Yes       Yes        40%       No
New York          6/1/1997    5     Yes       No         30%       No
North Carolina    7/1/1995   No     No        No         30%       Yes
North Dakota      8/1/2003   No     No        No         25%       Yes
North Dakota     5/31/1997   No     Yes       Yes        25%       Yes
Ohio             5/21/1997   No     No        No         30%       No
Oklahoma         5/17/2000   No     No        No         20%       Yes
Oklahoma         5/31/1997    5     Yes       Yes        15%       No
Oregon            7/1/1997    3     Yes       Yes        30%       No
Pennsylvania      7/6/1995   No     No        No         30%       Yes
Rhode Island     6/20/1995   No     No        No         30%       Yes
South Carolina    7/1/1996    5     Yes       Yes        30%       No
South Dakota      3/9/1996    5     Yes       Yes        30%       No
Tennessee        3/17/2003    3     No        No         30%       Yes
Tennessee         7/1/2001    5     No        No         30%       Yes
Tennessee         5/1/1998    5     Yes       No         30%       Yes
Tennessee         6/1/1997    5     Yes       Yes        30%       Yes
Texas             9/1/1999   No     No        No         20%       Yes
Texas            8/28/1995   N/A    N/A       N/A        20%       N/A
Utah             4/30/2001    5     No        No         30%       Yes
Utah              6/1/1995    5     Yes       No         30%       No
Vermont          1/1/2001    No     No        No         30%       Yes
Vermont          5/30/1996    5     Yes       No         30%       No
Virginia         9/29/1995   No     No        No         30%       Yes
Washington        5/9/2005    5     No        No         30%       Yes
Washington        6/6/1996    5     Yes       Yes        30%       No
West Virginia    5/31/1997   No     No        No         25%       Yes
Wisconsin         5/1/1996    5     Yes       Yes        30%       No
Wyoming          5/31/1997    3     Yes       Yes        30%       No
                                          Table 2: Summary Statistics
This table reports summary statistics for firms in the manufacturing sector in the LRD between 1976 and 2005. Panel
A reports pooled summary statistics for the time period before the interstate bank branching deregulation in a state
(“Before”) and after the interstate bank branching deregulation in a state (“After”). Assets is constructed via the
perpetual inventory method and is the sum of building assets plus machinery assets. Sales is the total value of
shipments. Production Cost sum of materials cost plus rental and administrative expenditures. Total capital
expenditure is the dollar value the firm spends on the purchase and maintenance of plant, machinery, and equipment,
etc. Materials Cost is the expenses for the cost of materials and parts purchased, resales, contract work, and fuel and
energy purchased. Age is the number of years since the firm first appeared in the LRD sample. Salaries and wages is
the total production-worker wages plus total non-production-worker wages plus total supplemental labor costs, which
include both legally required supplemental labor costs as well as voluntary supplemental labor costs of the firms.
Herfindahl index is the extent of industry concentration measured by summing up the square of each firm's market
share (in sales) at the annual three-digit NAICS level. Panel B reports sales statistics by sales quintile bins. Panel C
reports the number of bank establishments in four census years (years ending in 2 or 7) in the U.S., as well as the
number of out-of-state bank establishments and the number of in-state bank establishments. This panel uses data from
the FIRE census and the LBD. To comply with the U.S. Census Bureau confidentiality requirements, we report Quasi-
Medians which are the average of all observations between the 45th and the 55th percentile for each variable. All
observations are at the firm-year level. Where relevant, figures are in thousands of dollars.

       Panel A: Pooled sample statistics
                                                                   Overall             Before              After
       Assets                               Mean                10458.690          13592.096           8529.844
                                            Qmedian              1421.938           1519.124           1365.300
                                            Count                  570596             217411             353185
       Sales                                Mean                31054.170          41917.789          24366.828
                                            Qmedian              6029.849           6797.553           5620.406
                                            Count                  570596             217411             353185
       Production cost                      Mean                15623.600          20954.643          12341.964
                                            Qmedian              2687.164           3053.341           2489.982
                                            Count                  570596             217411             353185
       Total capital expenditure            Mean                  801.614            958.952            704.761
                                            Qmedian                93.001            109.230             83.730
                                            Count                  570596             217411             353185
       Materials cost                       Mean                19915.640          29164.237          14222.451
                                            Qmedian              2321.423           2430.627           2257.122
                                            Count                  570596             217411             353185
       Employment                           Mean                  195.566            218.410            181.503
                                            Qmedian                64.292             62.856             65.278
                                            Count                  570596             217411             353185
       Herfindahl index                     Mean                    0.018               0.016             0.020
                                            Qmedian                 0.012               0.011             0.013
                                            Count                  570596             217411             353185
       Salaries and wages                   Mean                 4659.628           5284.689           4274.858
                                            Qmedian              1339.898           1370.314           1321.518
                                            Count                  570596             217411             353185
        Panel B: Sales values by sales quintile bins
         Sales quintile      Mean           Quasi-median     Count
               1            4224.782           235.09        7806
               2            1366.741          518.787       20295
               3            2644.923          1488.27       38754
               4            7186.721         4879.323       76081
               5            84616.13         27946.17       151504




Panel C: Total bank establishments across census years (LBD/FIRE data)
                           (1)                   (2)                (3)
                     Total number           Out-of-state         In-state
                            of                  bank               bank
Year              bank establishments      establishments    establishments
1987                     54029                  7100              46929
1992                     66337                 12149              54188
1997                     69447                 21299              48148
2002                     79246                 34678              44568
            Table 3: TFP changes Around Interstate Bank Branching Deregulations
This table reports results for panel data regressions where the dependent variable is the TFP of a firm for a given
year (winsorized at the one percent level). The independent variables are: Deregulation Index is an index that is one
for the state that has the most restrictive interstate bank branching regulations as of the effective date of the state’s
setting of interstate bank branching restrictions, and increases by one for each restriction that is relaxed by a state
(this index takes the value zero in all years prior to the effective date); Before(4,1), which is a dummy variable that
equals one for years -4 to -1 relative to the deregulation of interstate bank branching in the firm’s state, and zero
otherwise; Log assets, which is the natural log of the one year lagged value of the firm’s capital stock; Log assets2;
Log age, which is the natural logarithm of firm age; Herfindahl index, which is the one year lagged concentration of
the firm’s three digit NAICS industry (winsorized at the one percent level); and firm and year fixed effects. The
various specifications in Panel A are as follows. Column (1) reports the basic specification. Column (2) reports the
regression results by including Before(4,1) as a control variable. Column (3) excludes firms born after interstate
bank branching deregulations are implemented in a firm’s state. Column (4) excludes firms that are categorized in
the US Census Bureau Business Register as dying within our sample period. Column (5) reports the results when
Deregulation index is modified by adding one for states that do not impose a reciprocity requirement in their
interstate banking regulations. The various specifications in Panel B are as follows. Column (1) restricts the sample
to within 5 years before and after interstate bank branching deregulations are implemented in a firm’s state.
Columns (2) and (3) falsify Deregulation index to be the value for one year after (thus moving the deregulation one
year before) and one year before (thus moving the deregulation one year after) the current year, respectively The
samples in these columns are restricted to within five years of the falsified deregulation year. Columns (4) and (5)
report the results for specifications where the dependent variables are labor productivity and sales growth,
respectively. Heteroskedasticity corrected robust standard errors, which are clustered by state, are in brackets. All
regressions are estimated with an intercept term. ***, **, and * represent statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10
percent levels, respectively.

     Panel A
                                                                   Exclude firms       Exclude
                                                   Controlling        born after         firms       Deregulation
                                     Basic
                                                       for         deregulation of    categorized    & reciprocity
                                  specification
                                                   Before(4,1)     interstate bank    as Death in       index
                                                                      branching          LBD
                                       (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)             (5)
     Deregulation index             0.003***         0.004***         0.003***         0.003***        0.003***
                                     [0.001]          [0.001]          [0.001]          [0.001]         [0.001]
     Before(4,1)                                       0.003
                                                      [0.002]
     Log assets                    -0.068***        -0.068***         -0.071***       -0.074***       -0.068***
                                    [0.006]           [0.006]          [0.006]         [0.006]         [0.006]
     Log assets2                   0.003***          0.003***         0.003***        0.003***        0.003***
                                    [0.000]           [0.000]          [0.000]         [0.000]         [0.000]
     Log age                         -0.006            -0.006           -0.000          0.003           -0.006
                                    [0.004]           [0.004]          [0.005]         [0.005]         [0.004]
     Herfindahl index              0.292***          0.292***         0.284***        0.370***        0.291***
                                    [0.106]           [0.106]          [0.105]         [0.126]         [0.106]

     Firm and Year FE                   Y               Y                 Y                Y               Y
     Observations                    570596           570596           558881           336977          570596
     Number of firms                 137009           137009           130701           62152           137009
     Adj. R-sq.                       0.517            0.517            0.515            0.495           0.517
Panel B
                                          Placebo test:            Placebo test:
                                     Deregulation falsified   Deregulation falsified
                        Sample
                                      to one year before         to one year after      Dependent     Dependent
                     restricted to
                                      actual deregulation      actual deregulation       variable:     variable:
                        within 5
                                              year                     year               Labor          Sales
                     years around
                                     (Sample restricted to    (Sample restricted to    productivity     growth
                      law change
                                     within 5 years around    within 5 years around
                                       placebo law year)        placebo law year)
                          (1)                  (2)                      (3)                (4)           (5)
Deregulation index      0.002*               0.002                    0.002              7.516***      0.011***
                        [0.001]            [0.001]                   [0.001]              [0.879]       [0.002]
Log assets            -0.043***           -0.038***                -0.049***           -118.767***    -0.112***
                        [0.007]            [0.007]                   [0.006]             [21.119]       [0.011]
Log assets2            0.001***            0.001**                  0.002***            10.404***     -0.005***
                        [0.001]            [0.001]                   [0.000]              [1.745]       [0.001]
Log age                  0.004              0.011                     -0.001            -6.667***     -0.284***
                        [0.008]            [0.007]                   [0.007]              [1.661]       [0.020]
Herfindahl index        0.326*              0.338*                  0.383**              -78.812*        0.045
                        [0.194]            [0.172]                   [0.175]             [43.496]       [0.159]

Firm and Year FE          Y                    Y                        Y                   Y             Y
Observations           248425               240278                   248035              583104        585692
Number of firms         77122                72025                    75765              144023        141335
Adj. R-sq.              0.563                0.566                    0.564               0.780         0.176
      Table 4: TFP changes Around Interstate Bank Branching Deregulations – By SBA
           Financing Eligibility of Firm prior to Law Change (Sharp-RD analysis)
Panel A of this table reports the result for a non-parametric local linear regression discontinuity estimator using
optimal bandwidth calculation of Imbens (e.g., Imbens and Lemieux (2008)). Panel B of this table reports results for
panel data regressions where the dependent variable is the difference between the average of the (winsorized) TFP
of a firm over the three years after the first interstate banking deregulation year of the state of a firm and the average
of the TFP over the three years prior to the first interstate banking deregulation year. The independent variables are:
SBA ineligible, which is a dummy variable that is one if the firm’s employment immediately prior to the firm’s
state’s interstate bank branching deregulation is higher than the SBA employment threshold for the firm’s three digit
NAICS industry to be classified as a small firm, and zero otherwise; Log normalized employment, which is the log
of the firm’s employment immediately prior to the firm’s state’s interstate bank branching deregulation divided by
the SBA employment threshold for the firm’s three digit NAICS industry; Log normalized employment2; Log assets,
which is the natural log of the one year lagged value of the firm’s capital stock; Log age, which is the natural
logarithm of the firm’s age; Herfindahl index, which is the one year lagged concentration of the firm’s three digit
NAICS industry (winsorized at the one percent level); Average prior 3 year TFP, which is the average of the TFP
over the three years prior to the year of the first interstate bank branching deregulation in the state of the firm; and 3-
digit NAICS industry, state, and year fixed effects. Column (1) reports the regression results with the sample of
firms whose employment prior to the interstate banking deregulation is within 10 percent of the SBA threshold.
Column (2) reports the regression results with the sample of firms whose employment prior to the interstate banking
deregulation is within 30 percent of the SBA threshold. Column (3) reports the regression results with the sample of
firms whose employment prior to the interstate banking deregulation is within 50 percent of the SBA threshold.
Column (4) reports the regression results with the complete sample. Heteroskedasticity corrected robust standard
errors, which are clustered on state, are in brackets. All regressions are estimated with an intercept term. ***, **,
and * represent statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels, respectively.

Panel A: Local linear regression estimate            Coeff                 SE
                                                   0.023***               0.010

Panel B: Parametric RD analysis
                                                    (1)                   (2)                 (3)                  (4)
                                                 10% sample            30% sample          50% sample         Full sample
SBA ineligible                                      0.071*              0.056***            0.049***           0.036***
                                                    [0.040]               [0.017]            [0.014]            [0.007]
Log norm. employment                                 -0.486              -0.153**             -0.049             -0.004
                                                    [0.325]               [0.072]            [0.046]            [0.004]
Log norm employment2                                 -2.482              -0.445**             -0.058           0.002**
                                                    [2.830]               [0.181]            [0.074]            [0.001]
Log assets                                           0.004                 0.006              0.003               0.002
                                                    [0.010]               [0.008]            [0.006]            [0.002]
Log age                                              -0.023                -0.017             -0.017              0.001
                                                    [0.024]               [0.019]            [0.014]            [0.007]
Herfindahl index                                     0.743                 -0.761             -0.160            -1.172*
                                                    [1.852]               [1.287]            [1.142]            [0.690]
Average prior 3 year TFP                           -0.171**             -0.219***           -0.223***         -0.259***
                                                    [0.070]               [0.042]            [0.031]            [0.027]

Industry, State, and Year FE                           Y                     Y                  Y                  Y
Observations                                          553                  1162               2077               6596
Adj. R-sq.                                           0.028                0.0738              0.089              0.099
     Table 5: TFP changes Around Interstate Bank Branching Deregulations – By SBA
     Financing Eligibility of Firm prior to Law Change (Sharp RD analysis), Additional
                                     Robustness Checks
This table reports results for panel data regressions where the dependent variable is the difference between the
average of the (winsorized) TFP of a firm over the three years after the first interstate banking deregulation year of
the state of a firm and the average of the TFP over the three years prior to the first interstate banking deregulation
year. The independent variables are: SBA ineligible, which is a dummy variable that is one if the firm’s employment
immediately prior to the firm’s state’s interstate bank branching deregulation is higher than the SBA employment
threshold for the firm’s three digit NAICS industry to be classified as a small firm, and zero otherwise; Log
normalized employment, which is the log of the firm’s employment immediately prior to the firm’s state’s interstate
bank branching deregulation divided by the SBA employment threshold for the firm’s three digit NAICS industry;
Log normalized employment2; Log normalized employment3; SBA ineligible dummy interacted with Log normalized
employment, Log normalized employment2 and Log normalized employment3; Log assets, which is the natural log of
the one year lagged value of the firm’s capital stock; Log age, which is the natural logarithm of the firm’s age;
Herfindahl index, which is the one year lagged concentration of the firm’s three digit NAICS industry (winsorized at
the one percent level); Average prior 3 year TFP, which is the average of the TFP over the three years prior to the
year of the first interstate bank branching deregulation in the state of the firm; and 3-digit NAICS industry, state, and
year fixed effects. Columns (1) through (5) report the regression results for the full sample with different powers of
Log normalized employment and interaction terms between SBA ineligible with different powers of Log normalized
employment. Heteroskedasticity corrected robust standard errors, which are clustered on state, are in brackets. All
regressions are estimated with an intercept term. ***, **, and * represent statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10
percent levels, respectively.

                                                (1)             (2)             (3)            (4)                (5)
                                               Linear          Cubic          Linear        Quadratic           Cubic
                                                                              spline          spline            spline
SBA ineligible                               0.044***        0.029***       0.041***        0.028**           0.035***
                                              [0.008]         [0.010]        [0.008]         [0.011]           [0.011]
Log norm. employment                         -0.011***         0.002        -0.013***         0.013             0.007
                                              [0.004]         [0.006]        [0.004]         [0.011]           [0.013]
Log norm. employment2                                          0.001                        0.006**             0.003
                                                              [0.001]                        [0.003]           [0.008]
Log norm. employment3                                          -0.001                                           -0.000
                                                              [0.000]                                          [0.001]
SBA ineligible *Log norm. employment                                           0.009           -0.022           -0.042
                                                                              [0.006]         [0.017]          [0.029]
SBA ineligible *Log norm. employment2                                                          -0.004           0.022
                                                                                              [0.005]          [0.017]
SBA ineligible *Log norm. employment3                                                                           -0.004
                                                                                                               [0.003]
Log assets                                     0.003           0.002           0.003          0.002             0.002
                                              [0.002]         [0.002]        [0.002]         [0.002]           [0.002]
Log age                                        -0.002          0.001          -0.001          0.001             0.001
                                              [0.007]         [0.007]        [0.007]         [0.007]           [0.007]
Herfindahl index                              -1.149*         -1.182*        -1.156*         -1.182*           -1.187*
                                              [0.681]         [0.694]        [0.685]         [0.693]           [0.690]
Average prior 3 year TFP                     -0.257***       -0.258***      -0.258***       -0.257***        -0.257***
                                              [0.027]         [0.028]        [0.028]         [0.028]           [0.028]
Industry, State, and Year FE                     Y               Y               Y              Y                  Y
Observations                                    6596            6596           6596            6596              6596
Adj. R-sq.                                     0.098           0.100           0.099          0.100             0.100
    Table 6: TFP changes Around Interstate Bank Branching Deregulations – By SBA
 Financing Eligibility of Firm prior to Law Change (Sharp RD analysis), Placebo Analysis
This table reports results for panel data regressions where the dependent variable is the difference between the
average of the (winsorized) TFP of a firm over the three years after the first interstate banking deregulation year of
the state of a firm and the average of the TFP over the three years prior to the first interstate banking deregulation
year. The independent variables are: SBA ineligible, which is a dummy variable that is one if the firm’s Normalized
employment immediately prior to the firm’s state’s interstate bank branching deregulation is higher than the falsified
value of the SBA threshold, and zero otherwise; Log normalized employment, which is the log of the firm’s
employment immediately prior to the firm’s state’s interstate bank branching deregulation divided by the SBA
employment threshold for the firm’s three digit NAICS industry; Log normalized employment2; Log assets, which is
the natural log of the one year lagged value of the firm’s capital stock; Log age, which is the natural logarithm of the
firm’s age; Herfindahl index, which is the one year lagged concentration of the firm’s three digit NAICS industry
(winsorized at the one percent level); Average prior 3 year TFP, which is the average of the TFP over the three
years prior to the year of the first interstate bank branching deregulation in the state of the firm; and 3-digit NAICS
industry, state, and year fixed effects Column (1) reports the regression results by falsifying the SBA eligibility
threshold for Normalized employment to 0.8 (actual threshold is 1). Column (2) reports the regression results by
falsifying the SBA eligibility threshold for Normalized employment to 1.2. All regressions use the sample of firms
whose Normalized employment prior to the interstate banking deregulation is within 10 percentage points of the
falsified SBA threshold. Heteroskedasticity corrected robust standard errors, which are clustered on state, are in
brackets. All regressions are estimated with an intercept term. ***, **, and * represent statistical significance at the
1, 5, and 10 percent levels, respectively.

                                                                       (1)                  (2)
                            Move discontinuity point by:              -20%                 +20%
                 SBA ineligible                                       0.021                0.015
                                                                    [0.031]               [0.104]
                 Log norm. employment                                -0.445                1.042
                                                                    [0.737]               [3.054]
                 Log norm. employment2                               -0.802                -4.663
                                                                    [1.389]               [7.629]
                 Log assets                                           0.012                0.013
                                                                    [0.013]               [0.019]
                 Log age                                              0.004                -0.052
                                                                    [0.031]               [0.057]
                 Herfindahl index                                     2.009                -3.918
                                                                    [2.322]               [2.470]
                 Average prior 3 year TFP                          -0.291***             -0.235**
                                                                    [0.052]               [0.095]

                 Industry, State, and Year FE                          Y                     Y
                 Observations                                         454                   158
                 Adj. R-sq.                                          0.173                 0.068
      Table 7: TFP changes Around Interstate Bank Branching Deregulations – By SBA
           Financing Eligibility of Firm prior to Law Change (Quasi RD analysis)
This table reports results for panel data regressions where the dependent variable is the TFP of a firm for a given
year (winsorized at the one percent level). The independent variables are: Deregulation index interacted with SBA
ineligible, where the Deregulation Index is an index that is one for the state that has the most restrictive interstate
bank branching regulations as of the effective date of the state’s setting of interstate bank branching restrictions, and
increases by one for each restriction that is relaxed by a state (this index takes the value zero in all years prior to the
effective date), and SBA ineligible is a dummy variable that is one if the firm’s employment immediately prior to the
firm’s state’s interstate bank branching deregulation is higher than the SBA employment threshold for the firm’s
three digit NAICS industry to be classified as a small firm, and zero otherwise; Deregulation index interacted with
SBA eligible, where SBA eligible is a dummy variable that equals one minus SBA ineligible; Deregulation index
interacted with Log normalized employment, which is the log of the firm’s employment immediately prior to the
firm’s state’s interstate bank branching deregulation divided by the SBA employment threshold for the firm’s three
digit NAICS industry; Log employment, which is the one year lagged value of the firm’s employment; Log
employment2; Log assets, which is the natural log of the one year lagged value of the firm’s capital stock; Log age,
which is the natural logarithm of the firm’s age; Herfindahl index, which is the one year lagged concentration of the
firm’s three digit NAICS industry (winsorized at the one percent level); and firm and year fixed effects. Column (1)
reports the regression results with the sample of firms whose employment prior to the interstate banking
deregulation is within 10 percent of the SBA threshold. Column (2) reports the regression results with the sample of
firms whose employment prior to the interstate banking deregulation is within 10 percent of the SBA threshold, and
Deregulation index is modified by adding one for states that do not impose a reciprocity requirement in their
interstate banking regulations. Column (3) reports the regression results with the sample of firms whose employment
prior to the interstate banking deregulation is within 30 percent of the SBA threshold. Column (4) reports the
regression results with the sample of firms whose employment prior to the interstate banking deregulation is within
50 percent of the SBA threshold. Column (5) reports the regression results with the complete sample.
Heteroskedasticity corrected robust standard errors, which are clustered on state, are in brackets. All regressions are
estimated with an intercept term. ***, **, and * represent statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels,
respectively.
                                              (1)               (2)            (3)          (4)            (5)
                                           10% sample     10% sample –      30% sample   50% sample   Full sample
                                                         Deregulation &
                                                        reciprocity index
Deregulation index*SBA ineligible            0.010*          0.012**          0.007*      0.005**      0.006***
                                            [0.006]          [0.005]          [0.003]      [0.002]      [0.002]
Deregulation index *SBA eligible             -0.011           -0.009           0.001        -0.003       -0.001
                                            [0.009]          [0.007]          [0.004]      [0.003]      [0.002]
Deregulation index *Log norm. employment   -0.240***        -0.223***          -0.002      -0.010*    -0.002***
                                            [0.082]          [0.075]          [0.013]      [0.006]      [0.000]
Log employment                             -0.148***        -0.146***          -0.074    -0.070***    -0.051***
                                            [0.044]          [0.044]          [0.046]      [0.023]      [0.007]
Log employment2                            0.014***         0.014***          0.008*     0.008***      0.007***
                                            [0.004]          [0.004]          [0.004]      [0.002]      [0.001]
Log assets                                  0.024**          0.024**           -0.001     -0.010**    -0.029***
                                            [0.012]          [0.012]          [0.009]      [0.005]      [0.002]
Log age                                      -0.012           -0.012           -0.008       0.012        0.003
                                            [0.027]          [0.027]          [0.019]      [0.013]      [0.007]
Herfindahl index                             -0.127           -0.131           0.038        0.246      0.360***
                                            [0.451]          [0.448]          [0.295]      [0.234]      [0.108]

Firm and Year FE                               Y               Y                Y            Y            Y
Observations                                 11146           11146            23957        43472       220625
Number of firms                               817             817             1754         3274        30702
Adj. R-sq.                                   0.515           0.515            0.512        0.517        0.486

After* SBA ineligible –
                                            0.021**         0.021**           0.006        0.008*      0.007***
After* SBA eligible
     Table 8: TFP changes Around Interstate Bank Branching Deregulations – By SBA
     Financing Eligibility of Firm prior to Law Change (Quasi RD analysis), Additional
                                     Robustness Checks
This table reports results for panel data regressions the dependent variable is the TFP of a firm for a given year
(winsorized at the one percent level). The independent variables are: Deregulation index interacted with SBA
ineligible, where the Deregulation Index is an index that is one for the state that has the most restrictive interstate
bank branching regulations as of the effective date of the state’s setting of interstate bank branching restrictions, and
increases by one for each restriction that is relaxed by a state (this index takes the value zero in all years prior to the
effective date), and SBA ineligible is a dummy variable that is one if the firm’s employment immediately prior to the
firm’s state’s interstate bank branching deregulation is higher than the SBA employment threshold for the firm’s
three digit NAICS industry to be classified as a small firm, and zero otherwise; Deregulation index interacted with
SBA eligible, where SBA eligible is a dummy variable that equals one minus SBA ineligible; Deregulation index
interacted with Log normalized employment, which is the log of the firm’s employment immediately prior to the
firm’s state’s interstate bank branching deregulation divided by the SBA employment threshold for the firm’s three
digit NAICS industry; Deregulation index interacted with Log normalized employment2; Deregulation index
interacted with Log normalized employment3; Log employment, which is the one year lagged value of the firm’s
employment; Log employment2; Log assets, which is the natural log of the one year lagged value of the firm’s
capital stock; Log age, which is the natural logarithm of the firm’s age; Herfindahl index, which is the one year
lagged concentration of the firm’s three digit NAICS industry (winsorized at the one percent level); and firm and
year fixed effects. All models report regression results with the complete sample. Columns (1) through (4) report
the regression results for the full sample with different powers of Log employment and interaction terms between
Deregulation Index with different powers of Log normalized employment. Heteroskedasticity corrected robust
standard errors, which are clustered on state, are in brackets. All regressions are estimated with an intercept term.
***, **, and * represent statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels, respectively.
                                               (1)         (2)           (3)           (4)
                                                                     Quadratic       Cubic
                                             Linear      Cubic
                                                                    interaction   interaction
Deregulation index*SBA ineligible           0.008***    0.006***     0.005***      0.005***
                                             [0.001]     [0.002]      [0.002]       [0.002]
Deregulation index *SBA eligible              -0.000      -0.001       -0.000        0.000
                                             [0.002]     [0.002]      [0.002]       [0.002]
Deregulation index *Log norm. employment    -0.002***   -0.002***      -0.000        -0.000
                                             [0.000]     [0.000]      [0.001]       [0.001]
Deregulation index *Log norm. employment2                             0.000*          0.000
                                                                      [0.000]       [0.000]
Deregulation index *Log norm. employment3                                            -0.000
                                                                                    [0.000]
Log employment                              0.008***       -0.023   -0.050***        -0.024
                                             [0.003]      [0.023]    [0.008]        [0.023]
Log employment2                                            0.000    0.007***          0.000
                                                          [0.005]    [0.001]        [0.005]
Log employment3                                            0.000                      0.000
                                                          [0.000]                   [0.000]
Log assets                                  -0.026***   -0.029***   -0.029***     -0.029***
                                             [0.002]      [0.002]     [0.002]       [0.002]
Log age                                       -0.002       0.003       0.003          0.003
                                             [0.007]      [0.007]     [0.007]       [0.007]
Herfindahl index                            0.349***     0.359***    0.359***      0.357***
                                             [0.111]      [0.108]     [0.109]       [0.108]

Firm and Year FE                                Y           Y           Y             Y
Observations                                 220625      220625      220625        220625
Number of firms                              30702        30702       30702         30702
Adj. R-sq.                                    0.485       0.486       0.486         0.486

After* SBA ineligible –
                                            0.008***    0.007***     0.005**       0.005**
After* SBA eligible
    Table 9: TFP changes Around Interstate Bank Branching Deregulations – By SBA
 Financing Eligibility of Firm prior to Law Change (Quasi RD analysis), Placebo Analysis
This table reports results for panel data regressions where the dependent variable is the TFP of a firm for a given
year (winsorized at the one percent level). The independent variables are: Deregulation index interacted with SBA
ineligible, where the Deregulation Index is an index that is one for the state that has the most restrictive interstate
bank branching regulations as of the effective date of the state’s setting of interstate bank branching restrictions, and
increases by one for each restriction that is relaxed by a state (this index takes the value zero in all years prior to the
effective date), and SBA ineligible, which is a dummy variable that is one if the firm’s Normalized employment
immediately prior to the firm’s state’s interstate bank branching deregulation is higher than the falsified value of the
SBA threshold, and zero otherwise; Deregulation index interacted with SBA eligible, where SBA eligible is a dummy
variable that equals one minus SBA ineligible; Deregulation index interacted with Log normalized employment,
which is the log of the firm’s employment immediately prior to the firm’s state’s interstate bank branching
deregulation divided by the SBA employment threshold for the firm’s three digit NAICS industry; Deregulation
index interacted with Log normalized employment2; Deregulation index interacted with Log normalized
employment3; Log employment, which is the one year lagged value of the firm’s employment; Log employment2; Log
assets, which is the natural log of the one year lagged value of the firm’s capital stock; Log age, which is the natural
logarithm of the firm’s age; Herfindahl index, which is the one year lagged concentration of the firm’s three digit
NAICS industry (winsorized at the one percent level); and firm and year fixed effects. Column (1) reports the
regression results by falsifying the SBA eligibility threshold for Normalized employment to 0.8 (actual threshold is
1). Column (2) reports the regression results by falsifying the SBA eligibility threshold for Normalized employment
to 1.2. All regressions use the sample of firms whose Normalized employment prior to the interstate banking
deregulation is within 10 percentage points of the falsified SBA threshold. Heteroskedasticity corrected robust
standard errors, which are clustered on state, are in brackets. All regressions are estimated with an intercept term.
***, **, and * represent statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels, respectively.

                                                                           (1)                  (2)
                               Move discontinuity point by:               -20%                 +20%
               Deregulation index*SBA ineligible                          0.002                 -0.001
                                                                        [0.035]                [0.022]
               Deregulation index *SBA eligible                           0.001                 -0.023
                                                                        [0.021]                [0.030]
               Deregulation index *Log norm. employment                  -0.022                 0.100
                                                                        [0.107]                [0.119]
               Log employment                                            -0.025                 0.051
                                                                        [0.069]                [0.105]
               Log employment2                                           0.006                  -0.005
                                                                        [0.006]                [0.008]
               Log assets                                              -0.034***                0.014
                                                                        [0.011]                [0.020]
               Log age                                                   -0.023                 0.084
                                                                        [0.035]                [0.103]
               Herfindahl index                                          -0.179                 0.863
                                                                        [0.391]                [0.568]
               Firm and Year FE                                             Y                      Y
               Observations                                               9785                   3026
               Number of firms                                             720                    242
               Adj. R-sq.                                                 0.517                 0.484

               After* SBA ineligible –
                                                                         -0.001                -0.022
               After* SBA eligible
           Table 10: TFP changes Around Interstate Bank Branching Deregulations -
                                   By Firm Size Quintiles
This table reports results for panel data regressions where the dependent variable is the TFP of a firm for a given
year (winsorized at the one percent level). The independent variables in Panel A are: an interaction term between
Deregulation Index, which is an index that is one for the state that has the most restrictive interstate bank branching
regulations as of the effective date of the state’s setting of interstate bank branching restrictions, and increases by
one for each restriction that is relaxed by a state (this index takes the value zero in all years prior to the effective
date), and each of the five size quintiles (i.e., Size Quintile 1, and so on). Columns (1) and (2) use size quintile bins
based on sales, whereas Columns (3) and (4) use size quintile bins based on assets. Columns (2) and (4) in Panel A
use the Deregulation index that is modified by adding one for states that do not impose a reciprocity requirement in
their interstate banking regulations. The independent variables in Panel B are: interactions term between interaction
terms between Deregulation index and each of the five employment bins (i.e., for employment between 1 and 10,
between 11 and 20, between 21 and 50, between 51 and 100, and greater than 100). Column (2) in Panel B uses the
Deregulation index that is modified by adding one for states that do not impose a reciprocity requirement in their
interstate banking regulations. Other independent variables common to both Panels (A) and (B) are: Log assets,
which is the natural log of the one year lagged value of the firm’s capital stock; Log assets2; Log age, which is the
natural logarithm of firm age; Herfindahl index, which is the one year lagged concentration of the firm’s three digit
NAICS industry (winsorized at the one percent level); and firm and year fixed effects. Heteroskedasticity corrected
robust standard errors, which are clustered on state, are in brackets. All regressions are estimated with an intercept
term. ***, **, and * represent statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels, respectively.
    Panel A: TFP Results by Size Based on Sales and Assets
                                                     Size Bins by Sales                    Size Bins by Assets
                                                    (1)              (2)                   (3)             (4)
                                                               Deregulation                           Deregulation
                                               Deregulation           &               Deregulation          &
                                                   index        reciprocity               index        reciprocity
                                                                    index                                 index
    Deregulation index*Size Quintile 1           0.027***         0.024***              0.011**         0.011**
                                                  [0.006]          [0.005]               [0.005]         [0.004]
    Deregulation index*Size Quintile 2           0.008***         0.008***              0.012***        0.010***
                                                  [0.003]          [0.002]               [0.002]         [0.002]
    Deregulation index*Size Quintile 3           0.004**          0.004***              0.008***        0.007***
                                                  [0.002]          [0.001]               [0.001]         [0.001]
    Deregulation index*Size Quintile 4             0.002            0.002                 0.002           0.002
                                                  [0.002]          [0.002]               [0.002]         [0.001]
    Deregulation index*Size Quintile 5           0.003***         0.003**                0.002*           0.002
                                                  [0.001]          [0.001]               [0.001]         [0.001]
    Log assets                                  -0.080***        -0.080***             -0.082***       -0.082***
                                                  [0.006]          [0.006]               [0.005]         [0.005]
    Log assets2                                  0.004***         0.004***              0.004***        0.004***
                                                  [0.000]          [0.000]               [0.000]         [0.000]
    Log age                                        0.006            0.005                 0.004           0.004
                                                  [0.007]          [0.007]               [0.006]         [0.006]
    Herfindahl index                             0.344***         0.343***              0.337***        0.336***
                                                  [0.109]          [0.109]               [0.109]         [0.109]
    Firm and Year FE                                 Y                Y                     Y               Y
    Observations                                  294438           294438                294438          294438
    Number of firms                                47745            47745                 47745           47745
    Adj. R-sq.                                     0.489            0.489                 0.489           0.489

    Deregulation index*Quintile 1 –
                                                    0.024***         0.021***            0.009*          0.009**
    Deregulation index*Quintile 5
Panel B: TFP Results by Size Based on Employment
                                                       (1)              (2)
                                                                  Deregulation
                                                   Deregulation
                                                                  & reciprocity
                                                      index
                                                                      index
Deregulation index*(Emp >=1 & <=10)                  0.008***       0.007***
                                                      [0.002]        [0.002]
Deregulation index*(Emp >=11 & <=20)                 0.007***       0.006***
                                                      [0.002]        [0.002]
Deregulation index*(Emp >=21 & <=50)                 0.005***       0.004***
                                                      [0.002]        [0.002]
Deregulation index*(Emp >=51 & <=100)                0.003**         0.002*
                                                      [0.001]        [0.001]
Deregulation index*(Emp >=101)                       0.003**         0.002*
                                                      [0.001]        [0.001]
Log assets                                          -0.080***      -0.080***
                                                      [0.005]        [0.005]
Log assets2                                          0.004***       0.004***
                                                      [0.000]        [0.000]
Log age                                                0.006          0.006
                                                      [0.006]        [0.007]
Herfindahl index                                     0.344***       0.343***
                                                      [0.109]        [0.109]

Firm and Year FE                                        Y              Y
Observations                                         294438         294438
Number of firms                                       47745          47745
Adj. R-sq.                                            0.488          0.488

Deregulation index*(Emp >=1 & <=10)–
                                                     0.005**        0.005**
Deregulation index*(Emp >=100)
                Table 11: TFP changes Around Interstate Bank Branching Deregulations -
                        By External Financing Dependence of the Firm’s Industry
      This table reports results for panel data regressions where the dependent variable is the TFP of a firm for a given
      year industry (winsorized at the one percent level). The independent variables are: an interaction term between
      Deregulation Index, which is an index that is one for the state that has the most restrictive interstate bank branching
      regulations as of the effective date of the state’s setting of interstate bank branching restrictions, and increases by
      one for each restriction that is relaxed by a state (this index takes the value zero in all years prior to the effective
      date), and High External Financial Dependence, which is a dummy variable that is one if the firm is in a three digit
      NAICS industry that is classified as highly dependent on external finance based on Rajan and Zingales’ (1998)
      measure, and zero otherwise; an interaction term between Deregulation index and Low External Financial
      Dependence, which is one minus the High External Financial dummy; Log assets, which is the natural log of the
      one year lagged value of the firm’s capital stock; Log assets2; Log age, which is the natural logarithm of the firm’s
      age; Herfindahl index, which is the one year lagged concentration of the firm’s three digit NAICS industry industry
      (winsorized at the one percent level); and firm and year fixed effects. Heteroskedasticity corrected robust standard
      errors, which are clustered on state, are in brackets. All regressions are estimated with an intercept term. ***, **,
      and * represent statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels, respectively.

                                                                                   (1)                                (2)
                                                                                                              Deregulation &
                                                                             Deregulation
                                                                                                                reciprocity
                                                                                index
                                                                                                                    index
Deregulation index*High External Financial Dependence                           0.008***                         0.008***
                                                                                 [0.003]                          [0.002]
Deregulation index*Low External financial Dependence                            0.003***                         0.003***
                                                                                 [0.001]                          [0.001]
Log assets                                                                     -0.068***                        -0.068***
                                                                                 [0.006]                          [0.006]
Log assets2                                                                     0.003***                         0.003***
                                                                                 [0.000]                          [0.000]
Log age                                                                           -0.006                           -0.006
                                                                                 [0.005]                          [0.005]
Herfindahl index                                                                0.276**                          0.274**
                                                                                 [0.106]                          [0.106]

Firm and Year FE                                                                    Y                                 Y
Observations                                                                     570550                           570550
Number of firms                                                                  137006                           137006
Adj. R-sq.                                                                        0.517                            0.517

Deregulation index*High External Financial Dependence –                         0.005**                           0.005**
Deregulation index*Low External Financial Dependence
Figure 1: Number of bank establishments in years ending with 2 or 7 (economic census years),
  Figure 2: Change in 3 year average TFP from before to after the interstate bank branching
                      deregulation around the SBA eligibility threshold.




Figure 3: Change in yearly TFP from before to after the interstate bank branching deregulation
                            around the SBA eligibility threshold.
Figure 4: Density of Normalized Employment
