                                      NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                                               FRIENDS OR FOES?
7+(,17(55(/$7,216+,3%(7:((1$1*(/$1'
VENTURE CAPITAL MARKETS

                                                Thomas Hellmann
                                                 Veikko Thiele

                                              Working Paper 20147
                                      http://www.nber.org/papers/w20147


                            NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                                            May 2014




     We would like to thank Einar Bakke, Holger Rau, RalphWinter, conference participants at the Annual
     International Industrial Organization Conference (IIOC) in Boston, the Canadian Economics Association
     Annual Meeting in Montreal, the Conference on Entrepreneurship and Finance in Lund, and seminar
     participants at Queen’s University and the University of Rochester (Simon) for valuable comments
     and suggestions. This project was in part funded by a SSHRC research grant. The views expressed
     herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
     Research.

     NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
     reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
     NBER publications.

     © 2014 by Thomas Hellmann and Veikko Thiele. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
     exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
     © notice, is given to the source.
Friends or Foes? The Interrelationship between Angel and Venture Capital Markets
Thomas Hellmann and Veikko Thiele
NBER Working Paper No. 20147
May 2014
JEL No. D53,D83,G24,L26

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper develops a theory of how angel and venture capital markets interact. Entrepreneurs first
receive angel then venture capital funding. The two investor types are ‘friends’ in that they rely upon
each other’s investments. However, they are also ‘foes’, because at the later stage the venture capitalists
no longer need the angels. Using a costly search model we derive the equilibrium deal flows across
the two markets, endogenously deriving market sizes, competitive structures, valuation levels, and
exit rates. We discuss how the model generates alternative testable hypotheses for the recent rise of
angel investing.


Thomas Hellmann
Sauder School of Business
University of British Columbia
2053 Main Mall
Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z2
CANADA
and NBER
hellmann@sauder.ubc.ca

Veikko Thiele
Queen's School of Business
Goodes Hall
143 Union Street
Kingston, Ontario
Canada K7L 3N6
vthiele@business.queensu.ca
1       Introduction
Investments by wealthy individuals into start-up companies are typically referred to as angel
investments. Over the last decade angel investors have become a more important source of
early stage funding for entrepreneurs. According to Crunchbase, the US angel market grew at
an annual rate of 33% between 2007 and 2013.1 In a 2011 report of the OECD, the size of the
angel market was estimated to be roughly comparable to the venture capital (VC henceforth)
market (OECD, 2011).2 The rise of the angel market coincides with a shift in VC investments
towards doing more later-stage deals. As a result the funding path of growth-oriented start-ups
typically involves some initial funding from angel investors, with subsequent funding coming
from venture capitalists (VCs henceforth). Facebook and Google, two of the most successful
start-ups in recent history, both received angel financing prior to obtaining VC.
    With this bifurcation in the funding environment of entrepreneurial companies, the ques-
tion arises how these two types of investors interact, especially whether angels and VCs are
friends or foes? Angel investors have limited funds and typically need VCs to provide follow-
on funding for their companies. At the same time VCs rely on angel investors for their own
deal flow. As they play complementary roles in the process of financing new ventures it might
seem that angels and VCs should be friends. However, in practice angels and VCs often see
each other as foes. In particular, there is a concern about so-called “burned angels”. Angel
investors frequently complain that VCs abuse their market power by offering unfairly low val-
uations. Expectations of low valuations at the VC stage then affect the willingness of angel
investors to invest in early stage start-ups. Michael Zapata, an angel investor, explains it as
follows (Holstein, 2012):

        In cases where the VCs do see a profit opportunity, they have become increasingly
        aggressive in low-balling the managements and investors of emerging companies
        by placing lower valuations on them. [...] Angels call these actions ‘cram downs’
        or ‘push downs’. The market has been very rough on the VCs and they are making
        it tougher on the angels. They are killing their future deal flow by cramming them
        down, crashing them out.

    The main objective of this paper is to examine the interdependencies between two types
of investors, angels and VCs, that focuses on two distinct sequential financing stages. Our
goal is to provide a tractable model of the equilibrium dynamics between these two markets
    1
    Data based on http://www.crunchbase.com/.
    2
    For 2009 the report estimates the US (European) venture capital market at $18.3B ($5.3B), and the US (Euro-
pean) angel market at $17.7B ($5.6B).


                                                      1
that generates a rich set of empirical predictions. We are particularly interested in identifying
the underlying determinants of market size and market competition (which depends on the
entry rates of entrepreneurs, angels and VCs), as well as company valuations and success rates.
Special attention is given to analyzing the full equilibrium implications of the “burned angels”
problem.
    From a theory perspective, the challenge is to obtain a model of the two connected markets
that generates tractable comparative statics for key variables. To this effect we develop a search
model with endogenous entry by entrepreneurs, angels and VCs. Companies require angels for
seed investments, and may require VC for funding their growth options. The model generates
predictions about the level of competition in both the angel and VC market. It predicts the
expected length of fundraising cycles (i.e., the time it takes to raise angel and VC funding), as
well as the rate at which companies fail, progress from the angel to the VC market, or achieve
some kind of exit. The model also derives equilibrium company valuations at both the angel
and VC stage.
    Our model has three key building blocks that build on previously disparate literatures. First
we draw on the staged financing literature (Admati and Pfleiderer, 1994; Berk, Green and Naik,
1999). Specifically we introduce a dynamic investment structure where start-ups first obtain
seed funding in the angel market, then follow-up funding in the VC market. This simple dy-
namic structure allows us to capture the basic interdependencies between angels and VCs: an-
gels invest first but need the VCs to take advantage of a company’s growth options. Central to
the model are two feedback loops. The first is the forward loop of how the angel market affects
the VC market. The key linkage is that outflow of successful deals in the angel market consti-
tute the deal inflow in the VC market. Here we can think of angels and VCs are ‘friends’. The
second is the backward loop of how the VC market affects the angel market. The key linkage
here is that the utilities of the entrepreneurs and angel investors at the VC stage affect the entry
rates of entrepreneurs and angel investors at the angel stage. A key insight is that at the VC
stage, the VC no longer needs the angel to make the investment. The angel’s investment is sunk
and he provides no further value to the company. This creates a primal friction between angels
and VCs, i.e., this is where angels and VCs become ‘foes’.
    Second, we draw on the search literature. Inderst and Müller (2004) explain how a search
model à la Diamond-Mortensen-Pissaridis allows for a realistic modeling of imperfect competi-
tion in the VC market. We expand their model to two interconnected markets. We also augment
their specification with a death rate for entrepreneurs to capture the full implications of demand
and supply imbalances. Our model highlights the consequences of imperfect competition in
the VC market on the angels’ bargaining position: while a monopolist VC would have a lot of
power over angels, such bargaining power get dissipated in a more competitive VC market.

                                                 2
     Third, to examine further determinants of the relative bargaining strengths of entrepreneurs,
angels and VCs, we consider the issue of minority shareholder protection (La Porta, Lopez-
de-Silanes, Shleifer and Vishny, 2000). In his work on the “burned angels” problem, Leavitt
(2005) provides a detailed legal analysis of the vulnerabilities of angels at the time of raising
VC. As new investors, VCs can largely dictate terms. They can also use option grants as a
way of compensating the entrepreneur for the low valuation offered to angel investors. Leavitt
argues that legal minority shareholder protection can mitigate the burned angel problem, but
cannot fully resolve it. Based on this, we consider a hold-up problem between the angel and
the entrepreneur at the time of the follow-up round.3 The entrepreneur can try to collude with
the VC to pursue the venture alone without the angel. While the threat remains unexercised
in equilibrium, the hold-up potential redistributes rents from the angel to the entrepreneur and
VC. Our analysis traces out the equilibrium effects that such hold-up has on the returns and
investment levels of angels and VCs.
     Our model generates a large number of comparative statics results. Throughout the analysis
we consider the joint equilibrium across the two markets. We find that our within-market effects
are consistent with results in the prior literature (e.g., Inderst and Müller, 2004), so our main
contribution is the analysis of cross-market effects. Here we discover several new insights. For
example, a standard within-market result is that while higher search costs for the investor lead
to less competition, higher search costs for the entrepreneur lead to more competition (because
of the fact that investors can capture more of the rents). However, this result does not apply in a
cross-market setting. We show that there is less angel competition when there are higher search
costs at the VC stage for either the VC or entrepreneur. This is because both of these search
costs reduce the utilities of the entrepreneur and angel investor.
     One of the most interesting results concern the effects of angel protection. One might con-
jecture that the ability to take advantage of angel investors increases entrepreneurial entry. How-
ever, we show that in equilibrium there is lower entry by entrepreneurs, because the direct ben-
efit for entrepreneurs from holding up angels at a later stage is outweighed by the indirect cost
of a thinner angel market. Intriguingly, we find opposite effects for entrepreneurial entry and
survival. Weaker angel protection actually leads to better entrepreneurial incentives (because it
is allows the entrepreneur to capture additional rents) and therefore to higher success rates.
     Our theory implies a series of testable predictions about the size of angel and VC markets,
their competitive structure, as well as the valuations obtained. It is useful to present the insights
and predictions of the model within the current industry context. Specifically, within the context
   3
    We use the term “hold-up” only for the ex-post relationship between angel and entrepreneur, at the time of
venture capital financing. The venture capitalist cannot hold up the angel or the entrepreneur, as he has no prior
contractual relationship with them.



                                                        3
of our model, we consider a number of alternative explanations for the recent rise of angel mar-
kets. This allows us to demonstrate how our theory generates testable predictions for comparing
these alternative explanations. Let us consider three leading explanations for the recent rise of
angel investments; we informally label them as (i) “angel investing got cheaper”, (ii) “angel
investing got easier”, and (iii) “angel investors got smarter”.
    The first argument (“angel investing got cheaper”) is that the cost of starting a business has
dramatically declined in recent years. This phenomenon has been widely discussed in the pop-
ular press (The Economist, 2014), and is related to the so-called “lean startup” movement (see
e.g. Ries (2011), Blank (2013), and Ewens, Nanda and Rhodes-Kropf (2014)). In our model,
lower start-up costs lead to more entry of entrepreneurs, and even more entry of angels. Overall
this generates a more competitive angel market, and results in shorter fundraising cycles. Lower
start-up costs also imply lower equity stakes for angels, generating better entrepreneurial incen-
tives and thus higher success rates. All this increases the rate at which angel-backed companies
enter the VC market. Free entry ensures that the VC market expands in size accordingly.
    The second argument (“angel investing got easier”) is that angel markets have become more
transparent. The main driver is the rise of internet-based platforms that facilitate matching
between investors and entrepreneurs. Angellist is currently the market leader, but a number
of other “crowdfunding” platforms also compete in this space (Nanda, 2013). So-called “seed
accelerators” are likely to further increase the transparency of angel markets.4 Our search model
naturally lends itself to study market transparency. We find that greater transparency in the angel
market leads to more entry by entrepreneurs, and even more entry by angel investors. Greater
competition leads to higher valuations and better entrepreneurial incentives. Interestingly all
of these changes in the angel market imply that the VC market should also expand in size.
Moreover, if these electronic platforms also increase the transparency of VC markets, our model
further predicts additional entry of VCs, with more competition, shorter fundraising cycles, and
higher valuations.
    The third argument (“angel investors got smarter”) is that angel investors have become more
experienced and sophisticated. This could be because of the creation of national angel investor
associations, and the rise of organized angel groups and angel networks (OECD, 2011). Ac-
cording to this argument angels learn over time how to better protect themselves against hold-up
in a variety of legal and strategic ways (Leavitt, 2005). Our model generates some testable pre-
dictions about the effects of better angel protection, namely that it increases the entry of angels
as well as entrepreneurs (as discussed above). It also creates a more competitive angel market,
and leads to higher valuations. The effects of angel protection on the VC market are nuanced.
   4
    A typical accelerator, such as YCombinator, promotes an entire cohort of start-ups in a carefully orchestrated
“demo day”, so that a large number of angel investors can easily meet the entire cohort at once (Cohen, 2013).


                                                        4
The loss of ex-post rents discourages entry of VCs, which is the ‘foes’ effect. However, there is
also a positive ‘friends’ effect from the increased supply of angel-financed companies entering
the VC market. While these two effects create an ambiguous prediction on the size of the VC,
the model generates the unambiguous prediction that competition in the VC market decreases.
Thus we note that better angel protection has opposite effects on the level of competition of
angel and VC markets. This also implies shorter fundraising cycles in the angel market, but
longer ones in the VC market.
    Our theory also generates predictions about the choice of projects, and the timing of exits.
Some angel investors have been advocating early exits as an attractive investment approach
(Peters, 2009). Accordingly, start-ups focus on projects that can be sold relatively quickly. The
advantage of such a strategy is that the entrepreneurs and angels can avoid the various challenges
of securing follow-on investments, typically from VCs. The disadvantage is that they may fail
to achieve their full potential. Our base model simply assumes that a successful company either
has a growth option, in which case it always optimal for the owners to seek VC, or it does not,
in which case it is optimal to sell. In a model extension we allow for a choice between two
development strategies: a safe strategy, where the venture can simply be sold in an early exit,
versus a risky strategy, which either leads to failure, or generates higher returns, namely if the
company succeeds in developing a growth option and obtaining VC financing. A key prediction
of this model extension is that the safe strategy of early exits becomes more likely when angel
protection is low, such as when the value of the start-up resides mainly in the entrepreneur’s
human capital. Consistent with this prediction we note that many early exists take the form
of so-called “acqui-hires” where the acquirer is mainly interested in the human capital of the
start-up, and not in the product itself.
    The remainder of the paper is structured as follow. Section 2 discusses the relation of this
paper to the literature. Section 3 introduces our main model. We then derive and analyze the
angel market equilibrium in Section 4, and the VC market equilibrium in Section 5. Section
6 analyzes how limited legal protection of angel investors affects the angel and VC market
equilibrium. Section 7 examines the decision of entrepreneurs and angels to exercise the safe
option of selling the venture early, versus the more risky option of seeking VC investments.
Section 8 discusses the empirical predictions from our model. Section 9 summarizes our main
results and discusses future research directions. All proofs are in the Appendix.


2    Relationship to Literature
The introduction briefly discusses how this paper builds on a variety of literatures. In this
section we explain in greater detail the connections to the prior literature. The natural starting

                                                5
point is the seminal paper by Inderst and Müller (2004). They were the first to introduce search
into a model of entrepreneurial financing, focussing on how competitive dynamics affect VC
valuations. Silveira and Wright (2006) and Nanda and Rhodes-Kropf (2012a) also use similar
model specifications for other purposes. One theoretical advance of this paper is that it examines
the relationship between two interconnected search markets. A limitation of all these search
models (including ours) is that they require homogenous types. Hong, Serfes, and Thiele (2013)
consider a single-stage VC financing model with matching among heterogeneous types.
    A growing number of papers examine the implications of staged financing arrangements.
Neher (1999) and Bergemann, Hege, and Peng (2009) study the design of optimal investment
stages. Admati and Pfleiderer (1994) and Fluck, Garrison, and Myers (2005) consider the dif-
ferential investment incentives of insiders and outsiders at the refinancing stage. Building on
recent work about tolerance for failure (Manso, 2011), as well as the literature on soft budget
constraints (Dewatripont and Maskin, 1995), Nanda and Rhodes-Kropf (2012a) consider how
investors optimally choose their level of failure tolerance in a staged financing model. These
models all assume that the original investors can finance the additional round. Our model de-
parts from this assumption by focusing on smaller angel investors who do not have the financial
capacity to provide follow-on financing.
    The theory closest to ours is the recent work by Nanda and Rhodes-Kropf (2012b) on financ-
ing risk. They too assume that the initial investors cannot provide all the follow-on financing.
Their analysis focuses on the possibility of multiple equilibria in the late stage market, and
shows how different expectations about the risk of refinancing affects initial project choices.
Our model does not focus on financing risk, but instead focuses on the hold-up problem at the
refinancing stage.
    Our model distinguishes between angels and VCs on the basis of the investment stage and
the amount of available funding: angels only invest in early stages and have limited funds;
VCs only invest in later stages and have sufficient funds to do so. The empirical evidence of
Goldfarb, Hoberg, Kirsch and Triantis (2012) and Hellmann, Schure and Vo (2013) is broadly
supportive of these assumptions. The latter paper also provides empirical evidence on the fi-
nancing dynamics, showing how some companies obtain only angel financing (possibly exiting
early), whereas others transition from the angel to the VC market.
    While we focus on some important distinctions between angels and VCs, our model clearly
does not capture all the nuances of reality. First, it is sometimes difficult to draw a precise
boundary between what constitutes an angel investor versus a VC. Shane (2008) and the OECD
report (OECD, 2011) provide detailed descriptions of angel investing, and the diversity within
the angel community. Second, we do not model value-adding activities of angels versus VCs.
Chemmanur and Chen (2006) assume that only VCs but not angels can provide value-added

                                                6
services. By contrast, Schwienbacher (2009) argues that both angels and VCs may provide
such services, but that angel investors provide more effort because they still need to attract
outside investors at a refinancing stage.5 Third, in our model both angels and VCs are pure
profit maximizers. The work of Axelson, Strömberg, and Weisbach (2009) suggests that the
behavior of VCs may be influenced by agency considerations. Moreover, angel investors can
be motivated by non-financial considerations, such as personal relationships or social causes, as
discussed in the work of Shane (2008) and Van Osnabrugge and Robinson (2000). Finally, while
we motivate our paper with angels and VCs, our theory applies more broadly to the relationship
between early and late investors. Further examples of early investors include friends and family,
accelerators, and other specialized early stage investors, such as university-based seed funds.
Further examples of late investors include corporate investors, and a variety of other financial
institutions such as banks or growth capital funds.
    Our paper is also related to the literature on the staged commercialization of new venture
ideas. Teece (1986), Anand and Galetovics (2000), Gans and Stern (2000) and Hellmann and
Perotti (2011) all consider models where complementary asset holders have a hold-up opportu-
nity at a later stage. They mainly ask how this hold-up problem impacts the optimal organiza-
tion of the early stage development efforts. This paper focuses on the challenges of financing
ventures across the different commercialization stages.


3       The Base Model
Our objective is to build a tractable equilibrium model that endogenously derives the size and
competitive structure of the early stage (angel) and late stage (VC) market. Conceptually we
want a model with endogenous entry to determine market size, and with a continuum between
monopoly and perfect competition to determine the level of competition. This naturally leads
us to a search model in the style of Diamond, Mortensen and Pissaridis (see Pissarides (1979,
2000), Mortensen and Pissarides (1994), and Diamond (1982, 1984)). This model has free entry,
and it endogenously generates a market density that is a continuous measure of competition.
Moreover, the real-life search process of entrepreneurs looking for investors closely resembles
the assumptions of pairwise matching used in such search models (Inderst and Müller (2004)).
    We consider a continuous time model with three different types of risk-neutral agents: en-
trepreneurs, angel investors, and VCs. The length of one period is ∆ → 0, and the common
discount rate is r > 0. In each period a number of potential entrepreneurs discover business op-
    5
    In terms of related empirics, Hellmann and Puri (2002) provide evidence on the value-adding activities of
venture capital versus angel investors. Kerr, Lerner and Schoar (2013) examine the causal effect of angel groups
on company performance.


                                                       7
                                   EARLY STAGE                                                  LATE STAGE

                                    Angels (A)                                                     VCs (V)

                                                        Success of             Start‐ups
                                                        Early Stage            attractive
                                                       Investments              for VCs*
                                     Angel
                                     Market                                                       VC Market            Success
 Entrepreneurs (E)
                                    ( ,     )                                                     ( ,     )          (payoff )

                                                           1                     1



                                 Obsolete Ideas          Failure               Liquidation     Obsolete Ideas
                                                      (zero payoff)            (payoff )
       *Section   7 (Early Exits) allows for additional uncertainty about the presence of growth options (prob. ).

                              Figure 1: Financing Stages – Angel and VC Markets

portunities. The cost for an entrepreneur to start his business is l ∈ [0, ∞), which is drawn from
the distribution F (l). We interpret l as the personal labor cost associated with establishing the
new venture (e.g., the cost of developing a business plan). The endogenous number of start-ups
founded in each period is mE  1 ; see Figure 1 for a graphical overview.
    Entrepreneurs are wealth-constrained, so they require external financing for their start-up
companies. Specifically, each entrepreneur needs an early stage investment k1 , and a late stage
investment k2 . What we have in mind is that entrepreneurs first need funding to develop pro-
totypes of their products (early stage financing) in order to prove the viability of their business
models. They then require follow-on investments to bring their developed products to market
(late stage financing). We assume that early and late stage financing is provided by two distinct
types of investors. For clarity of exposition we associate angels with early stage investments,
and VCs with late stage investments.6 For simplicity we also assume that early stage investors
do no contribute at all to the late stage investment.7
    In the early stage each entrepreneur needs to find an angel investor, who can make the
required investment k1 . We assume a monopolistically competitive search market with free
   6
      In reality VCs may sometimes also invest in early stage deals, and angels in late stage deals. This does not
affect the basic insights from our model; all that matters is that there is some separation of early and late stage
markets, where a company that obtained funding from an investor in the early stage needs to find a new investor
at the late stage. This may be either because the early stage investor does not have the funds to fully finance the
late stage investments, or because early and late stage investors have different skills and information, making them
both essential to the success of the venture.
    7
      Allowing them to finance part of the later stage investment would not change anything. All that matters for
the model is that angels do not have enough wealth to finance both stages. Conversely we also assume that VCs
cannot be the sole investor in both the early and the late stage market. Our assumptions closely matches industry
behavior where early stage investors typically seek syndication partners for the later investment stages.


                                                                   8
entry.8 Specifically, in each period mA   1 angel investors enter the early stage market and seek
                                       A
investment opportunities, where m1 is endogenous and satisfies the zero-profit condition for
angels. We denote M1A as the equilibrium stock of angels in the early stage market at a given
point in time, and M1E as the equilibrium stock of entrepreneurs.
    Entrepreneurial opportunities often depend on speedy execution, so that delays in fundrais-
ing can be costly for the entrepreneurs. We therefore augment the standard search model with a
parameter that measures urgency, i.e., the cost of delay. Specifically we assume that a fraction
δ1 M1E of business ideas becomes obsolete in each period, generating a zero payoff (see Figure
1). We refer to δ1 as the death rate of early stage ventures, which reflects the urgency for start-
up companies to receive angel investments. The death rate δ1 therefore constitutes an indirect
cost for entrepreneurs when searching for early stage financing.
    Our model includes the standard search model parameters. We denote the individual search
cost for entrepreneurs in the early stage market by σ1E , and the search cost for angels by σ1A .
Naturally we focus on the case where the angel market exists, which requires that σ1A is not too
large. The expected utilities from search in the early stage market is U1E for entrepreneurs, and
                                                                                             0.5
U1A for angels. We use a standard Cobb-Douglas matching function x1 = φ1 M1A M1E                   with
constant returns to scale, where x1 is the number of entrepreneur-angel matches in each period,
and φ1 > 0 is an efficiency measure of the matching technology in the early stage market.
    Once matched, the angel and entrepreneur bargain over the allocation of equity. We use
the symmetric Nash bargaining solution to derive the equilibrium outcome of this bilateral bar-
gaining game. The angel then invests k1 in the new venture, and the entrepreneur exerts private
effort e1 . The entrepreneur’s disutility of effort c(e1 ) is strictly convex, with c(0) = c0 (0) = 0.
Note that our model includes entrepreneurial incentives, which allows us to generate predictions
about the rate at which entrepreneurs move from the angel to the VC market.
    The early stage investment succeeds with probability ρ1 (e1 ), which is increasing and con-
cave in the entrepreneur’s private effort e1 , with ρ1 (0) = 0, ρ01 (0) = ∞ and lime1 →∞ < 1. With
probability (1 − ρ1 (e1 )) the early stage investment fails and generates a zero payoff; see Figure
1. With probability ρ1 (e1 ) it is successful, in which case there are two possible scenarios: With
probability g the venture has a growth option and becomes an attractive candidate for VCs to
make the follow-on investment k2 . With probability 1 − g the venture has no further growth op-
tion, but can be liquidated, generating the payoff y1 > 0. For our base model we assume that the
growth option is sufficiently attractive, so that realizing the growth option is always preferred
   8
    For tractability we have to assume that all investors in a market are homogenous, and that they face no entry
costs. Relaxing this assumption would considerably increase the complexity of the model. Note, however, that our
model does account for ongoing investor costs, as captured by their search costs.




                                                       9
to liquidation. In Section 7 we relax this assumption by introducing risky growth options, and
analyzing the optimal choice between growth and liquidation (early exit).
    The total number of ventures moving into the VC market in each period is given by mE     2 ≡
gρ1 (e1 )x1 . Their owners – namely the respective entrepreneur and angel – then search for a VC
investor. Again we assume that the late stage market is monopolistically competitive with free
entry. We denote mV2 as the endogenous number of VCs entering the market in each period.
The equilibrium stock of VCs in the late stage market at a given point in time is M2V , and
the equilibrium stock of ventures seeking VC financing is M2E . As for the angel market, we
assume that a fraction δ2 M2E of business ideas becomes obsolete in each period, generating a
zero payoff (see Figure 1). The individual search cost in the late stage market is σ2i , and the
expected utility from search is U2i , with i = E, A, V . To ensure existence of the VC market, we
assume that σ2V is not too large. For tractability we assume that entrepreneurs and angels – as
joint owners of late stage start-ups – incur the same cost when searching for a VC investor, i.e.,
                                                                                       0.5
σ2 ≡ σ2E = σ2A . The matching function for the late stage market is x2 = φ2 M2V M2E , where
x2 is the number of start-ups that receive VC financing in each period, and φ2 > 0 is a measure
of the matching efficiency.
    Once the owners of a late stage start-up (entrepreneur and angel) found a VC investor, they
all bargain over the allocation of equity, as discussed below. After reaching an agreement the
VC makes the required follow-on investment k2 .9 The venture then generates the expected
payoff y2 > 0 (with y2 > y1 ).
    In the late stage market the bargaining game is between three key players. We use the Shap-
ley value to derive the outcome of this trilateral bargaining game.10 This implicitly assumes that
all prior contracts can be renegotiated. While the entrepreneur and angel may want to commit
to a specific equity allocation beforehand, the VC never agreed to that, and may therefore ask
that all prior arrangements be ignored. In equilibrium the three parties agree on a division of
shares that is determined by their outside options.
   9
      To keep the analysis of the late stage market with trilateral bargaining games tractable, we abstract from private
efforts of entrepreneurs in the late stage. Allowing for private efforts would change the late stage payoff structure;
however, this would not qualitatively affect our insights with respect to the interrelationship between both markets
– which is the main focus of this paper.
   10
      The Shapley value is widely regarded as the most natural extension of the Nash bargaining solution to games
with more than two players. It provides an intuitive allocation of equity, which takes into account the marginal
contribution of each party to the overall value generation.




                                                          10
    Given the simple payoff structure of the model, equity is always an optimal security.11 The
angel investor initially receives an equity stake α in the early stage. This equity stake can be
renegotiated into β A in case of VC financing. The VC receives an equity stake β V . The so-
called post-money valuation is then given by V1 = k1 /α for angel rounds, and V2 = k2 /β V for
VC rounds.


4        Angel Market
4.1      Bargaining and Deal Values
We start by looking at how entrepreneurs and angels split the expected surplus when making
a deal. Our model consists of two investment stages, so the early stage allocation of surplus
naturally depends on the partners’ expected utilities from search in the late stage market, U2E and
U2A . However, the entrepreneur and angel cannot affect these utilities because of their inability
to commit not to renegotiate. The early stage equity allocation therefore only determines how
the liquidation value y1 is split, with the angel receiving αy1 and the entrepreneur keeping
(1 − α)y1 .
     We call the utilities at the time of making a deal the deal values, and denote them by D1E
and D1A . In the angel market they are given by

                          D1E = ρ1 (e1 ) gU2E + (1 − g)(1 − α)y1 − c(e1 )
                                                               


                          D1A = ρ1 (e1 ) gU2A + (1 − g)αy1 − k1 .
                                                         


     For a given equity allocation α, the entrepreneur then chooses his private effort e1 to maxi-
mize his deal value D1E . The entrepreneur’s optimal effort choice e∗1 is defined by the following
first-order condition:

                               ρ01 (e1 ) gU2E + (1 − g)(1 − α)y1 = c0 (e1 ).
                                                               
                                                                                                                 (1)

We can immediately see that the entrepreneur’s effort e∗1 is increasing in his utility from search
in the late stage market, U2E , and decreasing in the angel’s equity share α.
    11
     While our model set-up is suitable for analyzing valuations, it is not meant to generate insights into financial
security structures. Angels and VCs sometimes use more elaborate securities, such as preferred equity or convert-
ible notes (see Kaplan and Strömberg (2003) and Hellmann (2006)). In this model none of these more complicated
securities can achieve anything better than simple equity. This is because in case of VC financing, the angel’s
choice of security is irrelevant – the original contract will get renegotiated anyway. Technically we note that none
of the coalition values of the Shapley game depend on the securities held by the angel investor. Moreover, in case
of liquidation, there is an exogenous liquidation value, rendering security structures unimportant.

                                                        11
    The optimal equity share for the angel, α∗ , satisfies the symmetric Nash bargaining solution,
which accounts for the outside option of each party. The outside option for the entrepreneur is
to search for a new angel investor, which would give him the expected utility U1E . The angel
also searches for a new entrepreneur, but free entry implies U1A = 0. Thus, α∗ maximizes the
Nash product D1E (e∗1 ) − U1 D1A (e∗1 ) .
                               

    Naturally we focus on the downward sloping portion of the bargaining frontier.12 In the Ap-
pendix we show that the angel’s equilibrium equity stake α∗ is decreasing in the entrepreneur’s
outside option U1E (which captures the equilibrium of the entire market). This is a well-known
result from Nash bargaining, namely that if a party has a better outside option, it receives more
utility. In the present setting, this implies that more equity must be left for the entrepreneur,
which also makes the venture more likely to succeed (as de∗1 /dα < 0).


4.2       Market Equilibrium
We can now characterize the stationary equilibrium of the angel market. Let q1E ≡ x1 /M1E de-
note the deal arrival rate for entrepreneurs, which measures the probability that an entrepreneur
finds an angel investor at a given point in time. The expected utility of an entrepreneur when
searching for an angel investor, U1E , is then defined by the following asset equation:

                                rU1E = q1E (D1E − U1E ) + δ1 (0 − U1E ) − σ1E .

This equation says that the discounted expected utility from search equals the expected value of
getting a deal (q1E (D1E − U1E )), minus the expected costs when searching for an angel investor:
the risk of the business idea becoming obsolete (δ1 U1E ) and the direct cost of search (σ1E ).
Solving the asset equation we find the entrepreneur’s expected utility from search (U1E ), and
likewise the angel’s expected utility (U1A ):

                                 −σ1E + q1E D1E                         −σ1A + q1A D1A
                         U1E   =                                U1A   =                ,                 (2)
                                  r + δ1 + q1E                             r + q1A

where q1A ≡ x1 /M1A is the deal arrival rate for angels. Because of free entry, the expected utility
from search must be zero in equilibrium. Thus, in equilibrium we have

                                                  q1A D1A = σ1A .                                        (3)
  12
                     k1 denote the value of k1 at which the bargaining frontier has a zero slope, i.e., where
       Formally, let b
dD1E (e∗1 )/dα  = 0. We therefore focus on the case where k1 < b
                                                               k1 .




                                                        12
    An entrepreneur with entry cost l will only enter the early stage market if l ≤ U1E . Thus,
there exists a unique threshold entry cost l, with l = U1E , so that entrepreneurs enter as long as
l ≤ l. The endogenous equilibrium number of entrepreneurs entering the angel market in each
period, m1E∗ , is then given by
                                        mE∗           E
                                           1 = F (U1 ).                                         (4)

Moreover, in a stationary equilibrium the stock of entrepreneurs must be constant. This re-
quires that the total outflow of entrepreneurs – because either their business ideas became ob-
solete (δ1 M1E ) or they found an angel investor (q1E M1E ) – is equal to the equilibrium inflow of
entrepreneurs (mE∗ 1 ):
                                     δ1 M1E + q1E M1E = mE∗ 1 .                                 (5)

Likewise, in a stationary equilibrium the outflow of angels (q1A M1A ) is equal to the (endogenous)
inflow of angels (mA 1 ):
                                          q1A M1A = mA1.                                        (6)

The equilibrium of the angel market is then defined by conditions (2), (3), (4), (5), and (6).
Moreover, since the equilibrium is jointly determined in the angel and VC market, it must also
satisfy equations (7) - (11), which we will discuss in Section 5.2.


4.3    Results
Entrepreneurs and angel investors are forward-looking decision makers who take into account
their expected utilities in the VC market, given by U2E and U2A . Thus the angel market equilib-
rium depends on the characteristics of the VC market, which is the backward feedback loop.
Our model also features a forward feedback loop, where the outflows from the angel market
(excluding liquidations and failures) constitute the inflows into the VC market. All of our com-
parative statics results take into account these two equilibrium feedback loops, i.e., we always
consider the joint equilibrium between the two markets. We now discuss the results for the
angel market (we characterize the VC market equilibrium in Section 5.2).
    It is useful to distinguish between market-level and firm-level effects. On the market level
we are interested in the extent of entrepreneurial activities within the economy, which in our
model is measured by the equilibrium entry of entrepreneurs mE∗     1 . We are also interested in
                                                A∗
the equilibrium number of angel investors m1 that enter the market in each period to search
for investment opportunities. Related to these two variables of interest is the number of angel-
backed deals x∗1 in each period. It turns out that in equilibrium the inflow of angels equals the
                                             ∗
number of early stage deals, i.e., mA∗1 = x1 .




                                                13
    We also want to understand the determinants of the degree of competition among angel
investors. In a search model this can be readily measured by the number of angels relative to
the number of entrepreneurs in the market, also known as market thickness. Formally we denote
the degree of angel market competition by θ1∗ , where θ1∗ = M1A∗ /M1E∗ . It is interesting to note
that this measure of competition is closely related to the expected time for entrepreneurs to find
                                 p
an angel, which is given by 1/[φ1 θ1∗ ].13 We call this the fundraising cycle, which is negatively
related to the market transparency φ1 and to the level of competition θ1∗ .
    On the firm level we want to understand the determinants of the valuation of angel-backed
start-ups. We focus on the post-money valuation as given by V1 = k1 /α. We also want to
examine the implications for the success rate of angel investments, as reflected by ρ1 (e1 ).
    For parsimony we derive the equilibrium properties of all these variables in the Appendix.
The next proposition summarizes our comparative statics results, focusing on the effects of the
early stage parameters.

Proposition 1 (Angel Market – Early Stage Parameters) Consider the angel market.

Market-level Effects:
  (i) The equilibrium inflow of entrepreneurs mE∗
                                               1 is increasing in φ1 , and decreasing in δ1 ,
      σ1E , σ1A and k1 .

 (ii) The equilibrium inflow of angels mA∗      1 , and therefore the equilibrium number of early
      stage deals x∗1 , is increasing in φ1 , and decreasing in σ1A and k1 . The effects of δ1 and σ1E
      are ambiguous.

(iii) The equilibrium degree of competition θ1∗ is increasing in φ1 , δ1 and σ1E , and decreasing
      in σ1A and k1 .

Firm-level Effects:
  (i) The equilibrium valuation of early stage start-up companies V1∗ is increasing in φ1 , and
      decreasing in δ1 , σ1E and σ1A . The effect of k1 is ambiguous.

 (ii) The equilibrium success rate of angel investments ρ1 (e∗1 ) is increasing in φ1 , and decreas-
      ing in δ1 , σ1E , σ1A , and k1 .

    Our model generates intuitive comparative statics. Higher costs for angels (σ1A and k1 ) lead
                                                                                      ∗
to less angel entry (lower mA∗
                            1 ), and therefore to fewer early stage deals (lower x1 ), so that
   13
      Formally, the probability that an entrepreneur finds an angel in a given periodpis x∗1 /M1E∗ . Using the definitions
of x1 and θ1 we find that the equilibrium probability of finding an angel is φ1 θ1∗ . Thus, the expected time for
entrepreneurs to find an investor is 1/[φ1 θ1∗ ].
                                            p


                                                           14
entrepreneurs on average need longer to secure early stage financing. And because search is
costly, fewer entrepreneurs then find is worthwhile to enter the market (lower mE∗ 1 ). This makes
the angel market less competitive, suggesting that the effect on angel entry is more pronounced
(as σ1A and k1 have a first-order effect on mA∗                                         E∗
                                              1 , and only a second-order effect on m1 ).
    Higher direct and indirect search costs for entrepreneurs (σ1E and δ1 ) result in fewer en-
trepreneurs entering the early stage market (lower mE∗   1 ). This implies on the one hand fewer
investment opportunities for angels (which has a negative effect on mA∗    1 ), and, on the other
hand, a better bargaining position and higher deal values for angels (which has positive effect
on mA∗                                             A∗
       1 ). While the net effect on angel entry (m1 ) is ambiguous, we find that the angel market
overall becomes more competitive (i.e., the angel/entrepreneur ratio increases).
    The firm-level effects are best understood by looking at the equilibrium allocation of equity
between entrepreneurs and angels. We know that higher direct and indirect search costs for
entrepreneurs, σ1E and δ1 , weaken their outside option when negotiating a deal with an angel
investor, explaining the lower valuations. Higher costs for angels, σ1A and k1 , also decrease val-
uations. This is because fewer angels then enter the market in equilibrium, so that entrepreneurs
have a weaker outside option, as they need on average longer to find an alternative investor. A
lower valuation means that the entrepreneur needs to give up more equity, which in turn curbs
his effort incentives (lower e∗1 ), and therefore results in a lower probability of success (lower
ρ1 (e∗1 )).14
    The next proposition provides a comprehensive summary of how the equilibrium of the
angel market depends on the determinants of the VC market.

Proposition 2 (Angel Market – Late Stage Parameters) Consider the angel market.

Market-level Effects: The equilibrium inflow of entrepreneurs mE∗                                     A∗
                                                                            1 , the inflow of angels m1
(and therefore the number of early stage deals x∗1 ), and the early stage degree of competition
θ1∗ , are all increasing in φ2 , and decreasing in δ2 , σ2 , σ2V , and k2 .

Firm-level Effects: The equilibrium valuation of early stage start-up companies V1∗ , and the
success rate of angel investments ρ1 (e∗1 ), are increasing in φ2 , and decreasing in δ2 , σ2 , σ2V , and
k2 .

    All cross-market effects are driven by the backward feedback loop. Higher utilities for
the entrepreneur and angel investor at the VC stage also benefit the angel market. To fully
  14
     Intuitively we would expect k1 to have a positive effect on the equilibrium valuation V1∗ . Because k1 also
affects α∗ , which in turn is only implicitly defined by (12), we do not get a clear comparative statics result.
However, one can show that dV1∗ /dk1 > 0 when (i) k1 is sufficiently small, or (ii) the entrepreneur’s effort e1 is
exogenous (so that surplus can be perfectly transferred between entrepreneurs and angels through α). The proof is
available from the authors upon request.

                                                       15
understand these results we need to draw on some insights about the degree of VC market
competition, which we discuss in more detail in Section 5.3. Intuitively a more competitive VC
market has the following two effects: First, it reduces the expected time for entrepreneurs and
angels to secure follow-on investments from VCs. Second, it improves their bargaining position
when striking a deal with a VC, allowing them to capture more of the expected surplus from
the investment. Hence a more efficient VC market, as captured by an increase in the market
transparency φ2 , improves entrepreneurs’ and angels’ expected utilities from search (U2E and
                                                                                             ∗    ∗
U2A ). This in turn explains why the angel market variables, such as mE∗                A∗
                                                                                  1 , m1 , θ1 , V1 , and
ρ1 (e∗1 ), are all increasing in φ2 . A similar argument also applies for lower values of σ2V and k2 .
However, even though δ2 and σ2 both have a positive effect on the level of VC competition (as
we will formally show in Section 5.3), we find that the net effect on U2E and U2A is negative.
This is because the direct negative effects of these parameters on U2E and U2A always dominate.
                                                      ∗     ∗           ∗
The angel market variables, such as mE∗            A∗
                                            1 , m1 , θ1 , V1 , and ρ1 (e1 ), are therefore decreasing in
δ2 and σ2 .
    It is worth pointing out that cross-market effects fundamentally have a different logic than
within-market effects. This becomes most obvious when looking at the entrepreneurs’ search
costs. Proposition 1 shows that higher search costs at the angel stage increase angel market
competition. This is because of a market power effect, where the angels’ stronger bargaining
position encourages more angels and fewer entrepreneurs to enter. In contrast Proposition 2
shows that higher search costs at the VC stage decrease angel market competition. This is
because of the backward feedback loop, where lower utilities at the VC stage discourage entry
and competition at the angel stage.15


5        VC Market
5.1      Bargaining and Deal Values
In the late stage market the owners of each start-up company – the entrepreneur and angel –
seek an investment k2 from a VC. Naturally the angel investment k1 is now sunk. The total
surplus, which we denote by π, is then defined by π = y2 − k2 . We use the Shapley value to
derive the outcome of this tripartite bargaining game. The outside option for the entrepreneur
and angel is to go back to the market and search for a new VC investor; the joint value of their
outside option is therefore given by U2E + U2A . The VC can also search for a new investment
    15
     Note also that the results about the entrepreneurs’ search costs are different from the comparative statics for
investors’ search costs. Higher VC search costs at the VC stage dampen competition in the angel market; and this
is also true for higher angel search costs at the angel stage.



                                                        16
opportunity; however, free entry implies U2V = 0. For now we assume that the success of a late
stage start-up requires the involvement of all three parties, i.e., it is impossible to exclude any
of the three partners. In Section 6 we consider a model extension where the entrepreneur and
VC can establish a new venture based on the same business idea, thereby excluding the angel
investor.
    In the Appendix we derive the following late stage deal values for the entrepreneur (D2E ),
angel (D2A ), and VC (D2V ), using the Shapley value:

      D2E = 31 π +   1
                          U2 + U2A , D2A = 13 π + 16 U2E + U2A , D2V = 13 π − 13 U2E + U2A
                          E                                                           
                     6


Each entrepreneur and angel gets one-third of the total surplus π, plus a premium which reflects
the joint value of their outside option (U2E + U2A ). The VC receives the remaining surplus.
The equilibrium deal values define the late stage equity shares that all parties agree on, which
we denote by β i , i = E, A, V . For parsimony we state the equilibrium equity shares in the
Appendix. A better outside option for the entrepreneur and angel – as reflected by U2E + U2A –
gives them more equity in equilibrium, and therefore higher deal values.


5.2     Market Equilibrium
We can now characterize the equilibrium of the VC market. The inflow of start-up companies,
which we denote by mE∗ 2 , is endogenously determined by the angel market equilibrium. This
forward loop is characterized by the following equilibrium condition:

                                                      ∗ ∗
                                           mE∗
                                            2 = gρ1 (e1 )x1                                     (7)

    Let q2E ≡ x2 /M2E denote the deal arrival rate for entrepreneur-angel pairs, and q2V ≡ x2 /M2V
the deal arrival rate for VCs. In addition to (7), the stationary VC market equilibrium is then
defined by the following conditions:

                                                          −σ2 + q2E D2E
                                        U2A = U2E =                                             (8)
                                                          r + δ2 + q2E

                                           q2V D2V   = σ2V                                      (9)

                                  δ2 M2E + q2E M2E = gρ1 (e1 )x1                               (10)

                                           q2V M2V   = mV2 .                                   (11)




                                                     17
The expected utility for entrepreneurs and angels from search in the late stage market is given
by (8). The expected utilities are the same because entrepreneurs and angels – as co-owners of a
late stage start-up company – have identical search costs (σ = σ2E = σ2A ), in addition to identical
deal values (D2E = D2A ).16 Condition (9) is the free-entry condition for VCs, which implies that
U2V = 0 in equilibrium. Condition (10) ensures that the total outflow of new ventures equals
the total inflow. Likewise, condition (11) guarantees that the outflow of VCs equals the inflow.
The VC market equilibrium is therefore determined by equations (7) - (11), but for our analysis
we actually use the joint equilibrium between both markets, which in fact is characterized by
equations (2) - (11).


5.3    Results
For the market-level effects we focus on the equilibrium entry of VCs (mV2 ∗ ), the number of
VC-backed deals (x∗2 ), and the degree of competition (θ2∗ ≡ M2V ∗ /M2E∗ ). Again we find that
mV2 ∗ = x∗2 in the stationary equilibrium. Moreover, the measure of competition is inversely
                                                      p
related to the VC fundraising cycle, as given by 1/[φ2 θ2∗ ]. On the firm level we are interested
in how the determinants of the VC market affect the equilibrium valuation of late stage start-up
companies. We focus again on the post-money valuation as given by V2 = k2 /β V .
    The next proposition summarizes the comparative statics results, focusing on the parameters
that are associated with the VC market.

Proposition 3 (VC Market – Late Stage Parameters) Consider the VC market.

Market-level Effects:
  (i) The equilibrium inflow of VCs mV2 ∗ , and therefore the equilibrium number of late stage
      deals x∗2 , is increasing in φ2 , and decreasing in σ2V and k2 . The effects of δ2 and σ2 are
      ambiguous.

 (ii) The equilibrium degree of competition θ2∗ is increasing in φ2 , δ2 and σ2 , and decreasing
      in σ2V and k2 .
Firm-level Effect: The equilibrium valuation of late stage start-up companies V2∗ is increasing
in φ2 and k2 , and decreasing in δ2 , σ2 and σ2V .

    The comparative statics results resemble those for the angel market equilibrium (effects of
early stage parameters). We therefore do not provide a detailed discussion of the results here,
and refer the reader to the explanations right after Proposition 1 in Section 4.3.
  16
    This greatly simplifies many of our basic comparative statics. However, in Section 6 we consider a model
extension where the late stage expected utilities of angels and entrepreneurs differ.

                                                    18
   The next proposition provides a comprehensive summary of how the equilibrium of the VC
market depends on the parameters associated with the angel market.

Proposition 4 (VC Market – Early Stage Parameters) Consider the VC market.

Market-level Effects:
                                                                         V∗
  (i) The equilibrium inflow of start-up companies mE∗    2 and VCs m2 are both increasing in
      φ1 , and decreasing in σ1A and k1 . The effects of δ1 and σ1E are ambiguous.

 (ii) The characteristics of the angel market do not affect the equilibrium degree of VC market
      competition θ2∗ .

Firm-level Effect: The characteristics of the angel market do not affect the equilibrium valua-
tion of late stage start-ups V2∗ .

    The main driver of these results is the forward feedback loop, i.e., the fact that the angel
market generates the deal flow to the VC market as show by equation (7). We know from
Proposition 1 that the early stage matching efficiency φ1 has a positive effect on these two
equilibrium variables, while the direct and indirect costs for angels, σ1A and k1 , have a negative
effect. In equilibrium, a higher inflow of start-ups also encourages more VCs to enter the
market. This explains why we obtain identical comparative statics results for mV2 ∗ and mE∗     2 .
We also discussed in Section 4.3 why the direct and indirect search costs for entrepreneurs, σ1E
and δ1 , have an ambiguous effect on the number of angel investments, which naturally extends
to the inflow of start-ups into the VC market.
    Another important insight from Proposition 4 is that while the characteristics of the angel
market determine the absolute inflow of start-ups and VCs into the late stage market, they do not
affect the equilibrium ratio of investors to companies (θ2∗ ). In other words, when the inflow of
start-ups increases by x percent, then the number of VCs entering the market also increases by x
percent, so that the investor/company ratio remains constant in equilibrium. As a consequence,
angel market parameters do not affect the valuation of late stage companies (V2∗ ), which depends
on the level of competition, and not on the size, of the VC market.17
  17
     Naturally one may ask what additional assumptions are required to obtain a model where the angel market
parameters directly affect the level of VC competition. It turns out that such models are no longer tractable. The
main problem is that search models have tractable solutions as long as types are homogenous. Suppose we let
choices in the angel market (e.g., entrepreneurial effort) affect VC market variables other than market size (e.g.,
the profitability at the VC stage). Any first-order condition at the angel stage then has to allow for the possibility
that the optimizing entrepreneur will differ from all other entrepreneurs at the VC stage. This means that one
would have to solve a search model with heterogeneous types, which is well beyond the scope of this paper.




                                                         19
6     Angel Protection
6.1    Bargaining and Deal Values
We already noted that one of the fundamental problems for angel investors is their limited
bargaining power at the VC stage. Their investments are sunk and they cannot finance the deals
by themselves. At the bargaining table they solely rely on their contractual rights, especially
on their right to refuse the VCs’ deal. So far the model assumes that angels enjoy full legal
protection, in the sense that they can always prevent the entrepreneur from pursuing the venture
without them. In this section we allow for the possibility that the entrepreneur colludes with the
VC to exclude the angel investor by implementing the growth option in a new venture that the
angel is not part of. From the VCs’ perspective, such an exclusion is an opportunistic exercise of
their market power. From the entrepreneurs’ perspective, this essentially constitutes a hold-up
of their original angel investors.
     We model the hold-up opportunity in the following way. Suppose the initial investment was
successful, and the venture has a growth opportunity which makes it attractive for VC financing
(this happens with probability ρ1 g). The angel has a legal stake in the company, but is not
needed for the remaining value creation process. The entrepreneur may now consider closing
down the existing company and incorporating a new venture to implement the growth option,
thereby excluding the angel investor. This new venture still needs the late stage investment
k2 from a VC. Closing down the existing venture and starting a new venture is obviously not
without challenges. Most notably, the angel could mount a legal claim that the growth option
belongs to the existing venture. If starting such a new venture is inefficient, the entrepreneur and
VC do not actually start a new venture in equilibrium. However, the threat of doing so improves
their bargaining position. This changes the payoffs at the VC stage, which has repercussions
for the entire equilibrium across both the angel and the VC market.
     In the model we define λπ as the total surplus that an entrepreneur and VC can obtain
when excluding the angel investor by implementing the growth option in a newly incorporated
venture. The parameter λ ∈ [0, 1] measures how dispensable the angel is for the late stage value
creation process, and therefore measures the hold-up power of the entrepreneur. For example,
if the business model is based on a patented idea, and the patent belongs to the original firm,
then the entrepreneur cannot incorporate a new venture based on the same idea without the
angel. The angel is then completely indispensable, so that λ = 0; this was the assumption in
the base model. However, if the business idea cannot be fully protected by patents or contracts,
the entrepreneur can hold up the angel by incorporating the new venture, generating a surplus
λπ, with λ ∈ (0, 1). The angel is completely dispensable for λ = 1.


                                                20
    Consider now the case of λ ∈ (0, 1) where angel protection is imperfect. The threat of a
new incorporation weakens the angel’s bargaining position, and forces him to agree to a lower
equity stake (β A ) compared to our base model with λ = 0. Formally, for the Shapley value the
joint surplus for the entrepreneur-VC subcoalition (which excludes the angel investor) is now
given by λπ. In the Appendix we derive the following new deal values (and related new equity
shares) for the late stage market:

                    1              1                                 1              1
        D2E =         [2 + λA ] π + U2E + U2A ,               D2A =     [1 − λA ] π + U2E + U2A ,
                                                                                              
                    6              6                                  3              6
                    1              1
        D2V           [2 + λA ] π − U2E + U2A .
                                             
               =
                    6              3

    For now fix the expected joint utility from search for the entrepreneur and angel (U2E + U2A ).
We can then see that weaker angel protection (higher λ) leads to a lower deal value for the
angel (D2A ), and to higher deal values for the entrepreneur (D2E ).18 For the VC there is no prior
contractual relationship with the angel, so we cannot talk of hold-up power. Still, lower angel
protection improves the VC’s bargaining position and leads to a higher deal value (D2V ). Of
course, the equilibrium effect of λ is more complex, as λ also affects the outside options of
entrepreneurs and angels (U2E , U2A ).


6.2     Results
The next proposition sheds light on how the level of angel protection affects the angel and VC
market equilibrium.

Proposition 5 The effect of late stage hold-up of angels, as measured by λ, is as follows:

  (i) Early stage: The equilibrium inflow of entrepreneurs mE∗                              A∗
                                                               1 , the inflow of angels m1 (and
      therefore the number of early stage deals x∗1 ), the early stage degree of competition θ1∗ ,
      and the equilibrium valuation of early stage start-ups V1∗ , are all decreasing in λ. In
      contrast, the equilibrium success rate of angel investments ρ1 (e∗1 ) is increasing in λ.

 (ii) Late stage: The late stage degree of competition θ2∗ is increasing in λ, while the valuation
      of late stage start-ups V2∗ is decreasing. The effect of λ on the equilibrium inflow of
                                                    V∗
      start-up companies mE∗ 2 and inflow of VCs m2 is ambiguous.
  18
     Interestingly we note that D2A remains positive even as λA → 1. This is true in our model because the en-
trepreneur still needs the angel to find an alternative VC. This search role preserves some of the angel’s bargaining
power.



                                                        21
    The analysis of angel protection highlights the core tension in the relationship between
angels and VCs, as summarized by Holstein’s quote in the introduction. At the individual
deal level there is a relationship of ‘foes’, where VCs are happy to collude with entrepreneurs
to weaken the angels’ bargaining position. Yet for the market level there is also a need for
‘friendly’ relations, as VCs collectively rely on the angel market for their deal flow. A similar
observation pertains to the relationship between angels and entrepreneurs, where at the ex-
post deal level, entrepreneurs may like the idea of taking advantage of their angel investors.
However, from an ex-ante perspective, this behavior makes it less attractive for angels to invest
in the first place, undermining the collective self-interest of entrepreneurs.
    Proposition 5 generates several important insights into the net effects of these competing
forces. Consider first the relationship between angels and entrepreneurs. We already saw that
weaker angel protection (higher λ) provides entrepreneurs with higher deal values at the VC
stage. By itself this should encourage more of them to enter the early stage market. Then, why
do fewer entrepreneurs choose to enter the market in equilibrium? The reason for this is the
diminished supply of angel capital. Weaker protection at the VC stage makes angel investing
less attractive, so fewer angels enter the market. This means that each entrepreneur needs to
search on average longer to secure start-up financing, with more ventures dying before ever
raising any angel capital. This makes entry less attractive for entrepreneurs. The key insight
from Proposition 5 is that the ex-post rent-capture effect is dominated by the ex-ante effect of
a thinner angel market. In equilibrium we observe not only less entry by angels, but also less
entry by entrepreneurs. Moreover, the angel market is less competitive with longer fundraising
cycles.
    One might have expected that a less competitive angel market would have resulted in lower
valuations and weaker entrepreneurial incentives. Proposition 5 indeed finds that higher λ leads
to lower angel valuations. This is because angels are compensated for the expected hold-up by
receiving larger equity stakes upfront (i.e., higher α∗ ). However, we also find that a higher λ
actually strengthens entrepreneurial incentives (i.e., higher e∗1 ), and therefore also improves the
success rates at the angel stage (i.e., higher ρ1 (e∗1 )). The reason is that entrepreneurs are only
partly motivated by their payoffs in case of liquidation (given by (1 − α∗ )y1 ). The other relevant
payoff is in case of entering the VC market, where a higher λ gives them a higher ex-post deal
value (D2E ). Our analysis shows that the latter effect dominates the former. We therefore obtain
the surprising conclusion that while weaker angel protection reduces entrepreneurial entry, it
actually increases entrepreneurial incentives and success rates at the angel stage.
    One interesting consequence of this tension between lower entry rates and higher success
rates is that the effect of λ on the outflow into the VC market (as measured by mE∗   2 ) is ambigu-
ous. This is precisely because λ has a negative on the size of the angel market x∗1 , but a positive

                                                22
effect on the success rate ρ1 (e∗1 ). We can identify cases where one effect dominates the other.
If, for example, entrepreneurial incentives are unimportant so that ρ01 is close to zero, then the
market size effect always dominates, and mE∗   2 is decreasing in λ. However, if entrepreneurial
incentives are important, the supply of entrepreneurs is sufficiently inelastic, and there is little
urgency (δ1 close to zero), then the market size effect is small; the success effect dominates, and
mE∗2 becomes increasing in λ.
     We are now in a position to understand the effect of angel protection on the VC market.
With weaker angel protection (i.e., higher λ), VCs can strike better deals, so investing in late
stage start-ups becomes more attractive. This is a ‘foes’ effect and encourages entry into VC.
However, there is also a ‘friends’ effect through the supply of new deals into the VC market
(mE∗                                                                E∗
    2 ). As noted in the previous paragraph, the effect of λ on m2 is ambiguous, so we cannot
sign the effect of λ on x∗2 in general. For the particular case with little urgency and an inelastic
supply of entrepreneurs, both the ‘foes’ and the ‘friends’ effect point in the same direction, so
that the VC market size x∗2 is increasing in λ. For all other cases, the ‘foes’ and ‘friends’ effects
point in different directions, and therefore the effect of λ on x∗2 depend largely on the elasticity
of entrepreneurial entry.
     While the effect of λ on the size of the VC market remains ambiguous, Proposition 5 shows
that our model generates the unambiguous result that weaker angel protection makes the VC
market more competitive. The key intuition is that the degree of competition is a relative mea-
sure, and does not depend on the level of inflows into the VC market (mE∗     2 ). Instead, the level
of competition is driven by the modified late stage deal values in Section 6.1, with higher rents
for VCs attracting more VC entry per unit of deal inflow.
     Proposition 5 finally shows that weaker angel protection also leads to lower VC valuations.
The main intuition is simply that weaker angel protection gives the VCs more bargaining power.
Note, however, that this is a different rationale from the lower valuations in the angel market,
which was because angels are being compensated for future hold-up problems.
     Overall we note that the level of angel protection has profound and sometimes surprising
effects on all aspects of the entire equilibrium, both in the angel and the VC market.


7    Early Exits
So far our analysis takes it for granted that angels always want to bring their companies to the
VC market. However, some angels argue that it is better to avoid the VC market altogether,
and instead take an early exit (see Peters, 2009). Egan (2014) also shows that start-up compa-
nies may redirect their technology strategies towards getting acquired when opportunities for
follow-on funding diminish. In this section we consider the endogenous choice of angels and

                                                 23
entrepreneurs to take the more risky option of seeking VC financing, versus the safer option of
selling the company at an early stage.
    To model the endogenous choice between entering the VC market versus an early exit, we
consider the simplest possible model extension. In our base model we assumed that a successful
project faces one of two scenarios: either the company has a growth option, in which case it is
always optimal to raise VC funding; or the company does not have a growth option, in which
case it is liquidated (generating the payoff y1 ). In this section we augment our base model by al-
lowing entrepreneurs and angels to choose between two different commercialization strategies.
After achieving success with the initial investment (which happens with gρ1 ), entrepreneurs and
angels can either choose the safe strategy of selling what they have and taking the liquidation
value y1 (early exit). Or they can pursue the risky option of developing their growth option and
seeking out VC financing – see Figure 1. We assume that the entrepreneur and angel receive
a signal about the success probability of developing a growth option. Let γ be the probability
that the venture develops the growth option and becomes ready for VC financing. However,
with probability 1 − γ the growth option does not work out, so that the venture fails and is
worth nothing. That is, by exploiting growth opportunities, the entrepreneur and angel forgo
the chance to sell a more market-ready project at price y1 . In our base model we essentially
assumed that γ = 1. Now we assume that γ is a random variable with some distribution Ω(γ)
and support [0, 1]. For simplicity we assume that the realization of γ is verifiable.19
    The entrepreneur and angel investor agree ex-ante on an optimal γ ∗ , so that they choose an
early exit if and only if γ ≤ γ ∗ . It is easy to see that γ ∗ satisfies γ ∗ = y1 /(U2E + U2A ). A higher
value of γ ∗ means that the entrepreneur and angel are more likely to choose the safe over the
risky option. The next proposition examines how γ ∗ depends on the characteristics of the VC
market.

Proposition 6 The project choice threshold γ ∗ is increasing in δ2 , σ2 , σ2V and k2 , and decreas-
ing in φ2 .

    Proposition 6 establishes how the commercialization strategies of entrepreneurs are affected
by the structure of the VC market. Entrepreneurs and angels avoid the VC market more often
when securing follow-on investments is more costly (higher σ2 and δ2 ). The same applies when
fewer VCs search for investment opportunities (due to higher σ2V and k2 ), so that on average
entrepreneurs and angels search longer before receiving VC. In equilibrium we observe more
  19
    Assuming that the signal is observable but not verifiable adds some technical complications, but does not affect
the main insight. With observability, the entrepreneur and angel can always renegotiate an inefficient decision. The
main issue is that the entrepreneur is wealth constrained, which constrains renegotiation choices. This renegotiation
closely resembles the analysis in Hellmann (2006).


                                                        24
small entrepreneurial projects, and fewer risky projects that rely on large scale (VC) invest-
ments.
   A related and interesting question is how the level of angel protection affects the early stage
project choice. Consider again our model extension from Section 6, where the parameter λ
measures the entrepreneur’s late stage hold-up power. We obtain the following result:

Proposition 7 More severe hold-up of angels in the late stage market leads to more safe projects
being implemented in equilibrium (i.e., dγ ∗ /dλ > 0).

    Proposition 7 shows how the level of angel protection affects the commercialization strate-
gies of early stage ventures. We know from the modified late stage deal values in Section 6.1
that, ceteris paribus, less protection means that angels get a smaller and entrepreneurs a larger
share of the total surplus π. We formally show in the Appendix (see Proof of Proposition 5)
that this translates into a lower expected utility for angels (U2A ), and a higher expected utility for
entrepreneurs (U2E ). However, VCs also capture a part of the surplus from angels, so that the net
effect on the joint utility of angels and entrepreneurs (U2A + U2E ) is negative. This implies that
the anticipation of more severe hold-up of angels in the late stage market discourages owners
of early stage ventures to exploit growth opportunities through raising VC.
    Overall we find that the commercialization strategies of entrepreneurs, and therefore the
timing of exit, is influenced by VC market parameters, such as the level of competition in the
VC market, or the strength of angel protection.


8     Empirical Predictions
Our theory has a large number of comparative statics results. In principle all of these generate
empirical predictions. In this section we explore in depth those predictions that are empirically
most relevant.


8.1    Dependent Variables
Our model makes predictions about several endogenous outcomes that all lend themselves to be
used as dependent variables. At the market level, our model makes predictions about the size of
the angel and VC market, i.e. the rate at which angels and VCs make investments. Such market
activities are regularly tracked by governments and commercial data providers. While there
are important measurement challenges with tracking private deals, electronic data collection
has vastly improved the quality of such data in recent years. Our model also endogenizes the
number of entrepreneurs, distinguishing between those that are seeking funds and those that

                                                  25
actually succeed in raising funds. On electronic matchmaking platforms, such as Angellist, it
is now possible to empirically distinguish between companies merely seeking versus actually
finding investments.
     Another important endogenous variable is the level of competition in the angel and the
VC market. The most immediate measure is the ratio of investors willing to invest, relative
to the number of entrepreneurs seeking funds. The challenge is that this requires estimates
for the number of potential investors, as opposed to actual investors. As mentioned above, it is
sometimes possible to measure the number of entrepreneurs seeking funds. However, estimating
the number of investors that are truly willing to invest remains challenging. Intriguingly, our
search model also suggests an alternative measurement approach. As shown in Sections 4.2 and
5.2, the level of competition in a market is inversely related to the length of fundraising cycles,
i.e., the expected time to complete a fundraising campaign. This is simply because for a given
level of market transparency, greater competition implies shorter expected search time. The
interesting observation is that online search markets naturally record the time it takes to raise
funds on the platform. This might therefore be used as a proxy for the level of competition.
     Beyond this market-level analysis, our model also generates predictions at the company
level. In particular, the model allows for endogenous pricing of deals, expressed as post-money
valuations. These valuations in turn imply equity stakes for the entrepreneurs, which can be
used as a measure for entrepreneurial incentives. In addition, our model generates predictions
about entrepreneurial outcomes, namely the rate at which start-ups survive, the rate at which
they move from the angel to the VC market, and the rate at which they experience early or late
exits. All of these are standard measurable outcomes.


8.2    Key Independent Variables and Their Predictions
Our theory contains a large number of exogenous model parameters. We focus here on those
that are particularly relevant for empirical evaluations. Returning to the arguments from the
introduction, we consider (i) variations in the strength of angel protection, as measured by λ
(‘angel investors got smarter’) (ii) variations in the cost of starting a business, as measured
by k1 (‘angel investing got cheaper’) and (iii) variations in the transparency of angel markets,
as measured by φ1 (‘angel investing got easier’). We also consider two additional sets of pre-
dictions, one concerning the cost of venture capital (σ2V ), and one concerning the urgency of
entrepreneurial opportunities (δ1 and δ2 ).




                                                26
8.2.1    Angel Protection

Consider first the role of angel protection. Our model makes the following key predictions: Bet-
ter angel protection leads to a larger and more competitive angel market, more entrepreneurial
entry, higher angel valuations, and a higher probability of success. The effect on the size of the
VC market is ambiguous, but valuations are higher and the VC market becomes less competi-
tive. Finally, better angel protection encourages late over early exits.
     The main empirical challenge for testing these predictions is to find credible proxies for
angel protection. We propose three different approaches. First, one can examine cross-country
variations in the quality of legal protection. A large prior literature focuses on the legal origin
in terms of common versus civil law, as well as indices of legal enforcement and minority
shareholder protection (see Glaeser and Shleifer (2002) and La Porta et al. (2000)).20 Second,
within countries, entrepreneurs’ hold-up power is likely to differ across industry sectors. For
example, ideas in the software sector are likely to be more portable across ventures, whereas
ideas in the life sciences tend to be associated with patents and physical devices that can be
better protected. Third, even within sectors there is likely a variation in the relative importance
of contractible assets (e.g., physical assets, patents) versus “non-contractible”assets (e.g., non-
patented ideas, customer knowledge, entrepreneurial skills). For each of these three approaches
it is possible to exploit cross-sectional (and possibly time-varying) variations in the level of
angel protection.

8.2.2    Start-up Costs

Consider now the role of start-up costs. Our model predicts that lower seed investment costs
lead to a larger and more competitive angel market, more entrepreneurial entry, and a higher
probability of success. The VC market also becomes larger.
    For the empirical measurement we can imagine several approaches. One simple approach
is to directly exploit the variation in the size of seed investment rounds to look at the role of
start-up costs. Another approach is to exploit time variation. Ewens, Nanda and Rhodes-Kropf
(2014), for example, argue that the introduction of Amazon’s Elastic Compute Cloud (EC2)
services lowered the cost of starting a company. Yet another approach is to combine the time
variation with some cross-sectional variations. For example, Amazon’s EC2 is likely to have a
bigger effect on web-based start-ups rather than ‘bricks and mortar’ start-ups.
   20
      A related but different approach is to focus on cross-country or inter-state differences in the strength of intel-
lectual property protection. The main hypothesis is that stronger IP protection better protects angels from hold-up
by entrepreneurs. Hyde (1998) discusses differences in the enforcement of trade secrets; the work of Gilson (1999)
and Marx, Strumsky and Fleming (2009) emphasizes the role of non-compete agreements.



                                                          27
8.2.3   Market Transparency

Next we consider the role of market transparency. Our theory predicts that entry by entrepreneurs
and angels both increase as angel markets become more transparent. There is a net increase in
competition, angel valuations rise, and the probability of success goes up. The size of the VC
market also increases. If transparency also increases in the VC market, our theory also predicts
an increase in VC competition and valuations.
    The advent of online investment platforms provides a unique natural experiment for testing
these predictions. We can think of two alternative approaches. One approach is to consider a
market before and after the adoption of online platforms. This approach might also leverage re-
gional variations in the speed of adoption of online platforms. A second approach is to consider
variations in transparency within an online platform. Online platforms themselves are evolving
in the way they work, changing their rules of what information can or has to disclosed.

8.2.4   Entrepreneurial Urgency

We augment the standard search model with the urgency parameter δ1 (δ2 ) that measures the
probability that a new venture fails before raising angel (VC) funding. The most interesting pre-
diction is that greater urgency leads to a more competitive angel market with shorter fundraising
cycles, yet it also leads to lower angel valuations. This stands in contrast to the results about
greater transparency, where the model predicted higher valuations alongside a more competitive
angel market. The same observation applies to the VC market. Cross-market effects are also
interesting. Greater urgency at the VC stage unambiguously hurts the angel market, resulting in
lower entry by entrepreneurs and angels, less competition, lower valuations and lower success
rates. By contrast, the effect of greater urgency at the angel market has an ambiguous effect on
the size of the VC market. On the one hand fewer entrepreneurs enter, on the other hand fewer
ventures fail before getting funded, precisely because of shorter fundraising cycles. The overall
effect on the size of the angel market, and thus on the size of the VC market, is ambiguous.
     The most direct approach to empirically measure urgency is to look at the failure rate of
unfunded entrepreneurs. Again, this is much easier to observe in online platforms than in tra-
ditional data sources. However, because higher failure rates could also be due to lower compe-
tition, it is important to separately control for the level of competition (as discussed in Section
8.1 above). Another more indirect approach would be to look at measures of entry and prod-
uct market competition in fairly narrowly defined industries. Or one could try to measure the
length of product development, or the speed at which products or patents become obsolete. For
example, it is widely believed that markets moves faster in software than in the life sciences.



                                                28
8.2.5    VC Supply Shocks

Finally we can also use the model to examine the impact of changes in the VC market. His-
torically this market has been experiencing significant supply shocks (see Gompers and Lerner
(2001)). We capture this somewhat simplistically as changes in the VCs’ costs, as measured by
σ2V . Higher VC costs naturally lead to a smaller supply of VC funding. The model then shows
that this also implies a less competitive VC market. Most importantly, a supply shock to VC
leads to a smaller and less competitive angel market. Valuations are also lower in both markets.
The model also predicts a relative increase in early over late exits.
     We immediately note that the main empirical predictions do not seem to fit the recent market
patterns, where a retrenchment from the VC market was accompanied by a rise in angel invest-
ing. This suggests that a supply shock to VC is unlikely to be the sole or main driver behind the
recent rise of angel markets.
     Our model also provides a warning that it is not appropriate to measure VC supply shocks
directly from the number of realized deals, because all market sizes are endogenous. Several
approaches have been suggested in the prior literature to identify supply shocks to VC, focusing
mainly on investment conditions at the limited partner level. Samila and Sorenson (2011),
for example, use the returns to local university endowments as an instrument for local VC
availability. Mollica and Zingales (2007) adopt a similar approach using the returns of state
pension funds in the US.
     Overall we note that our theory generates a rich set of empirical predictions. We also provide
ample suggestions for how to empirically measure many of the key variables. Any empirical
analysis would naturally also have to tackle issues of sample selection and econometric identi-
fication. However, that is clearly beyond the scope of this theory paper.


9       Conclusion
In this paper we develop a theory of the interactions between angel and venture capital markets.
Entrepreneurs receive their initial funding from angel investors, but may need follow-on funding
from venture capitalists. On the one hand the two investor types are ‘friends’, in the sense that
they rely upon each other’s investments. On the other hand they are ‘foes’, because venture
capitalists no longer need the angel investors when they make their follow-up investments. The
venture capitalists’ bargaining power depends on how competitive venture markets are, and how
well angels are legally protected. Using a costly search model we establish a joint equilibrium
across the two markets, and endogenously derive the size and competitive structure of both
markets. We also identify determinants of angel and venture capital valuations, and generate


                                                29
predictions about the rate at which entrepreneurs proceed across the two markets, and whether
they choose strategies to exit early or late. We relate the theory to the recent rise of angel
investments, exploring alternative explanations concerning the cost of starting a business, the
transparency of angel markets, and the ability of angels to better protect their investments.
    Our analysis opens doors for further research into the relationship between early and late
investors. One limiting assumption of standard search models is that all types are homogenous.
Allowing for heterogenous types is technically much more complicated, but it would allow for
a richer set of feedback loops, in particular introducing the possibility that entrepreneurs make
endogenous decisions at the angel stage that affect the quality of their deals at the VC stage.
A different but equally interesting issue is to what extent investors can build reputations and
networks that limit the extent of counter-productive hold-up. Finally, our framework raises some
interesting policy questions. For instance, if a government wanted to subsidize VC (presumably
because of other market failures), would a subsidy to angels be more or less efficient than a
subsidy to VCs? We hope that future research, by ourselves and others, will help to illuminate
these important set of next questions.




                                               30
Appendix
Angel Market: Equilibrium Equity Shares and Entrepreneur’s Outside Option.
  According to the Nash product, α∗ is implicitly defined by

                      dD1E (e∗1 ) A ∗                          dDA (e∗ )
                                 D1 (e1 ) + (D1E (e∗1 ) − U1E ) 1 1 = 0.                  (12)
                        dα                                       dα

Applying the Envelope Theorem we find that dD1E (e∗1 )/dα < 0. We can then infer from (12)
that dD1A (e∗1 )/dα > 0 must hold for α = α∗ .
    Using (12) we can implicitly differentiate α∗ w.r.t. U1E :

                                                          dD1A
                           dα∗                             dα
                                =                                                  i.
                           dU1E
                                         h
                                     d       dD1E                           dD A

                                    dα        dα
                                                  D1A   +   (D1E   −   U1E ) dα1

Note that the denominator is strictly negative due to the second-order condition for α∗ . More-
over, recall that dD1A /dα > 0. Thus, dα∗ /dU1E < 0.

Derivation of Angel Market Equilibrium.
                                         0.5
   Using q1A = x1 /M1A and x1 = φ1 M1E M1A , we can write (3) as
                                                         0.5
                                                   M1E
                                               
                                    φ1 D1A                      = σ1A .                   (13)
                                                   M1A

Using θ1 = M1A /M1E we then get the equilibrium degree of competition for the angel market:
                 2
θ1∗ = φ1 D1A /σ1A . Next, note that we can write (13) as
     

                                                "            #2
                                                       eA
                                                    φ1 D 1
                               M1A = M1E                          = M1E θ1 .
                                                     σ1A

                                                    0.5                  0.5
Solving (5) for M1E and using q1E = φ1 M1E M1A            /M1E = φ1 M1A /M1E , we get the
equilibrium stock of entrepreneurs in the early stage market:

                           F (U1E )         F (U1E )              F (U1E )
                  M1E∗ =            =                    0.5 =         p .
                           δ1 + q1E   δ1 + φ1 [M1A /M1E ]      δ1 + φ1 θ1∗




                                                     31
Thus, the equilibrium stock of angels is given by

                                                          F (U1E )θ1∗
                                 M1A∗ = M1E∗ θ1∗ =              p .
                                                         δ1 + φ1 θ1∗

Using M1E∗ = M1A∗ /θ1∗ we can then write x∗1 as
                                                                    p ∗
                                                  A∗            φ    θ1
                                       0.5  φ 1 M                 1
                   x∗1 = φ1 M1A∗ M1E∗      = p 1∗ = F (U1E )
                                     
                                                                     p .
                                                 θ1          δ1 + φ1 θ1∗

                                                             ∗
Moreover, using (6) and q1A = x1 /M1A we get mA∗    A  A∗
                                              1 = q 1 M1 = x 1 .


Proof of Proposition 1.
    Recall that the equilibrium of the angel market is determined by the deal values D1E and
D1A , and therefore by the late stage utilities U2E and U2A , as well as by the entrepreneur’s outside
option U1E (through α∗ ). We will show in Proof of Proposition 4 that U2E and U2A do not
depend on φ1 , δ1 , σ1E , σ1A , and k1 . Next we need to derive a condition which defines U1E . The
equilibrium condition (2) can be written as

                              U1E [r + δ1 ] = −σ1E + q1E D1E − U1E .
                                                                 

                         0.5     p
Using q1E = φ1 M1A∗ /M1E∗      = φ1 θ1∗ = φ21 D1A /σ1A we get the following condition which
defines U1E :
                                    φ21 A  E
                        E
                      U1 [r + δ1 ] − A D1 D1 − U1E + σ1E = 0.
                                                        
                                                                                       (14)
                                    σ1
   Now consider the equilibrium degree of competition θ1∗ . Differentiating θ1∗ w.r.t. δ1 yields

                         dθ1∗    φ2 DA dD1A    φ2 DA dD1A dα∗ dU1E
                              = 2 1 12      = 2 1 12        E
                                                                   .
                         dδ1     [σ1A ] dδ1    [σ1A ] dα dU1 dδ1
                               
Next we define Γ ≡ D1A D1E − U1E . We then get

                             dU1E                        UE
                                  =−                     h1                    i.
                              dδ1                  φ21    dΓ dα∗         ∂Γ
                                     r + δ1 −      σ1A    dα dU1E
                                                                    +   ∂U1E




                                                 32
Note that dΓ/dα = 0 due to the first-order condition for α∗ . Moreover, ∂Γ/∂U1E = −D1A .
Consequently,
                            dU1E              U1E
                                   =−             φ2
                                                        < 0.
                             dδ1        r + δ1 + A1 DA              σ1     1

This in turn implies that dθ1∗ /dδ1 > 0. Likewise,

                                dθ1∗     φ21 D1A dD1A dα∗ dU1E
                                     = 2       2               ,
                                dσ1E                    E
                                         [σ1A ] dα dU1 dσ1
                                                            E



with dD1A /dα > 0, dα∗ /dU1E < 0, and

                                 dU1E           1
                                   E
                                      =−                            φ21
                                                                               < 0.
                                 dσ1     r + δ1 +                       DA
                                                                    σ1A 1


Thus, dθ1∗ /dσ1E > 0. Moreover, note that dD1A /dk1 < 0. Consequently, dθ1∗ /dk1 < 0. For the
remaining comparative statics it is useful to express the condition for U1E in terms of θ1∗ :
                                              p
                         U1E [r + δ1 ] − φ1           θ1∗ D1E − U1E + σ1E = 0,
                                                                  


so that
                                           φ1 √1
                                                    E       
                                                    D1 − U1E
                               dU1E           2       θ1∗
                                       =                       > 0.
                               dθ1∗
                                                        p
                                             r + δ1 + φ1 θ1∗
Moreover, using the definition of θ1∗ we define
                                                                     2
                                                    φ1
                                    G≡      θ1∗   − A D1A                  =0             (15)
                                                    σ1

where D1A = D1A (α∗ (U1E (θ1∗ ))). We get

                                                            φ1
                                                                     A 2
                                                      2              D1
                              dθ1∗
                                                                2
                                                 [ ]        σ1A
                                   =              i2                .
                              dφ1
                                                  h
                                                     dDA dα∗ dU1E
                                       1 − 2 σφA1 D1A dα1 dU E dθ ∗
                                                      1                        1      1




                                                          33
Recall that dD1A /dα > 0, dα∗ /dU1E < 0, and dU1E /dθ1∗ > 0. Thus, the denominator is positive,
which implies that dθ1∗ /dφ1 > 0. Likewise, using (15), we get

                                                               φ21              2
                                                           2               D1A
                           dθ1∗
                                                                   3
                                                   [ ]         σ1A
                                  =−                i2               .
                           dσ1A
                                                       h   A       E
                                                 φ1    A dD1 dα∗ dU1
                                           1 − 2 σA D1 dα dU E dθ∗
                                                           1                              1         1



Again, the denominator is positive, which implies that dθ1∗ /dσ1A < 0.
                                      0
   Next, note that dmE∗      E           E                             E E    E
                      1 /dU1 = F (U1 ) > 0, and recall that dU1 /dδ1 , dU1 /dσ1 < 0.
Moreover, using (14) we find

                                            2 σφA1 D1A D1E − U1E
                                                                
                           dU1E                  1
                                    =                                φ21
                                                                                       >0
                            dφ1                  r + δ1 +                DA
                                                                     σ1A 1

                                                     φ21                
                                                     2     D1A D1E − U1E
                           dU1E                  [ ]
                                                 σ1A
                                    = −                                    φ21
                                                                                               < 0.
                           dσ1A                       r + δ1 +                 DA
                                                                           σ1A 1

                                
Likewise, using Γ = D1A D1E − U1E ,

                                                                φ21 dΓ
                                       dU1E                     σ1A dk1
                                                 =                     φ21
                                                                                      ,
                                       dk1            r + δ1 +             DA
                                                                       σ1A 1


with
                        dΓ   dΓ dα∗   ∂Γ
                                          = − D1E − U1E < 0.
                                                      
                           =        +
                        dk1 |{z}
                             dα dk1   ∂k1
                                  =0

Thus, dU1E /dk1 < 0. All this implies that mE∗                                              E
                                            1 is increasing in φ1 , and decreasing in δ1 , σ1 ,
σ1A , and k1 .
                             ∗
     Next, recall that mA∗
                        1 = x1 is given by

                                                                                p
                                                                           φ1         θ1∗
                              mA∗
                               1       =   x∗1   =    F (U1E )                        p             .
                                                                     δ 1 + φ1                 θ1∗
                                                                     |     {z                   }
                                                                             ≡T

                                           p
It is straightforward to show that dT /d(φ1 θ1∗ ) > 0. Because dU1E /dφ1 > 0 and dθ1∗ /dφ1 > 0,
                                  ∗
we then have dmA∗                                                       E    A     E
                     1 /dφ1 = dx1 /dφ1 > 0. Likewise, we know that dU1 /dσ1 , dU1 /dk1 < 0
and dθ1∗ /dσ1A , dθ1∗ /dk1 < 0. Thus, dmA∗   A       ∗   A             A∗           ∗
                                        1 /dσ1 = dx1 /dσ1 < 0 and dm1 /dk1 = dx1 /dk1 < 0.



                                                           34
Moreover, we have shown that dU1E /dδ1 , dU1E /dσ1E < 0, while dθ1∗ /dδ1 , dθ1∗ /dσ1E > 0. Thus,
                                       ∗
the effects of δ1 and σ1E on mA∗1 = x1 are ambiguous.
    Now consider the equilibrium valuation V1∗ . Note that V1∗ is decreasing in the angel’s equi-
librium equity share α∗ , which is defined by (12). Recall that dα∗ /dU1E < 0, dU1E /dφ1 > 0
and dU1E /dδ1 , dU1E /dσ1E , dU1E /dσ1A < 0. Consequently, dα∗ /dφ1 < 0 and dα∗ /dδ1 , dα∗ /dσ1E ,
dα∗ /dσ1A > 0. All this implies that V1∗ is increasing in φ1 , and decreasing in δ1 , σ1E and σ1A .
Furthermore, note that k1 affects D1A and U1A . Using (12) we get

                                 dD1E ∂D1A       dU1E dD1A            d2 DA
                       dα∗        dα ∂k1
                                             −      + (D1E − U1E ) dαdk11
                                                 dk1 dα
                           =−           h E                       A
                                                                    i     ,
                       dk1            d  dD1
                                             D A
                                                 + (D E
                                                        − U E dD1
                                                              )
                                     dα   dα  1       1     1   dα


where the denominator is strictly negative due to the second-order condition for α∗ . Thus,
to prove that dα∗ /dk1 > 0, we need to show that the numerator is positive. We know that
dD1E /dα < 0, dD1A /dα > 0, and dU1E /dk1 < 0. Moreover, ∂D1A /∂k1 = −1 and d2 D1A /(dαdk1 ) =
0. Thus, the numerator is strictly positive, so that dα∗ /dk1 > 0. This in turn implies that the
effect of k1 on V1∗ = k1 /α∗ is ambiguous.
    Finally consider the equilibrium success probability ρ1 (e∗1 ), with ρ01 (e∗1 ) > 0. Using (1) we
get
                     de∗1                        ρ01 (e1 )(1 − q)y1
                          = d 0                 A                               0 (e )]
                                                                                        ,
                     dα      de1
                                 [ρ1 (e 1 ) [qU2   +   (1 −  q)(1 − α)y 1 ] − c     1

where the denominator is strictly negative due to the second-order condition for e∗1 . Thus,
de∗1 /dα < 0. Our comparative statics results for α∗ then imply that dρ1 (e∗1 )/dφ1 > 0 and
dρ1 (e∗1 )/dδ1 , dρ1 (e∗1 )/dσ1E , dρ1 (e∗1 )/dσ1A , dρ1 (e∗1 )/dk1 < 0.                  2

Proof of Proposition 2.
    In equilibrium, U2E = U2A . Moreover, we will show in Proof of Proposition 3 that dU2E /dφ2 >
0 and dU2E /dδ2 , dU2E /dσ2 , dU2E /dσ2V , dU2E /dk2 < 0. Consider the equilibrium degree of com-
petition θ1∗ . With U2E = U2A note that

                                    dθ1∗       φ21     A dD1
                                                            A
                                         = 2         D
                                                    2 1       .
                                    dU2E     [σ1A ]      dU2A

For a given α we find that
                                       ∗ 
                   dD1A     0    ∗ de1       E
                                                               + ρ1 (e∗1 )g > 0.
                                                             
                     E
                        = ρ 1 (e 1 )   E
                                          gU2  + (1 − g)αy 1
                   dU2               dU2



                                                   35
Moreover, applying the Envelope Theorem we get dD1E /dU2E = gρ1 (e∗1 ) > 0. Thus, the bar-
gaining frontier shifts outwards, so that dD1E /dU2E > 0 and dD1A /dU2E > 0 at the equilibrium
equity share α∗ . This implies that dθ1∗ /dU2E > 0, and consequently, dθ1∗ /dφ2 > 0 and dθ1∗ /dδ2 ,
dθ1∗ /dσ2 , dθ1∗ /dσ2V , dθ1∗ /dk2 < 0.
                                                                                     0
     Now consider the equilibrium inflow of entrepreneurs mE∗              E            E
                                                              1 = F (U1 ), with F (U1 ) > 0.
Using (14) we get
                                                    φ21 dΓ
                                    dU1E            σ1A dU2E
                                           =               φ21
                                                                    ,
                                    dU2E        r + δ1 +       DA
                                                           σ1A 1
                      
where Γ = D1A D1E − U1E . Note that

                               dΓ    dΓ de∗1 dΓ dα∗    ∂Γ
                                 E
                                   =      E
                                            +     E
                                                    +      ,
                              dU2    de1 U2   dα U2   ∂U2E

where de∗1 /dU2E > 0 and dΓ/dα = 0 (see (12)). Moreover,

    dΓ    dD1A  E            DE
                D1 − U1E + D1A 1 = ρ01 (e∗1 ) gU2A + (1 − g)αy1 D1E − U1E > 0
                                                                     
        =
    de1    de1                de1            |        {z       }|   {z   }
                                                      >0            >0
                              |{z}
                                           =0

    ∂Γ         ∂D1A  E      E
                                   A ∂D1
                                          E
          =           D −  U     +D          >0
   ∂U2E        ∂U2E | 1 {z 1 }     1
                                      ∂U2E
               | {z }   >0            | {z }
                >0                         >0


This implies that dU1E /dU2E > 0, and therefore, dF (U1E )/dU2E > 0. Our comparative statics
results for U2E (see Proof of Proposition 3) then imply that dmE∗                  E∗
                                                                 1 /dφ2 > 0 and dm1 /dδ2 ,
dmE∗            E∗    V     E∗
   1 /dσ2 , dm1 /dσ2 , dm1 /dk2 < 0.
    Next consider the equilibrium inflow of angels, mA∗
                                                     1 , which is defined by

                                                                p
                                     ∗                  θ1∗φ1
                               mA∗            E
                                1 = x1 = F (U1 )        p .
                                         | {z } δ1 + φ1 θ1∗
                                          =mE∗
                                             1
                                                 |   {z     }
                                                               ≡T

                         p                                                         ∗
One can show that dT /d θ1∗ ) > 0. Our comparative statics results for mE∗1 and θ1 then imply
that dmA∗                  A∗          A∗          A∗   V      A∗
         1 /dφ2 > 0 and dm1 /dδ2 , dm1 /dσ2 , dm1 /dσ2 , dm1 /dk2 < 0.
    Now consider the equilibrium equity share α∗ for angels. Recall that dD1E /dU2E > 0 and
dD1A /dU2E > 0 at the equilibrium equity share α∗ . Moreover, using the Envelope Theorem it
is straightforward to show that dD1A /dU2E > dD1E /dU2E . The Nash bargaining solution then
implies that dα∗ /dU2E < 0. Thus, dα∗ /dφ2 < 0 and dα∗ /dδ2 , dα∗ /dσ2 , dα∗ /dσ2V , dα∗ /dk2 >


                                                  36
0. For the equilibrium valuation V1∗ = k1 /α∗ we can then infer that dV1∗ /dφ2 > 0 and dV1∗ /dδ2 ,
dV1∗ /dσ2 , dV1∗ /dσ2V , dV1∗ /dk2 < 0.
    Finally consider the equilibrium success rate ρ1 (e∗1 ), with ρ01 (e∗1 ) > 0. Using (1) it is straight-
forward to show that ∂e∗1 /∂U2E > 0 and ∂e∗1 /∂α < 0. Using our comparative statics results for
U2E and α∗ we can then infer that de∗1 /dφ2 > 0 and de∗1 /dδ2 , de∗1 /dσ2 , de∗1 /dσ2V , de∗1 /dk2 < 0.
Consequently, dρ1 (e∗1 )/dφ2 > 0 and dρ1 (e∗1 )/dδ2 , dρ1 (e∗1 )/dσ2 , dρ1 (e∗1 )/dσ2V , dρ1 (e∗1 )/dk2 < 0.
2

VC Market: Derivation of Deal Values and Equity Shares.
    Let CVi denote the value generated by the coalition i = EAV, EV, EA, AV, E, A, V . Using
the Shapley value we get the following general deal values from the tripartite bargaining game:

                   1                  1               1               1
       D2E =         [CVEAV − CVAV ] + [CVEA − CVA ] + [CVEV − CVV ] + CVE                             (16)
                   3                  6               6               3
                   1                  1               1               1
        D2A =        [CVEAV − CVEV ] + [CVEA − CVE ] + [CVAV − CVV ] + CVA                             (17)
                   3                  6               6               3
                   1                  1               1               1
       D2V    =      [CVEAV − CVEA ] + [CVEV − CVE ] + [CVAV − CVA ] + CVV                             (18)
                   3                  6               6               3
We note that CVEAV = π and CVAV = CVEV = CVE = CVA = CVV = 0. Moreover, by
assumption we have U2E + U2A > y1 , so that CVEA = U2E + U2A . Thus,

                                                1    1
                                    D2E =         π + U2E + U2A
                                                                
                                                3    6
                                                1    1
                                    D2A =         π + U2E + U2A
                                                                
                                                3    6
                                                1    1
                                    D2V           π − U2E + U2A
                                                                
                                           =
                                                3    3

    The deal values then allow us to derive the equilibrium equity shares β E∗ , β A∗ , and β V ∗ .
The equilibrium equity share for entrepreneurs, β E∗ , ensures that their actual net payoff equals
their deal value from the bargaining game: β E∗ y2 = D2E . Solving this for β E∗ yields

                                          D2E    1 
                                β E∗ =              2π + U2E + U2A .
                                                                  
                                              =
                                          y2    6y2




                                                    37
Likewise we get

                                D2A    1 
                     β A∗ =               2π + U2E + U2A
                                                         
                                    =
                                y2    6y2

                                k2 + D2V    1 
                     βV ∗ =                    3k2 + π − U2E + U2A .
                                                                  
                                         =
                                   y2      3y2

Derivation of VC Market Equilibrium.
   The first part of the derivation follows along the lines of the derivation of the angel market
                                                    2
equilibrium: Using (9) we get θ2∗ = φ2 D2V /σ2V . Moreover, using (10) and the relationship
                                       

M2V ∗ = M2E∗ θ2∗ we find
                                                            θ2∗
                                 M2V ∗ = gρ1 (e∗1 )x∗1          p .
                                                       δ2 + φ2 θ2∗
Using M2E∗ = M2V ∗ /θ2∗ and the definition of M2V ∗ , we can write x∗2 as
                                                              p
                                V ∗ E∗ 0.5 φ2 M2V ∗       φ2 θ2∗
                    x∗2   = φ 2 M2 M2       = p ∗ = m2E∗
                                                                p ,
                                                 θ2      δ2 + φ2 θ2∗

where mE∗ 2   = gρ1 (e∗1 )x∗1 . Furthermore, using (11) and q2V = x2 /M2V we find that mV2 ∗ =
q2V M2V ∗ = x∗2 .
    Finally, using the equilibrium equity share β V ∗ for VCs we can write V2∗ as follows:
                                                                              
                            k2     k2 y2                       3k2
                   V2∗    = V∗ =          =                                        y2 .
                           β     k2 + D2V             3k2 + π − (U2E + U2A )

Proof of Proposition 3.
   First we need to derive a condition which defines U2E . We can write (8) as

                              U2E [r + δ2 ] = −σ2 + q2E D2E − U2E .
                                                                

                                                                       0.5     p
Note that D2E − U2E = π/3 − 2U2E /3 = D2V . Using q2E = φ2 M2V ∗ /M2E∗
                                                                  
                                                                            = φ2 θ2∗ =
φ22 D2V /σ2V , we get the following condition which defines U2E :

                                                 φ22  V 2
                               U2E [r + δ2 ] −        D2 + σ2 = 0.                          (19)
                                                 σ2V




                                                  38
   Consider the equilibrium degree of competition θ2∗ . Recall that U2A = U2E in equilibrium;
thus,
                       dθ2∗   dθ2∗      φ22 D2V dD2V      4 φ22 D2V
                            =      =  2       2      =  −           < 0.
                      dU2A    dU2E      [σ2V ] dU2
                                                  E
                                                          3 [σ2V ]2
Note that δ2 only affects U2E in the definition of θ2∗ . Implicitly differentiating U2E w.r.t. δ2 yields

                                               dU2E           U2E
                                                    =−            φ2
                                                                        < 0,
                                                dδ2    r + δ2 + 4 V2 DV       3 σ2       2


which implies that dθ2∗ /dδ2 > 0. Likewise, σ2 only affects U2E in the definition of θ2∗ . We get

                                               dU2E            1
                                                    =−           φ2
                                                                        < 0.
                                               dσ2     r + δ2 + 4 V2 DV       3 σ2       2


Thus, dθ2∗ /dσ2 > 0. Next, differentiating U2E w.r.t. φ2 yields

                  dθ2∗    φ2 D2V          dD1V dU2E      φ2 D2V        2 dU2E
                                                                           
                                   V                                V
                       =2       2 D2 + φ2             =2        2 D 2 − φ2      ,
                  dφ2     [σ2V ]          dU2E dφ2       [σ2V ]        3 dφ2

with                                                                       2
                                                dU2E                2 σφV2 D2V
                                                                       2
                                                        =                       2            > 0.
                                                 dφ2                         4 φ2
                                                            r + δ2 +            V
                                                                             3 σ2
                                                                                    D2V

Therefore,
                                             dθ2∗    φ2 D2V (r + δ2 )D2V
                                                  =2       2               2     > 0.
                                             dφ2     [σ2V ] r + δ2 + 43 σφV2 D2V
                                                                                     2

Likewise,

                                                                                                             φ22 D2V D2V
       dθ2∗
                                                                                                                        2
                   φ2 D V                      2 dU2E V                                   dU2E
                                                                      
                              1                                                                                [σ2V ]
              =   2 2 V2                     −       σ      − D2V , with                            =−                            < 0.
       dσ2V         σ2      [σ2V ]
                                     2
                                               3 dσ2V 2                                   dσ2V           r + δ2 +   4 φ2
                                                                                                                        2
                                                                                                                            D2V
                                                                                                                    3 σ2V


Consequently,
                                                                        2    V 2
                                                                    2 φ2
                            dθ2∗               φ2 D V       1       3 σ2V
                                                                             D2 + (r + δ2 )D2V
                                     =       −2 2 V 2           2                            2             < 0.
                            dσ2V                σ2      [σ2V ]              r + δ2 +      4 φ2
                                                                                             V   D2V
                                                                                          3 σ2




                                                                       39
Moreover, we get
                                                                                    2
                                                                                 2 φ2
  dθ2∗         φ22 D2V   dD2V         φ22 D2V
                                                         E
                                                    1 2 dU2
                                                                      E
                                                                     dU2            V
                                                                                 3 σ2
                                                                                      D2V
         =   2       2          =   2        2     − −        , with     =−             φ2
                                                                                             < 0.
  dk2          [σ2V ]    dk2          [σ2V ]        3 3 dk2          dk2    r + δ2 + 4 V2 DV    3 σ2   2


Thus,
                                      dθ2∗    2 φ2 D V      r + δ2
                                           = − 2 22                       < 0.
                                      dk2     3 [σ2V ] r + δ2 + 4 φV22 DV
                                                                3σ      2
                                                                                2


   Next, recall that       mV2 ∗    =   x∗2   is given by
                                                                                p
                                                                         θ2∗
                                                                           φ2
                                        mV2 ∗ = x∗2 = gρ1 (e∗1 )x∗1      p .
                                                      | {z } δ2 + φ2 θ2∗
                                                        =mE∗2
                                                                    | {z     }
                                                                                ≡T


We have shown in Proof of Proposition 2 that dx∗1 /dφ2 > 0 and dx∗1 /dδ2 , dx∗1 /dσ2 , dx∗1 /dσ2V ,
dx∗1 /dk2 < 0. Likewise, we have shown that dρ1 (e∗1 )/dφ2 > 0 and dρ1 (e∗1 )/dδ2 , dρ1 (e∗1 )/dσ2 ,
                                                                                             p
dρ1 (e∗1 )/dσ2V , dρ1 (e∗1 )/dk2 < 0. Moreover, it is straightforward to verify that dT /d(φ2 θ2∗ ) >
0. Using our comparative statics results for θ2∗ , we can infer that dT /dφ2 , dT /dδ2 , dT /dσ2 > 0,
and dT /dσ2V , dT /dk2 < 0. All this implies that dmV2 ∗ /dφ2 > 0 and dmV2 ∗ /dσ2V , dmV2 ∗ /dk2 <
0, while the effects of δ2 and σ2 on mV2 ∗ are ambiguous.
     Now consider the equilibrium late stage valuation V2∗ :
                                                                               
                                                                    3k2
                                                 V2∗   =                            y2 .
                                                               3k2 + π − 2U2E

Recall that dU2E /dφ2 > 0, and dU2E /dσ2 , dU2E /dσ2V , dU2E /dδ2 < 0. Thus, dV2∗ /dφ2 > 0
and dV2∗ /dσ2 , dV2∗ /dσ2V , dV2∗ /dδ2 < 0. Furthermore, recall that V2∗ can also be written as
V2∗ = k2 y2 /(k2 + D2V ). Taking the first derivative of V2∗ w.r.t. k2 yields

                                                                                           ≡N
                                                             z          }|        {
                                                                                  E
                                     h
                                                 dU E
                                                      i      1             2   dU
                       k2 + D2V − k2 1 − 13 − 32 dk22          k2 + D2V + k2 2
                dV2∗                                         3             3 dk2
                     =                                  y2 =                        y2 .
                dk2                    V 2                                 V 2
                                [k2 + D2 ]                         [k2 + D2 ]




                                                                   40
Note that the denominator is always positive. Moreover, we have N > 0 for k2 → 0. Thus,
dV2∗ /dk2 > 0 for k2 → 0. To verify that dV2∗ /dk2 > 0 for all k2 > 0, it is sufficient to show
that dN/dk2 > 0:

                       1 1 2 dU2E 2 dU2E      d2 U2E     2 d2 U2E
                                                    
                  dN
                      = − −      +       + k2          =   k2      .
                  dk2  3 3 3 dk2   3 dk2       dk22      3    dk22

It remains to identify the sign of d2 U2E /dk22 . Using a2 ≡ φ22 /σ2V we can write dU2E /dk2 as
                                  2                             2
                     dU2E           a DV
                                  3 2 2                         3
                          =−                    = −                    −1    .
                     dk2     r + δ2 + 43 a2 D2V     (r + δ2 ) [a2 D2V ] + 43

Thus,                                                             h           i
                                      2
                                                                    −2 dU2E
                           d2 U2E       a
                                      9 2
                                            (r + δ2 )         a2 D2V1 + 2 dk2
                                  =                                    i2       .
                            dk22
                                             h
                                                                 −1
                                              (r + δ2 ) [a2 D2V ] + 43

Note that
                                       4
                         dU2E            a DV
                                       3 2 2              r + δ2
                   1+2        =1−           4      =                    > 0.
                         dk2                     V
                                  r + δ2 + 3 a2 D2   r + δ2 + 34 a2 D2V
Hence, d2 U2E /dk22 > 0, so that dN/dk2 > 0. Consequently, dV2∗ /dk2 > 0.                               2

Proof of Proposition 4.
    We can see from (19) that U2E (and therefore U2A ) does not depend on the early stage param-
eters φ1 , δ1 , σ1E , σ1A , and k1 . This also implies that D2V , and therefore θ2∗ and V2∗ , do not depend
on these parameters.
                                                                            ∗ ∗
    Now consider the equilibrium inflow of start-ups mE∗        2 = gρ1 (e1 )x1 . Recall from Proposition
1 that dx∗1 /dφ1 > 0 and dx∗1 /dσ1A , dx∗1 /dk1 < 0, while the effects of δ1 and σ1E are ambiguous.
Moreover, we know from Proposition 1 that dρ1 (e∗1 )/dφ1 > 0 and dρ1 (e∗1 )/dδ1 , dρ1 (e∗1 )/dσ1E ,
dρ1 (e∗1 )/dσ1A , dρ1 (e∗1 )/dk1 < 0. This implies that dmE∗                        E∗     A
                                                              2 /dφ1 > 0 and dm2 /dσ1 , dm2 /dk1 <
                                                                                                  E∗

0, while the effects of δ1 and σ1E are ambiguous.
    Finally consider the equilibrium inflow of VCs mV2 ∗ , as defined by
                                                                     p ∗
                                                                   φ2  θ2
                                   mV2 ∗   =   x∗2   =   mE∗
                                                          2            p .
                                                                δ2 + φ2 θ2∗

Recall that θ2∗ does not depend on the early stage parameters. Our comparative statics results
                            V∗                  V∗         V∗
for mE∗                                               A
     2 then imply that dm2 /dφ1 > 0 and dm2 /dσ1 , dm2 /dk1 < 0, while the effects of δ1




                                                         41
and σ1E are ambiguous.                                                                          2

Angel Protection: Derivation of Deal Values and Equity Shares.
  The new coalition values are given by CVEAV = π, CVEA = U2E + U2A , CVEV = λπ, and
CVAV = CVE = CVA = CVV = 0. Using the general deal values (16), (17), and (18), we get

                                        1            1
                             D2E =        [2 + λ] π + U2E + U2A
                                                                
                                        6            6
                                        1            1
                             D2A =        [1 − λ] π + U2E + U2A
                                                                
                                        3            6
                                        1            1
                             D2V          [2 + λ] π − U2E + U2A
                                                                
                                    =
                                        6            3

   The new equilibrium equity share for entrepreneurs, β E∗ , ensures that their actual net payoff
equals their deal value from the bargaining game: β E∗ y2 = D2E . Solving this for β E∗ yields

                                   D2E    1 
                          β E∗ =             (2 + λ) π + U2E + U2A .
                                                                  
                                       =
                                   y2    6y2

Likewise we get

                           D2A    1 
                β A∗ =               2 (1 − λ) π + U2E + U2A
                                                             
                               =
                           y2    6y2

                           k2 + D2V    1 
                βV ∗ =                    6k2 + (2 + λ) π − 2 U2E + U2A .
                                                                       
                                    =
                              y2      6y2

Proof of Proposition 5.
   We first show that dU2A /dλ < 0. Note that D2A 6= D2E for λ > 0, and recall that q2E =
   V∗        0.5
φ2 M2 /M2E∗        = φ22 D2V /σ2V . Thus, using (8) we define

                      F ≡ U2E (r + δ2 ) + σ − a2 D2V D2E − U2E = 0
                                                             


                      G ≡ U2A (r + δ2 ) + σ − a2 D2V D2A − U2A = 0,
                                                             




                                               42
where a2 = φ22 /σ2V . Using Cramer’s rule we get

                                   − ∂F
                                     ∂λ
                                           ∂F
                                          ∂U2E

                         dU2A      − ∂G
                                     ∂λ
                                           ∂G
                                          ∂U2E
                                                       − ∂F  ∂G
                                                         ∂λ ∂U E
                                                                 +      ∂G ∂F
                                                                        ∂λ ∂U2E
                                                               2
                              =                    =    ∂F ∂G           ∂G ∂F
                                                                                   .
                          dλ        ∂F     ∂F
                                                       ∂U2A ∂U2E
                                                                   −   ∂U2A ∂U2E
                                   ∂U2A   ∂U2E
                                    ∂G     ∂G
                                   ∂U2A   ∂U2E


The denominator is negative if

                                     ∂F ∂G    ∂G ∂F
                                       A  E
                                            <           ,
                                    ∂U2 ∂U2   ∂U2A ∂U2E

which is equivalent to

        1   E              1  
          a2 2 D2 − U2E − D2V a2 2 D2A − U2A − D2V
                                                  
       6                     6                                       
                 1   A      A
                                   V
                                                 1   E     E
                                                                   V
                                                                      
     < r + δ2 + a2 2 D2 − U2 + 5D2        r + δ2 + a2 2 D2 − U2 + 5D2 .
                 6                                6

If this condition holds for r + δ2 = 0, then it also holds for all r + δ2 > 0. Setting r + δ2 = 0
we get
                                                                          2
−2 D2E − U2E D2V −2 D2A − U2A D2V < 10 D2A − U2A D2V +10D2V D2E − U2E +24 D2V .
                                                              


This condition is satisfied as D2E > U2E and D2A > U2A . Thus, the denominator of dU2A /dλ is
strictly negative. Likewise, the numerator is positive if

                                     ∂G ∂F    ∂F ∂G
                                          E
                                            >         ,
                                     ∂λ ∂U2   ∂λ ∂U2E

which is equivalent to
                                                                 
              1     A     A
                                  V
                                            1   E       E
                                                              V
                                                                 
                πa2 D2 − U2 − 2D2 r + δ2 + a2 2 D2 − U2 + 5D2
              6                              6
              1                       1
                πa2 D2E − U2E + D2V a2 2 D2A − U2A − D2V .
                                                 
            <
              6                       6
This condition can be written as
   2                                                                 2
      (r + δ2 ) D2A − U2A − 2D2V + D2A − U2A D2V − D2V D2E − U2E < 3 D2V .
                                                         
                                                                                            (20)
   a2


                                                 43
From F and G we know that
                    U E (r + δ2 ) + σ                                             U A (r + δ2 ) + σ
      D2V D2E − U2E = 2                                              D2V D2A − U2A = 2
                                                                       
                                                          and                                         ,
                            a2                                                             a2

so that we can write condition (20) as follows:

 2                             U A (r + δ2 ) + σ U2E (r + δ2 ) + σ     2
    (r + δ2 ) D2A − U2A − 2D2V + 2                                  < 3 D2V
                     
                                                 −
 a2                                    a2                 a2
                                                                        2
                                 (r + δ2 ) 2D2A − U2A − 4D2V − U2E < 3 D2V a2 .
                                                                 
                            ⇔
                                          |           {z          }
                                                                                 ≡T


We now show that T < 0. Using the definitions of D2A and D2V we can write T < 0 as

   2            1                2           4
     [1 − λ] π + U2E + U2A − U2A − [2 + λ] π + U2E + U2A − U2E < 0
                                                       
   3            3                 3           3
                                                                             ⇔            U2E + U2A < [1 + 2λ] π.

This condition is satisfied for all λ ≥ 0 because π > U2E + U2A . Thus, the numerator of
dU2A /dλ is strictly positive. Consequently, dU2A /dλ < 0. Finally note that ∂D2E /∂λ = π/6 <
                                       
 ∂D2A /∂λ = π/3. Thus, d U2E + U2A /dλ < 0, which implies that dD2V /dλ > 0.
   Next we analyze the effects of λ on the early stage equilibrium variables. Consider the
equilibrium degree of competition θ1∗ . We get

                                      dθ1∗      φ2    dDA
                                           = 2 1 2 D1A 1 .
                                      dλ      [σ1A ]   dλ

Recall that
                              d           dU2A dU2E
                                U2A + U2E =       +       < 0.
                             dλ             | dλ
                                              {z } | dλ
                                                     {z }
                                                                <0          >0

This implies
                             dD1A dD1E                                  dD1A
                                 +     <0                       ⇒            < 0.
                              dλ   dλ                                    dλ
Thus, dθ1∗ /dλ < 0.
   Now consider the equilibrium entry of entrepreneurs mE∗
                                                        1 . Using (14), we get
                                           h                       i
                                     φ21       dD1A          dDE
                          dU1E       σ1A
                                               D1E − U1E + D1A dλ1
                                                dλ
                                 =                 h              i ,
                           dλ                   φ21 dΓ dα∗    ∂Γ
                                       r + δ1 − σA dα dU E + ∂U E
                                                           1            1             1




                                                          44
                      
where Γ = D1A D1E − U1E . Note that dΓ/dα = 0; see (12). Thus,
                                            h                                  i
                                      φ21       dD1A                    dDE
                           dU1E       σ1A        dλ
                                                           D1E − U1E + D1A dλ1
                                  =                                   φ21
                                                                                   ,
                            dλ                         r + δ1 +           DA
                                                                      σ1A 1


where the denominator is positive. Consequently, dU1E /dλ < 0 if

                                 dD1A  E            dDE
                                       D1 − U1E + D1A 1 < 0.
                                               
                                                                                        (21)
                                  dλ                  dλ

Using (12) we can derive the following expression for D1E − U1E :

                                                                    dD1E
                                       D1E      −   U1E     =−       dα
                                                                    dD1A
                                                                           D1A ,
                                                                     dα

so that (21) can be written as
                                                           
                                                    dD1E
                                   dD1A         −    dα             dD1E
                                                  dD1A
                                                                +        < 0.
                                      dλ                             dλ
                                                   dα
                                            |       {z      }
                                                    ≡X


Recall that d(D1A + D1E )/dλ < 0, with dD1A /dλ < 0; thus, this condition is satisfied when
X ≥ 1. Note that dD1E /dα < 0 and dD1A /dα > 0. Hence, X ≥ 1 if

                                   dD1A dD1E    d  A
                                                   D1 + D1E .
                                                           
                             0≥        +     =
                                    dα   dα    dα
It is easy to show that the joint surplus is maximized when α = 0 (which maximizes effort
incentives for the entrepreneur); thus
                                                 
                                      d D1A + D1E
                                                                            < 0,
                                           dα
                                                                 α=α∗ >0


so that X ≥ 1. Consequently, dU1E /dλ < 0, and therefore dmE∗                E
                                                             1 /dλ = dF (U1 )/dλ < 0.
    Next consider the equilibrium inflow of angels, mA∗
                                                     1 , which is defined by

                                                                            p
                                         ∗                   θ1∗       φ1
                                 mA∗
                                  1  = x 1 = F (U E
                                                    )        p .
                                             | {z1 } δ1 + φ1 θ1∗
                                              =mE∗
                                                 1
                                                      |   {z     }
                                                                           ≡T



                                                            45
               p                                                            ∗
Note that dT /d θ1∗ ) > 0. Our comparative statics results for mE∗  1 and θ1 then imply that
               ∗
dmA∗
   1 /dλ = dx1 /dλ < 0.
   Now consider the angel’s equilibrium equity share α∗ , which is defined by (12). We get

                               dα∗   dα∗ dU2E   dα∗ dU2A
                                   =          +          ,
                               dλ    dU2E dλ    dU2A dλ

where dU2E /dλ > 0 and dU2A /dλ < 0. Moreover, the Nash bargaining solution implies that
dα∗ /dU2E > 0 and dα∗ /dU2A < 0. Thus, dα∗ /dλ > 0. For the equilibrium valuation V1∗ =
k1 /α∗ this concurrently implies that dV1∗ /dλ < 0. Finally we know that dD1E /dλ > 0 in
equilibrium. Using the Envelope Theorem we get

                     dD1E              d  E
                                          gU2 + (1 − g)(1 − α∗ )y1 > 0,
                                                                  
                          = ρ1 (e1 )
                      dλ             |dλ          {z              }
                                                    ≡T


which implies that T > 0. Using (1) we find

                                                         =T
                                          z            }|              {
                                           d
                                ρ01 (e1 )     gU2E + (1 − g)(1 − α)y1
                                                                      
                  de∗1                    dλ
                       =− d      0
                                                                                ,
                  dλ     de1
                               [ρ1 (e1 ) [gU2E + (1 − g)(1 − α)y1 ] − c0 (e1 )]

where T > 0, and the denominator is negative due to the second-order condition for e∗1 . Thus,
de∗1 /dλ > 0. This in turn implies that dρ1 (e∗1 )/dλ > 0.
     Finally we analyze the effects of λ on the late stage equilibrium variables. Note that
d U2E + U2A /dλ < 0 also implies that dD2V /dλ > 0. Using the definitions of θ2∗ , β V ∗ and
              

V2∗ , we can then infer that dθ2∗ /dλ > 0, dβ V ∗ /dλ > 0 and dV2∗ /dλ < 0. Moreover,
                                                         ∗                ∗
                 dmE∗
                                                                           
                   2     d        ∗ ∗          0   ∗ de1 ∗          ∗ dx1
                      =    [gρ1 (e1 )x1 ] = g ρ1 (e1 )     x + ρ1 (e1 )       .
                  dλ    dλ                             dλ 1             dλ

                                                 ∗               ∗
In general, the effect on mE∗
                           2 is ambiguous as de1 /dλ > 0 and dx1 /dλ < 0. However, we can
                                0  ∗
see that dmE∗                                                              A∗       E∗
              2 /dλ < 0 when ρ1 (e1 ) → 0. Moreover, for δ1 → 0 we have m1 = m1 ; with
                                            ∗
mE∗                                                              E∗
  1 being sufficiently inelastic, we have dx1 /dλ → 0, so that dm2 /dλ > 0. Next, recall that
mV2 ∗ is defined by                                     p
                                  V∗     ∗     E∗     φ2 θ2∗
                                m2 = x2 = m2               p .
                                                   δ2 + φ2 θ2∗
                                                  |     {z   }
                                                         ≡T




                                               46
                       p
One can show that dT /d θ2∗ > 0, so that dT /dλ > 0. Recall, however, that the sign of
dmE∗                                            V∗   ∗
  2 /dλ is ambiguous. Thus, the effect of λ on m2 = x2 is also ambiguous.           2

Proof of Proposition 6.
    Recall that U2E = U2A in equilibrium. Moreover, as shown in Proof of Proposition 3,
dU2E /dφ2 > 0, and dU2E /dσ2 , dU2E /dδ2 , dU2E /dσ2V , dU2E /dk2 < 0. Consequently, dγ ∗ /dφ2 <
0, and dγ ∗ /dσ2 , dγ ∗ /dδ2 , dγ ∗ /dσ2V , dγ ∗ /dk2 > 0.                                     2

Proof of Proposition 7.
   Recall from Proof of Proposition 5 that d U2E + U2A /dλ < 0. Thus, dγ ∗ /dλ > 0.           2
                                                     




                                              47
References
Admati, Anat R., and Paul Pfleiderer (1994). Robust Financial Contracting and the Role of
VCs. Journal of Finance, 49(2), 371-402.

Anand, Bharat N., and Alexander Galetovic (2000). Weak Property Rights and Holdup in R&D.
Journal of Economics & Management Strategy, 9(4), 615-642.

Axelson, Ulf, Per Strömberg, and Michael Weisbach (2009). Why Are Buyouts Levered? The
Financial Structure of Private Equity Funds. Journal of Finance, 65(4), 1549-1582.

Bergemann, Dirk, Hege, Ulrich, and Liang Peng (2009). VC and sequential investments. Work-
ing Paper.

Berk, Jonathan B., Richard C. Green, and Vasant Naik (1999). Optimal Investment, Growth
Options, and Security Returns. Journal of Finance, 54(5), 1553-1607.

Blank, Steve (2013). Why the Lean Start-Up Changes Everything. Harvard Business Review,
May, 4-9.

Chemmanur, Thomas J., and Zhaohui Chen (2006). VCs versus Angels: The Dynamics of Pri-
vate Firm Financing Contracts. Working Paper.

Cohen, Susan (2013). What Do Accelerators Do? Insights from Incubators and Angels. Inno-
vations: Technology, Governance, Globalization, 8(3/4), 19-25.

Dewatripont, Mathias, and Eric Maskin (1995). Credit and Efficiency in Centralized and De-
centralized Economies. Review of Economic Studies, 62(4), 541-555.

Diamond, Peter (1982). Aggregate Demand Management in Search Equilibrium. Journal of
political Economy, 90(5), 881-894.

Diamond, Peter (1984). Money in Search Equilibrium. Econometrica, 52(1), 1-20.




                                           48
Egan, Edward J. (2014). How Start-up Firms Innovate: Technology Strategy, Commercializa-
tion Strategy, and their Relationship. Working Paper.

Ewens, Michael, Ramana Nanda, and Matthew Rhodes-Kropf (2014). Entrepreneurship and
the Cost of Experimentation. HBS Working Paper.

Fluck, Zsuzsanna, Kedran Garrison, and Stewart C. Myers (2005). VC Contracting and Syndi-
cation: An Experiment in Computational Corporate Finance. Working Paper.

Gans, Joshua S. and Scott Stern (2000). Incumbency and R&D Incentives: Licensing the Gale
of Creative Destruction. Journal of Economics & Management Strategy 9(4), 485-511.

Gilson, Ronald J. (1999). The Legal Infrastructure of High Technology Industrial Districts:
Silicon Valley, Route 128, and Covenants Not to Compete. New York University Law Review
74(3), 575-629.

Glaeser, Edward and Andrei Shleifer (2002). Legal Origins. Quarterly Journal of Economics
107(4), 1193-1229.

Goldfarb, Brent, Gerard Hoberg, David Kirsch, and Alexander Triantis (2012). Does Angel
Participation Matter? An Analysis of Early Venture Financing. Working Paper.

Gompers, Paul and Josh Lerner (2001). The Venture Capital Revolution. Journal of Economic
Perspectives 15(2), 145-168.

Hellmann, Thomas (2006). IPOs, Acquisitions and the Use of Convertible Securities in VC.
Journal of Financial Economics, 81(3), 649-679.

Hellmann, Thomas, and Manju Puri (2002). VC and the Professionalisation of Start-Up Firms:
Empirical Evidence. Journal of Finance, 57(1), 169-197.

Hellmann, Thomas, and Enrico Perotti (2011). The Circulation of Ideas in Firms and Markets.
Management Science, 57(10), 1813-1826.




                                            49
Hellmann, Thomas, Paul Schure, and Dan Vo (2013). Angels and VCs: Complements or Sub-
stitutes? Mimeo, University of British Columbia.

Holstein, William J. (2012). Where’s the VC? Online article published by Chiefexecutive.net:
http://chiefexecutive.net/wheres-the-venture.

Hong, Suting, Konstantinos Serfes, and Veikko Thiele (2013). The Market for VC: Entry, Com-
petition, and the Survival of Start-Up Companies. Working Paper.

Hyde, Alan (1998). Silicon valley’s high-velocity labor market. Journal of Applied Corporate
Finance, 11(2), 28-37.

Inderst, Roman, and Holger M. Müller (2004). The Effect of Capital Market Characteristics on
the Value of Start-up Firms. Journal of Financial Economics, 72, 319-356.

Kaplan, Steven, and Per Strömberg (2003). Financial Contracting Theory Meets the Real
World: An Empirical Analysis of VC Contracts. Review of Economic Studies 70, 281-315.

Kerr, William R., Josh Lerner, and Antoinette Schoar (2013). The Consequences of Entrepreneurial
Finance: A Regression Discontinuity Analysis. Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny (2000). In-
vestors Protection and Corporate Governance. Journal of Financial Economics, 58(1-2), 3-27.

Leavitt, Jeffrey M. (2005). Burned Angels: The Coming Wave of Minority Shareholder Op-
pression Claims in Venture Capital Start-up Companies. North Carolina Journal of Law &
Technology, 6(2), 223-286.

Manso, Gustavo (2011). Motivating Innovation. Journal of Finance, 66(5), 1823-1860.

Marx, Matt, Deborah Strumsky, and Lee Fleming (2009). Mobility, Skills, and the Michigan
Non-compete Experiment. Management Science, 55(6), 875-889.

Mollica, Marcos A., Luigi Zingales (2007). The Impact of VC on Innovation and the Creation
of New Businesses. Working Paper.



                                             50
Mortensen, Dale, and Christopher Pissarides (1994). Job Creation and Job Destruction in the
Theory of Unemployment. Review of Economic Studies, 61(3), 397-415.

Nanda, Ramana and Liz Kind (2013). AngelList. HBS Case Study #9-814-036.

Nanda, Ramana and Matthew Rhodes-Kropf (2012a). Innovation and the Financial Guillotine.
HBS Working Paper #13-038.

Nanda, Ramana, and Matthew Rhodes-Kropf (2012b). Financing Risk and Innovation. HBS
Working Paper #11-013.

Neher , Darwin, V. (1999). Staged Financing: An Agency Perspective. Review of Economic
Studies, 66(2), 255-274.

OECD (2011). Financing High-Growth Firms: The Role of Angel Investors, OECD Publishing.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264118782-en.

Peters, Basil (2009). Early Exits. First Choice Books, Vancouver, Canada.

Pissarides, Christopher (1979). Job Matching with State Employment Agencies and Random
Search. Economic Journal, 89(356), 818-833.

Pissarides, Christopher (2000). Equilibrium Unemployment Theory. 2nd edition. Cambridge,
MIT Press.

Ries, Eric (2011). The Lean Start-Up. Crown Publishing Group, New York. New York.

Samila, Sampsa and Olav Sorenson (2011). Venture Capital, Entrepreneurship, and Economic
Growth. Review of Economics and Statistics, 93(1), 338-349.

Schwienbacher, Armin (2009). Financing Commitments and Investors Incentives in Entrepreneurial
Firms. Working Paper.

Shane, Scott (2008). Fool’s Gold?: The Truth Behind Angel Investing in America. Oxford
University Press, Oxford, UK.



                                             51
Silveira, Rafael, and Randall Wright (2006). The VC Cycle. Working Paper, University of
Pennsylvania.

Teece, David J. (1986). Profiting from Technological Innovation: Implications for Integration,
Collaboration, Licensing and Public Policy. Research Policy, 15, 285-305.

The Economist (2014). A Cambrian Moment. Jan. 18th.

Van Osnabrugge, Mark, and Robert J. Robinson (2000). Angel Investing: Matching Start-Up
Funds with Start-Up Companies-the Guide for Entrepreneurs, Individual Investors, and VCs.
San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.




                                             52
Appendix for Referees (Not for Publication)
Early Stage Investment and Valuation.
   Consider first our base model with endogenous effort. Differentiating V1∗ w.r.t. k1 yields
                                                                            ∗
                                 dV1∗                           α∗ − k1 dα
                                                      
                                         d        k1                    dk1
                                      =                    =                    .
                                 dk1    dk1       α∗               [α∗ ]2

Note that dV1∗ /dk1 > 0 when k1 → 0. Thus, the equilibrium valuation V1∗ is decreasing in k1
when k1 is sufficiently small.
    Next, suppose the entrepreneur’s effort e1 is exogenous, and define ρ1 ≡ ρ1 (e1 ). The early
stage deal values are then given by

                             D1E = ρ1 gU2E + (1 − g)(1 − α)y1 − c
                                                            


                             D1A = ρ1 gU2A + (1 − g)αy1 − k1 ,
                                                      


where c is the entrepreneurs disutility of providing effort e1 . The optimal equity share for the
angel, α∗ , then satisfies the symmetric Nash bargaining solution, which accounts for the outside
option of each party (U1E for the entrepreneur, and 0 for the angel because of free entry). Let
e 1E and D
D        e 1A denote the deal values reflecting the Nash bargaining solution, which are given by

                   e 1E = 1 ρ1 g U2E + U2A + (1 − g)y1 − k1 − c + U1E
                                                                  
                   D
                          2

                   e A = 1 ρ1 g U E + U A + (1 − g)y1 − k1 − c − U E .
                                                                
                   D 1           2     2                          1
                         2

The equilibrium equity share for the angel, α∗ , then satisfies D1E (α∗ ) = D
                                                                            e 1E and D1A (α∗ ) = D
                                                                                                 e 1A .
Recall that U2A = U2E in equilibrium. Thus,

                                             1 k1 − c − U1E
                                      α∗ =    +              .
                                             2 2ρ1 (1 − g)y1

      The equilibrium early stage valuation is V1∗ = k1 /α∗ . Taking the first derivative w.r.t. k1 we
get
                                                           ≡N
                                                  z        }|{
                                                             ∗
                                                          dα
                                                α ∗ − k1
                                         dV1∗             dk1
                                              =          2     .
                                         dk1          ∗
                                                    [α ]




                                                      53
The denominator is always non-negative. Moreover, note that N ≥ 0 for k1 → 0, which implies
that dV1∗ /dk1 ≥ 0 for k1 → 0. To show that dV1∗ /dk1 > 0 for all k1 > 0, it is thus sufficient to
verify that dN/dk1 > 0:

                               dα∗
                                       ∗
                                                  d2 α∗          d2 α ∗
                                                        
                         dN             dα
                             =      −        + k1 2 = −k1 2 .
                         dk1   dk1      dk1        dk1            dk1

We need to find the sign of d2 α∗ /dk1∗ . We start by taking the first derivative of α∗ w.r.t. k1 :

                               dα∗                           dU1E
                                                                  
                                                1
                                    =                    1−          .
                               dk1       2ρ1 (1 − g)y1        dk1

                       eE − UE = D
It is easy to see that D         e A . Thus, the condition defining U E simplifies to
                        1    1     1                                 1

                                                   φ21 h e A i2
                                 U1E [r + δ1 ] −        D1 + σ1E = 0.
                                                   σ1A

Thus,
                                      dU1E           eA
                                                  a1 D1
                                           =−                  ,
                                      dk1                 e 1A
                                              r + δ1 + a1 D
where a1 = φ21 /σ1A . Consequently,
                                                                                    
                            ∗
                        dα           1                             1
                            =               1 +                                     .
                                                                                    
                                                                          i−1
                        dk1   2ρ1 (1 − g)y1
                                                               h
                                                                   e 1A
                                                      (r + δ1 ) a1 D            +1

We then get
                                                          h         i−2 h          i
                                         1                        A           dU1E
                    2
                   dα   ∗
                                1      −   a
                                         2 1
                                               (r + δ 1 )   a  D
                                                              1 1
                                                               e          1 +  dk1
                     2
                       =                                                    2       .
                   dk1   2ρ1 (1 − g)y1
                                                         h         i −1
                                              (r + δ1 ) a1 D   e 1A      +1

Note that
                            dU1E            eA
                                         a1 D 1            r + δ1
                    1+           =1−                 =                  > 0.
                            dk1      r + δ1 + a1 D
                                                 e1A               e 1A
                                                       r + δ1 + a1 D
Thus, d2 α∗ /dk12 < 0. This implies that dN/dk1 > 0, and therefore dV1∗ /dk1 > 0.




                                                    54
