                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  INTERINOUSTRY WAGE DIFFERENCES
                   AND INDUSTRY CHARACTERISTICS




                        William 1. Dickens

                         Lawrence F. Katz




                      Working Paper No. 2014




                NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                         Cambridge, MA 02138
                           September 1986




We would like to thank Elizabeth Bishop, Phillip Bokovoy and Daniel
Dorrow for their expert research assistance and Kevin Lang for
helpful comments. We would also like to thank the National Science
Foundation (Grant no. SES-8409380) and the Institute of Industrial
Relations at Berkeley for generous research support. The research
reported here is part of the NBER's research program in Labor
Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                 Working Paper #2014
                                                 September 1986


           Interindustry Wage Differences and Industry Characteristics



                                    ABSTRACT


          This paper examines the extent of interindustry wage differences
          for nonunion workers and finds that even after controlling for a
          wide range of individual characteristics and geographic location
          a substantial amount of individual wage variation can be
          accounted for by industry differences. In the  aggrergate
          industry effects explain at least 6.7% of inter-personal wage
          variation. At most they explain 30%.

          While the importance of industry differences is clear, the
          reasons for the differences are more difficult to establish.
          Independent of the problems of interpreting the correlates of
          industry differences, even the sign of the relation of many
          variables with wages is difficult to establish when other
          variables are included as controls. This conclusion is suggested
          by a literature review and confirmed by an analysis of a large
          number of alternative specifications of an industry wage equation
          using   individual   wage   data   from the CPS and industry
          characteristics from a number of recent sources. Only industry
          average education and industry profitability have the same
          (positive) sign in every specification and in all the studies
          reviewed. Of these two only average education was nearly always
          significantly related to wages. Average establishment size had a
          nearly consistent positive relation.

          What does emerge from the analysis is a pattern of correlations.
          There appears to be one major dimension (and perhaps other less
          important dimensions) along which industries differ. A principal
          components analysis of an industry characteristics data set is
          used to demonstrate this.  High wage industries have lower quit
          rates, higher labor productivity, fewer women, more educated
          workers, longer work weeks, a higher ratio of nonwage to wage
          compensation, higher unionization rates, larger establishments
          and firms, higher concentration ratios and are more profitable.
          An analysis of a limited number of industry characteristics in
          1939 yields a similar pattern.

          The   implications of these results for alternative theories of
          wage determination are considered.

William T. Dickens                               Lawrence F. Katz
NBER                                             Department of Economics
1050 Massachusetts Avenue                        Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138                              Cambridge, MA 02138
I. introduction
     It   has long been noted that there are large differences in tages across in-

dustries for workers with similar characteristics doing apparently similar jobs.

Area wage surveys invariably indicate a great deal of wage dispersion for a de-

fined job classification, such as key punch operator or order filer, within a

locality.    Slichter (1950) observes that hiring rates paid for common labor by

85 plants in Cleveland in February 1947 ranged from $.50 to $1.09 an hour. A more

recent wage survey reveals that wages for the job classification key entry oper-

ator I ranged from $160 to $480 a week in Cleveland in September 1985 (U.S. Bureau

of Labor Statistics, 1985). Dunlop (1985) notes that consideration of differences

in fringe benefits tends to expand rather than offset the wage differences ob-

served across industries in area wage comparisons.      Substantial industry wage

differentials remain even after controlling for union status and observed worker

and job characteristics.

     A textbook competitive labor market model offers several explanations for

interindustry wage differentials. They can arise from systematic differences in

worker ability that are correlated with industry status or from compensating

differentials for non-pecuniary aspects of work that directly affect worker

utility. Alternatively, industry wage premiums may reflect transitory differen-

tials related to shifts in labor demand or supply across sectors and imperfect

short-run labor mobility.

    In recent years, a number of alternative theories of wage determination; such

as the efficiency wage theories surveyed by Stiglitz (1984), Yellen (1984), and

Katz (1986) and the union threat model of Dickens (1986); have been proposed as

possible explanations for industry wage differentials, equilibrium involuntary

unemployment, and a wide variety of other labor market phenomena. These alter-

native explanations focus on potential reasons why firms may find it profitable
to pay above market clearing wages and why the importance of these factors may

differ among establishments both within and across industries.

    Efficiency wage models suggest that the potential benefits to a firm of higher

wages include increased effort and reduced shirking by employees, lower turnover

costs, a higher quality workforce, and improved worker morale and better group

work norms. A basic implication of efficiency wage models is that if the condi-

tions necessitating efficiency wage payments differ across industries, then the

optimal wage will differ among industries. This means that workers with identical

productive characteristics are paid differently depending on their industry af-

filiation.   These wage differences for similar workers may reflect industry

characteristics that do not directly affect the utility of workers and thus would

not require compensating differentials in a standard competitive labor market.

      The payment of non-competitive wage premiums may also be related to the

presence of unions or threat of collective action by workers. Firms may find it

profitable to pay greater than competitive wages to unionized workers to prevent

strikes and maintain industrial peace.1

     Determining the empirical relevance of these alternative models of wage de-

termination is quite important since the non-competitive models generate positive

and normative implications with respect to issues such as trade, industrial policy

and unemployment insurance that can be quite different from textbook competitive

labor market models or implicit contract models.2 An understanding of the nature

of interindustry wage differentials could prove quite useful in determining the

relevance of alternative models of wage determination. Dickens and Katz (1986),

Krueger and Summers (1986), and Murphy and Topel (1986) have shown that industry

wage differentials are quite persistent over long time periods. This persistence

of the wage premiums appears to rule out transitory skill premiums as a major

factor in explaining industry wage differences. The studies by Dickens and Katz



                                                                                 2
and by Krueger and Summers also indicate that industry wage differentials are

quite similar across countries, across occupational groups, and for both the union

and nonunion sectors.   In this paper, we analyze the industry characteristics

associated with wage premiums.

     Simple competitive labor market models suggest that industry characteristics

should only generate persistent wage differences if they affect skill requirements

and working conditions. Product market factors should not matter after control-

ling for relevant worker and job characteristics.     It is widely believed that

collectively bargained wages are set in a manner different from others, and, in

particular, that they may be related to a firm's "ability to pay." We are pri-

marily interested in this paper in the relevance of different theories of wage

determination in the absence of explicit collective bargaining. The union threat

model predicts that the bargaining power of insider nonunion workers should enable

them to capture a part of product market rents. Efficiency wage models suggest

establishment and firm size variables may affect wages by affecting the ability

to monitor worker performance. Normative efficiency wage models (Akerlof, 1984)

postulate that ability-to-pay may affect a firm's optimal wage structure.

    The plan of this paper is as follows. The importance of industry affiliation

in explaining cross-sectional wage variation for the nonunion sector as a whole,

the union sector as a whole, and for individual occupational groups is analyzed

in section II.   Previous studies of the impact of industry characteristics on

wages are reviewed in section III. The sensitivity of results in these studies

to the exact specifications chosen and the failure to adequately assess the dis-

tinct impacts of industry attributes on union wages and on wages set in the ab-

sence of collective bargaining within the existing literature motivates our

detailed analysis of the correlates of industry wage differences for both union

and nonunion workers. This empirical analysis is presented in section IV. The



                                                                                3
implications of the observed relationships among industry characteristics and

wages for alternative wage determination theories is discussed in section V.



II.   The Importance of Industry Affiliation in Wage Variation
          To determine the importance of industry affiliation we use analysis of

covariance.3 We begin by postulating an earnings function in which wages depend

on human capital factors, personal characteristics, location, occupation, and

industry:



(1)         logW..p+X.+Z.a+t..
               13    1   3   13
where       V..     hourly wage of individual i in industry j,

            X. =
             1
                   vector   of individual characteristics and locational
                     variables for individual i,

            Z. =   vector   of mutually exclusive dummy variables indicating
                     industry affiliation,
                  = random disturbance term,
             13



p is the intercept, and           and a are parameter vectors. The total proportion of

wage variation (share of total sum of squares) explained by the covariates (the

variables in X) and industry affiliation is given by the R2 of equation (1).

      If the covariates and industry dummy variables were orthogonal to each other,

regressions of log earnings on the covariates alone and on the industry dummies

alone would give a unique decomposition of the contribution of each set of vari-

ables to the total explained variation. The realistic case of multicollinearity

between the covariates and industry affiliation implies there is no unique vari-

ance decomposition. A conservative approach to evaluating the importance of in-

dustry effects is to credit the industry effects only with the increase in

explanatory power arising fror adding             industry    dummies to a log wage regression



                                                                                             4
already including the   covaristes.   This approach attributes all common impacts on

wages of the industry fixed effects and the covariates to the covariatcs.        An

alternative upper bound on the importance of the industry effects is given by the

R2 of a log wage regression including only the industry dummies.

      The analysis requires a large micro data set with information on personal

characteristics, occupation, industry, and union status.        All twelve monthly

Current Population Surveys (CPSs) from 1983 were combined to generate a sample

of individuals with these properties large enough to accurately estimate industry

effects for detailed industry categories. The sample consists of private sector,

nonagricultural employees, 16 years of age or older with complete data on industry

and occupation and on either hourly wages or normal weekly earnings and normal

hours of work per week. Average earnings per hour were computed for each indi-

vidual with complete earnings data. Observations with reported wages of less than

$1.00 per hour or more than $250 an hour were assumed to be coding errors and were

deleted from the data set. Although the CPS is partially a panel data set, only

those individuals in outgoing rotation groups are asked about earnings and people

exit the sample only once a year. Thus, we can be sure that all observations

represent unique individuals. This procedure left us with a sample of 109,735

nonunion workers and 25,193 union workers.4

     The basic decomposition of the sources of wage variation for the nonunion

and union samples are presented in Table 1.        The covariates include detailed

controls for individual characteristics, state dummy variables, an SMSA status

dummy variable, and dummy variables for broad occupational groups. The industry

factor measures the explanatory power of a set of three digit 1980 Census of

Population code industry dummy variables (fixed effects).5 These industry effects

account for 7 to 30 percent of the nonunion wage variation and 10 to 29 percent

of the union ag variation.6 The broad ranges arise from the large degree of



                                                                                  5
multicollinearity between the industry effects and the covariates.              The

F-statistics for the hypothesis that    the   industry effects are all zero once the

covariates are present in the earnings equations are 81.45 for the nonunion sample

and 23.17 for the union sample. Thus, the hypothesis that the industry effects

do not matter can be rejected at any conventional significance level.

     Industry differentials appear to have a substantial impact on earnings even

when allocating the joint contribution of industry and the covariates entirely

to the covariates. An approximate measure of the impact of the portion of the

industry effects orthogonal to the covariates on earnings can be derived by

multiplying the proportion of sum of squares attributable to industry alone by

the variance of log earnings in the sample, and then taking the square root of

this quantity. This yields a conservative estimate of the standard deviation in

earnings generated by industry differentials after accounting for other

observables.7 This procedure yields a standard deviation in log wages attributable

to industry of .141 for the nonunion sample and .140 for the union sample.

    A further issue relevant to assessing the importance of alternative theories

of wage determination is the extent to which the impact of industry affiliation

on wages differs across occupations.      Working conditions, skill requirements,

efficiency wage considerations, and union threat effects that may give rise to

industry wage effects for particular groups of workers are likely to differ sub-

stantially across occupational groups.        We performed separate analyses of the

sources of wage variation for each of twelve occupational groups for the nonunion

sample.8 The twelve occupational groups are managers, professionals, technicians,

supervisors, sales, clericals, service workers, craft workers, operators, trans-

port and equipment operators, semiskilled workers, and laborers. The decompos-

itions are based on on a separate set of earnings equations for each occupational

group. Tf   industry   effects are strongly statistically significant and contribute



                                                                                   6
substantially to the explained variation in earnings for each group. The minimum

proportion of the variation in wages     explained   by industry effects ranges from

7.6 percent for clericals to 18.9 percent for professionals, while the maximum

proportion explained ranges from 13.2 percent for clericals to 46.1 percent for

sales workers.



III.   Previous Studies of Industry Characteristics and Wages
       The evidence presented in the previous section indicates that industry wage

differentials account for a substantial share of individual wage differences.

Furthermore, Dickens and Katz (1986) find that industry wage differentials are

strongly correlated across occupations. There appears to be a pattern of wage

differentials in which all workers in some industries are highly paid relative

to similar workers in other industries. The pattern of which industries pay high

wages has been very stable over time and across countries with widely varying

methods of determining labor compensation.

       What are the attributes of high paying and of low paying industries? In this

section, we present a partial survey of the large empirical literature that has

attempted to answer this question by relating workers' wages to industry charac-

teristics.     Previous studies fall into two broad categories. The first group

consists of studies attempting to relate industry attributes and average worker

characteristics to a measure of industry average wages. Selected industry-level

(or macro) studies are summarized in table 2. The aggregate nature of the data

typically leads to difficulties in adequately controlling for worker character-

istics.    A major conceptual problem arises in the interpretation of these macro

estimates. For example, if an individual's wage depends on his or her own union

status as well as the extent of unionization in his or her industry of employment,

the macro estimates of the impact of union density on industry average wages in-



                                                                                  7
volve a combination of the two effects.9 The industry level studies, with the

exception of Moore, Newman and Cunningham (1985), also do not allow one to de-

termine the potential differences in impact of industry characteristics on union

and nonunion wages.

    The second group of studies add industry level variables to individual level

data sets which include individual worker characteristics. Selected studies of

this type are summarized in table 3. The large micro data sets utilized in these

studies permit detailed controls for worker characteristics.   Individual level

data with information on the union status of workers potentially allows the in-

vestigator to estimate separate effects of industry attributes on collectively

bargained wages and on nonunion wages. The merging of data on individuals with

industry data also permits one to include both micro and macro features of other

variables that may affect earnings. In particular, an individual's earnings may

depend on his or her own attributes and the characteristics of his or her estab-

lishment as well as on the attributes of the industry.

     The existing micro studies suffer from several conceptual and econometric

difficulties. A particular problem involves the use of variables from an incor-

rect level of aggregation, such as industry average plant size rather than the

size of the plant in which each individual is employed and a concentration ratio

measure at an aggregation level not closely related to the relevant product mar-

kets. This type of aggregation problem is likely to bias the estimates and lead

to incorrect standard errors (Dickens and Ross, 1964). The inclusion of aggregate

(or grouped) data in a micro specification even if it is at the correct level of

aggregation typically means that the OLS standard errors are incorrect and exag-

gerate the significance of the included aggregate variables (Moulton, 1965). This

is because there are typicaly common group error components. None of the existing

studies have used CLS to obtain correct standard errors. We shall discuss the



                                                                               8
statistical significance of the findings in these studies based on the standard

errors presented by the authors of the studies. The   caveats   noted here indicate

that the results for the industry level variables in these equations are probably

less precise than indicated by the standard errors reported by the authors.



A. Extent of Unionization: The extent of union organization of an industry is

likely to affect the wages of both union and nonunion workers employed in the

industry. An increase in the extent of unionization in a product market is likely

to reduce the ability of purchasers to substitute nonunion for union products and

thereby tends to lower the elasticity of demand for organized workers.1° The im-

proved trade-off between wages and membership employment for the union suggests,

all else equal, a positive relationship between union wages and the extent of
                         11
industry organization.

     The direction of the impact of the extent of unionization on nonunion wages

is unclear a priori. Increased union wages may increase the threat of organiza-

tion for nonunion firms and lead to the payment of higher nonunion wages to help

prevent unionization. Increased costs of union firms may lead to shifts of demand

toward nonunion products raising the demand for nonunion workers. On the other

hand, reduced employment in the union sector may increase the supply of labor to

nonunion firms in an industry. These changes in demand and supply for nonunion

workers should not have permanent effects on nonunion wages in the industry rel-

ative to the wages of nonunion workers in other industries given worker mobility

across industries. The typical finding of the studies summarized in table 2 with

respect to the relation between union density and industry wages is that they are

positively related in the presence of limited controls for worker quality and

other industry characteristics.   But, there are the problems of interpretation

discussed above.




                                                                                 9
    A number of the studies utilizing micro data on earnings have controlled both

for individual union status and for industry union density. Freeman and Medoff

(1961) estimate separate union and nonunion earnings including an industry extent

of unionization measure as well as controls for other individual and industry

characteristics using pooled CPS data for production workers in manufacturing.

They find that union density has a large positive effect on union wages and little

impact on nonunion wages. In contrast, Podgursky's (1986) results with a similar

sample indicate a large positive effect on industry unionization on the wages of

nonunion workers in both manufacturing and nonmanufacturing. The Podgursky and

the Freeman and Medoff studies differ in the controls for other industry charac-

teristics included in the wage equations.

    Moore, Newman, and Cunningham (1985) separately aggregate CPS data for union

and nonunion workers into fairly broad industry-occupation-region cells. They

also find a positive effect of union density on nonunion wages. Their use of

unweighted regressions with data separately aggregated into union and nonunion

groups is likely to avoid some of the problems in inference from combining data

of different levels of aggregation.

      Existing studies generally find that industry union density is positively

related to the earnings of union and nonunion workers. The positive effect on

nonunion wages is consistent with union threats acting to keep nonunion wages in

heavily unionized industries high. The estimates appear quite sensitive to the

particular data set utilized and to the other industry attributes included as

regressors. The studies surveyed which allow differential impacts of extent of

unionism on union and nonunion wages yield coefficient estimates on the industry

percent unionized variables in log wage equations ranging from .045 to .460 for

union workers and from - .013 to .421 for nonunion wages.




                                                                               10
B. Concentration and other Product Market Power Measures: Alternative      models

of the labor market provide many rationales for an observed relationship between

measures of product market power and wages. A potential competitive labor market

explanation for a positive relationship between product market power and wages

even after controlling for observed worker characteristics is complimentarity

between capital and unobserved skills.       This link relies on a view that

capital-intensive industries are likely to be more concentrated and typically more

likely to generate monopoly rents for incumbent firms. The union threat model

and some other models in which insider workers have bargaining power imply that

workers should share in product market rents in the form of higher wages. The

same relationship arises from efficiency wage models in which workers notion of

fairness are related to the firm's ability to pay.12 Additionally, one attribute

of expense-preference behavior by managers in noncompetitive product markets may

be the paying of higher wages to reduce managerial effort required for monitoring

workers or for dealing with turnover. This type of behavior may not be very costly

to a firm in a market where efficiency wage considerations are important.13

     Weiss (1966) and Masters (1969) both find that concentration has a strong

positive relationship to earnings when no labor quality variables are included

as controls. Weiss also finds that the effect of concentration on earnings is

greatly reduced once detailed personal characteristics are included as controls

in a micro earnings equation. Weiss concludes that employers in more concentrated

industries appear to pay their employees more, but that they get higher "quality"

labor in exchange. On the other hand, Kwoka (1983), Long and Link (1983), Mellow

(1982), and Heywood (1986) find a large positive and and significant effect of

industry concentration on wages utilizing individual level data on earnings and

worker characteristics combined with other industry level variables. The studies

presented in tables 2 and 3 indicate that the relationship between concentration



                                                                               11
and wages is quite ambiguous when detailed labor quality controls are utilized.

Furthermore, concentration has been sharply criticized as a measure of product

market power and monopoly rents (Phillips, 1976).

     Pugel (1980) and others have argued that economic profitability is a better

measure of product market power across industries than concentration. The major

problem that arises is getting an empirical measure of of economic profitability

given the lack of a tight relationship between available measures of accounting

profits and the theoretical construct of economic profitability.14 Pugel (1980)

and Hodson and England (1986) find strong positive effects of industry profit-

ability measures on average industry wages even with controls for average worker

characteristics, union density, and other industry variables including the rate

of employment growth. Both these studies find that wages are much more strongly

related to direct measures of profits than to concentration. This positive re-

lationship between wages and profitability is apparent even though the direct

effect of higher wages is to lower profits. Alternatively, Kumar (1972) finds a

much larger impact, on wages of unskilled workers, for concentration than for a

measure of profits in a small sample of Canadian industries.      None of these

studies permit one to determine if product market power has differential impacts

on the wages of union and nonunion workers. Kalachek and Raines (1976) add an

industry rate of return variable to a micro earnings equation and find a signif-

icant positive effect on union wages and little impact on nonunion wages.

      Industry wage differences appear to be related to ability-to-pay although

measurement problems in variables such as concentration and accounting profits

mean these conclusions should be be viewed as tentative.        Several studies

(Heywood, 1986; Weiss, 1966; Mellow, 1982; and Jenny, 1978) indicate that inter-

action effects between concentration, extent of unionization, and individual Un-




                                                                              12
ion status might be important for sorting out the effects of concentration on

earnings.



C.   Plant and Firm Size: Large   employers typically pay more than small employers

within a given industry.b Masters (1969) reports a positive simple correlation

between industry average wages and the industry proportion of workers in large

plants. Most models of wage determination can be made consistent with this pos-

itive relationship between wages and employer size. Di (1983) argues that large

employers hire higher quality employees to conserve on managements time since

better workers are easier to monitor. Alternatively, some have argued that the

shirking version of the efficiency wage model implies that higher wages are paid

by large firms, holding worker quality constant, to conserve on monitoring costs

and create incentives against poor performance. It is argued that this relation

holds because monitoring is likely to be quite costly in large organizations and

because large plants often have integrated production processes utilizing expen-

sive equipment. Masters (1969) further suggests that large plants need to pay

compensating differentials for the regimentation of work typically found in these

settings.   Additionally, large nonunion establishments may be potential union

organizing targets and pay high wages to avoid unionization.

       The proportion of workers in an industry in large plants and the average

establishment size have typically been found to be positively related to industry

wage levels even in the presence of detailed control variables (Kwoka, 1983; Long

and Link, 1983; Pugel, 1980 and many others). Although establishment size and

firm size appear to have quite important effects on wages within industries, they

cannot explain much of inter-industry wage differentials. The May 1979 CPS con-

tains a special survey including questions on establishment and firms size.

Krueger and Summers (1986) find in analyzing this data set that the inclusion of



                                                                                 I 3
plant size and firm size controls barely affects the estimates of industry wage

differentials. They find the employment weighted standard deviation of two-digit

industry log wage differentials falls only from .104 to .099 when plant and firm

size controls are added to a log earnings equation with controls for occupation,

region, union status and individual characteristics. The raw correlation of the

estimated industry differentials with and without employer size controls is .96.

Katz (1986) finds that estimated industry differentials are only slightly affected

by the inclusion of plant size and firm size dummies when nonunion workers are

analyzed alone.

        Brown and ?ledoff (1985)    present the most detailed analysis of the re-

lationships among plant size, firm size and wages.      Brown and Medoff find that

plant size and firm size have distinct positive effects on wages for both union

and nonunion employees. They conclude that most of the employer size effect on

wages occurs within detailed industries and that a large employer size effect

persists even after controlling in detail for worker quality and working condi-

tions in several data sets. Employer size appears to be an important factor in

explaining intra-industry wage differentials, but not very important in explain-

ing differences in wage levels across industries.



D.   Other Industry Characteristics: The   differences in results for   a   variety   of
variables   across studies are highlighted for micro and macro industry wage studies

in tables 4 and 5 respectively. Capital-intensity is one variable that efficiency

wage models and insider bargaining models indicate is likely to be positively

related to worker bargaining power and wages (Dickens, 1986). Haworth and

Rasmussen (1971), Hodson and England (1986), and Lawrence and Lawrence (1986) all

find that the capital-to-labor ratio has a strong positive relationship with in-

dustry average wages. A basic simultaneity problem makes it difficuli tc deter-



                                                                                      14
mine whether these findings mean that capital intensive industries need to pay

high wages or that high wages generated for other reasons lead to the substitution

of capital for labor.

       The studies reviewed in this section indicate that conclusions concerning

the industry characteristics that affect wages are quite sensitive to the spec-

ification (e.g. other control variables included) and to the particular sample

analyzed (e.g. time period and group of industries included). These findings

suggest the effects are not uniform across industries and that multicollinearity

makes it quite difficult to sort out the effects of individual industry attri-

butes. These problems are studied in detail in the next section.



IV.   Correlates of   Industry Wages.

       As the last section makes clear, there are a number of problems with sole

reliance on the results of previous studies for the purposes of our analysis.

First, only a few of the previous studies have distinguished between wages of

union and nonunion workers.        Most economists would expect the wages of union

workers to be set in a noncompetitive manner, but how wages are set for nonunion

workers is an open question. Below we analyze union and nonunion wages sepa-

rately. Second, many results reported above are sensitive to the specification

of the wage regression. What we can not tell from the literature survey is whether

the results presented in each study are representative of a wide range of spec-

ifications or idiosyncratic to the particular specification chosen. If a result

is idiosyncratic - -   unique   to a particular sample or some unusual set of control

variables -- we may wish to ignore it as not representative of the behavior across

most industries or as being due to the inclusion of theoretically inappropriate

controls.    Below we analyze a large number of specifications to determine which

results are representative and which are idiosyncratic. Finally, the discussion



                                                                                   15
above pointed out several econometric problems with past studies which are reme-

died in the analysis presented below. To avoid   confounding   the effects of indi-

vidual and industry characteristics, we use micro data. One approach would be

to include the industry variables in with the micro data and to use a GLS estimator

to deal with the industry error components. This approach would be expensive and

unwieldy given the number of different specifications we wish to examine.        In

addition, the level of aggregation problems discussed in section III can lead to

biased coefficient estimates. Since we are only concerned with the coefficients

of the industry characteristics, we take a second approach.

     We have estimated wage equations in two steps. In the first step, we regress

wages on a number of individual characteristics, geographic dummy variables and

three-digit 1980 Census of Population code dummy variables. In the second step,

the coefficients on the three-digit industry dummies are regressed on industry

characteristics. Dickens and Ross (1984) suggest this approach as a possible

solution to the aggregation problem which results from the correlations between

the characteristics of individual workers and the deviations of the attributes

of their firms' characteristics from industry averages.        For large numbers of

people in each industry, this method produces reliable parameter estimates even

in the presence of such correlations. The results in Dickens (1985) suggest that

the standard errors from an OLS wage equation of this sort may differ insubstan-

tially from those of the ideal GLS estimator where the variances of the individual

and group error components are assumed known. For several specifications we es-

timated standard errors with unweighted data, with data weighted by the square

root of group size and using White's technique.          All three methods gave

qualitatively similar results so we have used and reported unweighted OLS standard

errors.




                                                                                 16
A. Regression Specifications: The     first stage regressions are run   using the 1963
CPS data   set described in section II. The specification is the same as that de-
scribed above including three-digit     industry dummies and occupational dummy var-

iables. All the other covariates were also included. The industry characteristics

used as independent variables in the second stage are described briefly below and

in detail in appendix 1.       There is a problem in that the variables we use are

characteristics of the entire industry - -    both   union and nonunion workers and
firms --   while   we are estimating equations for the union and nonunion wages sep-

arately.      Further, we know from previous studies that at least some of these

characteristics differ between union and nonunion workers within three digit in-

dustries (for example the injury rate).      If at least the ordering of the obser-

vations on each variable are correct, we can interpret these variables as indexes

for the factors they are supposed to represent.

    A problem in analyzing the correlates of industry wages is that many industry

characteristics are available only for a subset of the industries we wish to ex-

amine.     The existence of many different systems for coding industry data aggra-

vates this problem since it is often impossible to impute the values for some

industries using one coding system from the values using another. Since we are

using census (CPS) data on individuals, we use 1980 Census industry codes. We

have two different ways of dealing with missing values.       In one set of specifi-

cations, we eliminated all industries for which information on any variable in-

cluded in a regression was missing.       In the other group, we set missing values

to zero and included a dummy variable for each variable with missing values. Each

dummy variable of this type was set equal to I when data were missing for the

relevant variable and zero when data were present. The first method is unbiased

as long as data are randomly missing. The second is unbiased only if the variables


                                                                                    17
with missing data are orthogonal to all other variables. When these orthogonality

conditions hold, the second method yields unbiased estimates even if data are

non-randomly missing and it also makes more efficient use of available data.

Since the right-hand-side variables used here are not in general orthogonal, the

use of this method involves a compromise between efficient use of available data

and different sources of bias.

      The industry characteristics included in our analysis can be thought of as

falling into five groups. The classification presented below is to some extent

arbitrary since some variables could be thought of as falling into several of the

categories.

    Human Capital Variables: Although we have already controlled for the standard

human capital variables at the individual level, it is possible that average

levels of observable human capital at the industry level may sti]l be correlated

with wages. Workers in industries where other workers are highly educated, more

experienced and/or have had longer job tenures than themselves may be exceptional

workers. Alternatively, better workers may be attracted to firms paying higher

wages even though those higher wages are not set explicitly to compensate them

for their human capital as in the noncompetitive wage models discussed in the

introduction. The three human capital characteristics we consider are average

years of education in the industry, average years of job tenure with current em-

ployer, and average years of labor market experience.

      Discrimination or Unobserved Labor or Job Quality:              It has been argued

(Bergmann, 1971) that women and blacks may be "crowded" into certain jobs and that

that crowding may reduce their wages. The crowding would also reduce the wages

of any other workers in that job. For this reason the percent of an industries

work force which is female or black may be related to the average wage in the

industry.     It   might also be related if   skill   requirements or unobservable aspects



                                                                                        18
of job quality differ across industries with different racial and sex compos-

itions. We include the percent of each industry's workers who are female and the

percent who are black as independent variables in our second stage regressions.

      Compensating Differentials: Several variables are included in the analysis

because they represent characteristics of employment in an industry for which

workers might receive a compensating wage premium. These variables are the layoff

rate, the injury rate, the number of hours in the work week, the number of hours

of overtime worked, and the ratio of total compensation to wage compensation.

    Labor Market Characteristics: Two attributes of industries labor markets are

included --   the   industry unemployment rate and union density. Firms in industries

with high unemployment rates may have to pay workers more to compensate them for

the prospect or frequent or long spells of unemployment.16 Alternatively, if wages

are determined by noncompetitive mechanisms, a high unemployment rate may indicate

the existence of a queue for high wage jobs.        Union density in an industry may

effect the wages of both union and nonunion workers via a number of routes as

discussed in section III.

      Technology and Product Markets: Ten variables related to the structure of

each industry's product market or the technology of production were included in

the analysis: two measures of firm size (the number of employees per firm and the

dollar value of sales per firm), the four firm concentration ratio, the

capital-to-labor ratio, the ratio of R&D spending to the dollar value of sales,

the average number of employees per establishment, the fraction of production

workers In each industry's workforce, and three measures of profitability (net

income as a percent of sales, the rate of return on capital and net income per

employee) were also included.

    Altogether 432 specifications were tried -- 216 for the union sector and 216

for the nonunion sector.       All specifications included the average tenure of



                                                                                  19
workers in the industry, their average education and job experience, union den-

sity, and   the   percent of workers who are female, black and the percent who are

production workers. Half the specifications also included the average number of

employees per firm, the average dollar value of sales per firm, the average number

of employees per establishment, the average number of hours worked each week and

the number of injuries per 10,000 workers resulting in a lost work day. All of

these variables were available for a wide range of industries.

     For each of these two basic specifications, four other specifications were

created.    Each of the three profit measures was included individually with each

of the basic specifications. Two other specifications were added in which all

three profit measures were included with each of the basic specifications. These

eight specifications were repeated including the capital-to-labor ratio and the

industry unemployment rate. These two variables were also included with the two

basic specifications without profit variables for a total of ten new specifica-

tions or eighteen specifications altogether. Each of these specifications was

estimated with and without eighteen dummy variables for one and two digit indus-

tries. (See table 7 for a list of the dummies). The inclusion of these dummies

allows us to consider the effects within relatively comparable groups of indus-

tries rather than across very different industries.     This gives us thirty-six

specifications.      Each of the thirty-six specifications was repeated again in-

cluding a number of variables only available for manufacturing industries: the

four-firm concentration ratio, the ratio of R&D spending to sales, the ratio of

total compensation to wages and salaries, average hours of overtime per week and

the layoff rate. This gives us seventy-two specifications.

     This hierarchical construction of the specifications was developed in part

because of the different industries for which the data on each groups of variables

were available and in part as an attempt to discover patterns with respect to



                                                                               20
which variables were significant or insignificant in conjunction with what other

variables. 'e were mostly unsuccessful in this second regard.

    Each of these seventy-two specifications was run on three different samples.

In the first, all observations with missing values for any of the variables were

deleted.    In the second, only manufacturing industries were included. Hissing

data were handled by setting missing elements to zero and including missing value

dummies for each variable. In the third, all industries were included and again

missing data were handled using the dummy variable technique. Each of these 216

specifications was run with the union fixed effects as the dependent variable and

with the industry fixed-effects from the nonunion regression as the dependent

variable.



B. Regression Results: Table 6 presents the raw correlations of all the vari-

ables in the industry data set. Table 7 presents the results of some represen-

tative regressions from the 432 we estimated. The results with respect to nearly

all the variables proved sensitive to the specification.   Average years of edu-

cation in the industry was the exception. It was one of only two variables with

the same sign in every specification in the nonunion sector.    It was the only

variable that was positive end statistically significant in every specification

tried. Coefficient values ranged from .04 to .15 with most falling in the middle

of the range.

      The results with respect to the other two human capital variables were far

less robust. Minor changes in the specification produced sign changes for both

variables. For example, tenure generally had a positive sign and was sometimes

significant when missing values were deleted; but when dummies were used to deal

with missing values in the full sample, the sign was negative more often than not

and sometimes significant.



                                                                              21
     The percent of an industry's workforce which is female was nearly always

significantly negatively related to wage.    In a half-dozen specifications the

coefficient was positive --   though never positive and significant.      Nothing

clearly distinguished these six specifications. The coefficients on the percent

of an industry's workforce which is black were less uniform. In general, it was

positive and occasionally significant though it was often negative when the sample

was restricted to the manufacturing sector or when dummy variables were used to

deal with missing data in the full sample.

     The results with respect to the variables included to take account of com-

pensating differences were mixed.     The layoff rate entered most often with a

positive coefficient which was occasionally significant in the nonunion sector,

but it was mostly negative for union workers. In the nonunion sector, the injury

rate was positive and insignificant in all but eight specifications.       It was

negative in five of those and significantly positive in three. In the union sec-

tor, there were many more negative coefficients. The coefficient on hours of work

was always positive and often significant in the nonunion sector except when the

sample was restricted to the manufacturing sector. More often than not the co-

efficient was significant. Negative coefficients were far more common for union

workers. On the other hand, the overtime variable almost always had a negative

coefficient which was often significant. Finally the ratio of total compensation

to wage and salary compensation almost always had a negative coefficient, but the

size of the coefficient was always less than the -l that would be expected if

workers valued a dollar of benefits the same as a dollar of pay.

       The relation between the wage and the industry unemployment rate varied

considerably with small changes in the specification. The sign on the coefficient

was as often negative as positive. There were a few specifications where it was




                                                                               22
positive and significant in the nonunion sector and some where it was signif-

icantly negative in the union   sector.
      The extent of union coverage also appears to have a somewhat ambiguous re-

lationship to wages. When the full sample was considered for nonunion workers

and missing observations were deleted, this variable was almost always positive

though only significant when the industry dummies were not included. When dummies

were used to deal with missing data, union coverage was nearly always signif-

icantly positive. When the sample was restricted to manufacturing industries,

the coefficient was often insignificantly negative. The coefficient on industry

union density was always positive and significant ranging from about .3 to .7 for

union workers.

    The sign on the coefficient on the number of employees per firm was sensitive

to the sample. In the full nonunion sample it was always negative and insignif-

icant, but in the manufacturing only sample it was always positive and often

significant.     In the union sample these results were reversed. The results for

the sales-per-firm variable were somewhat more consistent.   The coefficient was

nearly always positive and sometimes significant.       The exceptions were some

specifications in which only manufacturing industries were included. The results

for the establishment size variable were even more consistent, at least for non-

union workers. In every specification the coefficient was positive and was often

significant. Only for union workers was the coefficient ever negative. The ratio

of research and development expenditures to sales was also fairly consistently

positively related to wages in the nonunion sector and was statistically signif-

icantly positive in about half the specifications. This result was reversed for

union workers with most of the specifications having a negative coefficient which

was sometimes significant. The coefficient on the percent of production workers

in the industry's workforce varied considerably depending on the sample. For the



                                                                              23
full sample for nonunion workers the coefficient was generally negative and sig-

nificant. For manufacturing it was generally positive and   often   significant. For

union workers the coefficient was generally negative.

      The capital-to-labor ratio was nearly always positively and often signif-

icantly related to wages. In the manufacturing sample the coefficient was always

positive. The concentration ratio variable had an inconsistent relation to the

wage with both positive and negative coefficient values following no easily dis-

cernible pattern. There was only a small difference between the results for union

as opposed to nonunion workers with the coefficients for the union sector being

negative more often than for the nonunion sector.

    Finally, the profitability variables performed fairly uniformly for nonunion

workers. The ratio of net income to sales and the average return on capital were

both positively related to wages in all specifications tried and were often sig-

nificantly related when entered by themselves. Profits per employee was nearly

always positively related and often significantly positively related when entered

by itself. Given the point estimates, the wage difference between an industry

with an average net-income/sales ratio two standard deviations above the mean and

one two standard deviations below the mean would range from 5% in the specifica-

tion with the smallest coefficient to 12% in the specification with the largest.

Most estimates were towards the middle of that range. The same range for the

average rate-of-return on capital was from 2.5% to 15.4% and for net-income per

worker the range was from negative values to 17.6%. When all three profitability

variables were included, one or two of the variables might have a negative coef-

ficient while the other one or two would be positive. Results were less strong

for unionized workers. In those specifications the coefficients on the profit

variables were often negative.




                                                                                  24
     An exercise similar to this can be performed for manufacturing industries

in a much earlier year.17 This is a useful comparison given the long-term sta-

bility in industry wage levels reported in previous studies (Slichter, 1950;

Dickens and Katz, 1986; Krueger and Summers, 1986). Although the micro data are

not available and far fewer of the industry characteristics can be identified,

table 9 presents the results of regressing average industry wages on a number of

characteristics of manufacturing industries using 1939 data (see appendix 2 for

a description of the data) and table 8 presents the correlation matrix for these

data. The results are consistent with those reviewed above with one interesting

exception. The average hours worked a week was consistently positive and often

significantly related to wages in the modern data.   In table 8 the correlation

is negative and the regressions yield an insignificant positive coefficient.



C. Principal Component Analysis: The correlation matrices presented in tables

6 and 8 suggest why the results are as unstable as they are. Industry charac-

teristics are fairly highly correlated with each other.     Further, there is a

pattern to the correlation suggesting that there is one or a few underlying fac-

tors which explain the distribution of industry characteristics. This has been

the conclusion of people studying industry           characteristics   from the

"dual-economy" perspective. Several authors18 have factor analyzed industry data

and have found one dominant factor corresponding to the view that there is a

single dimension along which industries vary. At one end of this spectrum are

industries which pay high wages, have substantial market power, tend to be made

up of large firms with large establishments, have a higher union density, have

high capital-to-labor ratios and employ fewer women. At the other end are those

with the opposite characteristics.




                                                                               25
        We have repeated this exercise for both our modern data and the 1939 data

using principal components analyses. For the more recent data we ran two analysis

--   one for manufacturing industries and one for the full sample of industries.

In both of these analyses and in the analysis of the 1939 data, we find that the

first component extracted fits the dual economy description and accounts for over

a third of the standardized variance of the industry variables.

        Table 10 presents the results for an analysis of the modern manufacturing

data.      In these data and in the analysis of the full modern sample and the 1939

data the first component accounts for over a third of the variance in the data

set. An examination of the first eigenvector in each analysis, which can be in-

terpreted as the correlation between each of the variables and the respective

component, shows the pattern predicted by the dual economy theory.

        The second components of both of the analyses of the modern data are posi-

tively correlated with the average experience and tenure of the the workforce,

union coverage, the unemployment rate, the layoff rate and the injury rate. They

are negatively correlated with R&D spending, percent female and all the profit-

ability variables. This component could reflect a declining vs. growing industry

pattern.      The first two components together account for over half the variance

both in the modern data and the 1939 data.

        The remaining components add little explanatory power individually, but to-

gether with the first two it takes six or fewer components to explain

three-fourths of the variance in any of the three data sets. Ninety percent of

the variance can be explained with ten or fewer variables.                         This explains the

sensitivity of the coefficient estimates in the preceding analysis.                       It is fun-

damentally impossible to untangle the independent effects of all the industry

characteristics on wages with these data. A few variables, such as education,

profitability and establishment size, have sufficient independcn \:riability so



                                                                                                  26
that they have a consistent relation with wages controlling for a wide range of

other variables. For most variables this is not the case. In general all we can

do is identify the pattern of the correlations. The principal components analysis

provides a useful summary of these results.



V.   Conclusion
      It   has long been noted that wages for apparently similar workers can differ

greatly between firms in different industries. The results presented in section

II support this view.      The most conservative estimates indicate that industry

affiliation accounts for seven percent of all inter-personal wage variance for

nonunion workers.19 An upper bound on the importance of industry effects is that

they explain thirty percent of wage variance.

       While the importance of industry differences is clear, the reasons for the

differences are more difficult to establish, independent of the problems of in-

terpreting the correlates of industry differences, even the sign of the relation

of many variables with wages is difficult to discern when other variables are

included as controls. This conclusion is suggested by the literature review in

section III and confirmed by the detailed analysis of alternative specifications

in section IV. What does emerge is a pattern of correlations. There appears to

be one major dimension (and perhaps other less important dimensions) along which

industry wage patterns differ. Over a third of the standardized variation in the

three data Sets we examine can be explained by one underlying factor.

      Despite these problems, there are three variables which stand out, from the

literature survey and the analysis of section IV, as having a consistent relation

with wages. Average years of education in an industry is positively related to

wages in every study in which it is included. It is also strongly positively re-

lated to wages in every specification in section IV even after controlling for



                                                                                 27
 education at the individual level. Though not significantly related to wages in

 every case, the sign on the coefficients of the profit variables included in the

 studies surveyed and on two of the three measures used in section IV were con-

sistently positive for nonunion workers.    Since we would expect a negative re-

 lation between profits and wages, all else held equal, this is a remarkable

result.   Finally, workers in industries with larger than average establishment

sizes and with high capital-labor ratios appear to earn positive wage premiums

in most of the specifications reviewed in section III and in most of those tried

in section IV for nonunion workers.

      The empirical analysis in section IV was not exhaustive. Only one source

of micro data from one year was used, and only a small fraction of the different

samples and specifications which were possible with the data we collected were

estimated. Still, the consistency across the studies reviewed and the equations

estimated in section IV should give us some confidence in these findings. What

can we make of them?

    The results with respect to education are consistent with all of the theories

discussed in the introduction.    Those with respect to establishment size and

capital intensity can be reconciled with any of the theories by postulating a

correlation between these variables and some unobserved variable influencing

compensation.   The same is true for the profit variables, but three types of

theories would anticipate a direct relation between profits and wages --   normative
wage, insider collective action threat, and expense-preference theories.        The

observed pattern of correlations can also be reconciled with any of the theories

but would only be anticipated from the perspective of these three. Thus, the

results presented here can be seen as providing weak support for these

non-standard models of wage determination in the nonunion sector.




                                                                                 28
FOOTNOTES




1.   Foulkes (1980) presents numerous examples of large nonunion firms which

maintain high wages at least partially to avoid unionization.



2. Bulow and Summers (1986), Dickens (1986), and Stiglitz (1984) provide detailed

discussions of the policy implications of alternative wage determination models.



3. Searle (1971) provides a detailed treatment of the techniques of analysis of

variance and of analysis of covariance. Wachtel and Betsy (1972) and Kalachek

and Raines (1976) provide examples of alternative approaches to decomposing the

contribution of personal characteristics and labor market structure variables in

explaining wage differences.    Groshen (1985) utilizes an analysis of variance

approach to examine the importance of establishment and occupational effects in

explaining within-industry production worker wage variation.



4. Union workers are those in employment covered by collective bargaining agree-

ments.




5. The share of wage variation explained by industry effects depends to some ex-

tent on the fineness of the industry classification scheme used. The three digit

classification is probably a bit too broad for the purpose of capturing the rel-

evant product market but is the most detailed breakdown possible with the CPS

data. A three digit industry classification yields an average of about 519 ob-

servations per industry cell for our nonunion san1e and 125 observations per cell



Footnotes                                                                      29
for our union sample. One can reject the restriction that three digit industry

wage effects do not differ within one digit industries at any standard level of

significance for both the union and nonunion samples. The difference between a

three digit and a one digit industry breakdown also seems to be economically as

well as statistically significant. The standard error for a log wage equation

with the same covariates as listed in table 1 drops from .37 to .35 when one moves

from including one digit to three digit industry dummies.



6. An alternative decomposition involves treating both industry and occupation

as structural variables. This means removing the occupation dummies from the

covariates. The industry and occupation dummies combined explain from 14 to 46

percent of the wage variation in the nonunion sample. The remaining covariates

account for 12 to 44 percent of the variation. The addition of industry-occupation

interaction dummies raises the overall R-squared to .604. One can reject at any

conventional significance level that the interaction terms do not matter. The

industry-occupation cell fixed effects explain 17 to 50 percent of the total sum

of squares.



7. Direct estimation of the variance components attributable to the covariates

and to industry effects is prohibitively expensive for a large data set with a

many unbalanced cells. Groshen (1985) provides a more detailed justification for

the procedure we utilize for calculating the "standard deviations."



8. The complete earnings variation decompositions by occupational group are con-

tained in an appendix available from the authors upon request.




Footnotes                                                                      30
9. See Lewis (1986) for a detailed critique of macro estimates of the impact of

unionization on wages.



10. Freeman and Medoff (1961) present a detailed analysis of the relationship

between extent of product market organization and the elasticity of demand for

union labor.



11. This improved trade-off between wages and union employment arises when union

and management bargain over wages and management has a large degree of unilateral

discretion over the level of employment. Fully ttefficientt wage bargains merely

involve the redistribution of rents between union and the employer with employment

set at the competitive level.    Abowd (1985) discusses alternative concepts of

"efficient" bargains and presents an interesting test of the efficiency of

union-management wage settlements.



12. Kahneman, Knetsch, and Thaler (1985) provide evidence that for many people

(a majority of Canadian survey respondents) "fair" wages for incumbent employees

depend on a firm's profitability and ability-to-pay.   Akerlof (1984) presents a

wide variety of sociological evidence indicating that the perceived "fairness"

of a firm's personnel policies can have large impacts on worker productivity.



13. Heywood (1985) analyzes a simple model of expense-preference behavior of

managers in a labor market exhibiting efficiency wage behavior. He shows that

wages in an industry are likely to be positively related to industry concentration

in these circumstances. Akerlof and Yellen (1985) and Bulow and Summers (1986)

show that firms paying "too high" wages in labor markets characterized by effi-

ciency wage payments may face only second-order losses. weiss (1966) argues that



Footnotes                                                                       31
industries with less competitive structures are subject too more intense public

scrutiny. The payment of high wages may help the maintenance of a good public

image and reduce the likelihood of anti-trust problems.



14. Fisher and McGowan (1963) argue that accounting rates of return tell one

little about relative economic profitability or the presence or absence of mo-

nopoly.     A recent paper by Kay and Mayer (1986) demonstrates that under some

conditions accounting concepts may provide correct measures for economic analy-

sis.




15. Brown and Medoff (1985) and Garen (1985) present detailed discussions of ex-

planations for a positive relationship between employer size and wages.



16. Murphy and Topel (1986) analyze the role of differences in unemployment risk,

hours requirements, and income variability in explaining wage differentials.



17. Since only industry level data is available for this period, this analysis

is subject to all the criticisms made of industry level studies in section III.



18. Buchele (1976a,b) and Oster (1979) present examples of factor analytic studies

of the dual economy. Lang and Dickens (forthcoming) provide a critical survey of

the dual economy literature.



19. Saunders and Marsden (1981) find similar results for six European countries.

Their study does not distinguish between union and nonunion workers.




Footnotes                                                                      32
APPENDIX 1: INDUSTRY LEVEL DATA SET CIRCA 1983



Table A1.l

Variable                                  Mean    S.D.   Source

Average Rate of Return on Capital         .059    .034     a
Average Unemployment Rate 79, 82 & 84     .078    .024     b
Average Wage                              7.99    2.15     c (Tab.C2)
Average Weekly Income                     304     102      c (Tab.C2)
Capital/Labor Ratio                       .097    .170     d
Fraction Black                            .095    .065     e
Fraction Female                           .365    .207     c (Tab.B2,3)
Fraction Production                       .765    .124     c (Tab.B2)
Four Firm Concentration Ratio             .372    .146     f
Hours of Overtime                         2.47    1.00     c (Tab.C2)
Hours of Work per Week                    37.4    3.85     c (Tab.C2)
Injury Rate                               4.19    2.47     g
Labor Productivity                        74.6    50.5     h
Layoff Rate                                .016   .013     i
Net income/Employee                        .059   .090     j
Net Income/Sales                           .039   .031     a
Non-Wage and Salary Compensation           .378   .066     k
Quit Rate                                  1.29   .788     i (not /100)
R&D Expenditures/Sales                     .023   .032     1
Sales per Firm                             .015   .075     a
Thousand Employees per Establishment       .038   .040     j
Thousand Employees per Firm                .169   .477     j
Union Coverage                             .184   .169     m
Years of Education                         13.45 1.07      m
Years of Job Tenure                       4.68    2.90     n
Years of Experience                        18.1   3.53     o

Sources
       *
a. Three year average. Source Book: Statistics of Income 1979,
   1980, 1981.   Corporate Income Tax Returns, Treasury Department.
b. Employment and Earnings, January 80, 83 &85, Table 11.
c. Employment and Earnings, March 83.
d. Plant and equipment in l000s in 1972 dollars/employees.
   Input/Output Data, Bureau of Economic Analysis, 1984.
e. 1980 Census, Detailed Population Characteristics, Table 286.
f. By value of shipments. 1977 Census of Manufactures, Table 8.
g. Lost workday cases per 100 fuiltime employees/100. USBLS, Occupa-
   tional injuries and Illnesses 1982, Bulletin 2196; Apr 84, Tab. 1.
h. Total value added/production workers. Annual Survey of
   Manufactures 1981, Table 4.
i. Per 100 empi. per mo./lOO. Employment and Earnings, March 82, Tab. D2.
j. Enterprise Statistics, 1977, Table 4. llncome data from source (a)).
k. BLS memo.
1. By sales. SF R&D in Industry, 1981, Tables Al,B2,B5,Bll.



Appendix 1: hclustry Leve1 Data Set Circa 1983                              33
m. 1983 Current Population Survey.
n. USDOL, Job Tenure of 'orkers, Special Labor Force Report 172,
   1975. Employment and Earnings. March 1974, Table B3.
o. Age-6-(last year of school completed). Computed from 1983 CPS.

  A detailed description of how each variable was constructed is available from
the authors on request.




Appendix 1: Industry Level Data Set Circa 1983                              34
         APPENDIX 2: 1939 MANUFACTURING INDUSTRIES DATA SET


The 31 industries in the sample are printing, newspaper and magazine; printing,

book and job; automobile; rubber; iron and steel; electrical manufacturing; ag-

ricultural implements; chemicals; paint and varnish; meat packing; lumber and

miliwork; paper products; hoisery and knit goods; furniture; wool; paper and pulp;

leather tanning; boots and shoes; cotton; foundries; machines and machine tools;

heavy equipment; hardware and small parts; other foundry and machine shop pro-

ducts; rubber tires and tubes; other rubber products; silk; woolen and worsted;

other woolen products; cement; and petroleum refining.

      The definitions, means, standard deviations, and sources of the variables

in the data set are presented in Table A2-l.     BLS data giving crude measures of

the extent of unionization by industry for 1941 is used as a proxy for 1939

unionization rates. These BLS estimates classify manufacturing industries into

four categories:

         Group   I: almost entirely under written agreements
         Group   II: large proportion under written agreements
         Group   III: about half under written agreements
         Group   IV: moderate proportion under written agreements.

We summarize the information from the BLS classifications by assigning each in-

dustry the midpoint of Lewis' (1963) informed estimates of the class limits for

each group. The variable UNION for each industry takes on the following values

depending on its BLS classification:

         Group   I: 90 percent
         Group   II: 70 percent
         Group   III: 50 percent
         Group   IV: 20 percent.




Appendix 1: Industry Level Data Set Circa 1983                                  35
                                    TABLE A2-1


                  VARIABLE DEFINITIONS, SOURCES AND MEANS
                    (STANDARD DEVIATIONS) OF THE DATA
                      MANUFACTURING INDUSTRIES - 1939

                                             Me an
                                           (Standard
Description                                Deviation    Source)

Average hourly earnings, male                 .586        1
 unskilled (1939)                            (.091)
Average hourly earnings, male                 .798        1
 skilled and semiskilled (1939)              (.139)
Average hourly earnings, all                  .723       2
 wage earners (1939)                         (.137)
Median age, male employees (1940)           35.31        3
                                            (2.00)
Fraction of females among wage                   .204     1
 earners (1939)                             (.183)
Discharge rate per                           .018        4
 worker (1939)                              (.009)
Layoff rate per                              .282        4
 worker (1939)                              (.179)
Quit rate per                                .107        4
 worker (1939)                              (.041)
Average hours of work                        37.7        2
 per week (1939)                            (1.96)
Fraction of labor force covered by           .460        5
 collective bargaining agreements (1941)    (.239)
Value added per employee (1939)              2545        6
 ($/year)                                   (1091)
Average number of employees per              1.42        6
 establishment/100 (1939)                   (1.30)
Net income after taxes as percentage         4.34        1
 of sales or total receipts (1939)          (2.88)

Sources:
1. Slichter (1950)
2. Conference Board (1940)
3. 1940 Census
4. Handbook of Labor Statistics (1941)
5. Petersen (1942)
6. Census of Manufactures (1940)




Table A2-1                                                        36
                                    TABLE 1



                       Analysis of Sources of Wage Variance
                         for Nonunion and Union Workers

                                      Nonunion                  Union

                                  Share of Total              Share of Total
Source of Variation               Sum of Squares              Sum of Squares

Covariates and Industry (RA)           .582                        .478

Error (1 - RA)                         .418                        .522

Covariates First
Covariates (RB)                        .515                        .377

Industry (RA - RB)                     .067                        .101

Industry First
Covariates (RA - RC)                   .284                        .185

Industry (RC)                          .298                        .293




Total Sum of Squares (SST)           32637.0                      4867.6
Variance of log(wage)                  .297                        .193
Standard Deviation of log(wage)        .545                        .440
Mean of log(wege)                     1.85                        2.17

Total /1 of observations             109735                       25193
# of Industry cells                     217                         209
# of covariates                          82                          82




RA is the R-squared from a log wage regression including both the covariates and
industry dummies; RB is the R-squared from a regression of log wage on the
covariates alone; and RC is the R-squared from a regression of log wage on in-
dustry dummies alone. The covariates are education (years of schooling) and its
square; experience (age-education-5) and its square; 50 state and 11 occupation
dummy variables; dummy variables for marital status, race, sex, part-time work
and whether or not an individual lives in an S1SA; and interaction terms for both
experience and experience squared with all the other varab1es except the state
and occupation dummies and education squared. Industry refers to 3-digit 1980
Census of Population code industry dummies.


Table 1                                                                        37
                                                                TABLE 2

                     EMPIRICAL STUDIES OF INDUSTRY ATTRIBUTES AND WAGES UTILIZING INDUSTRY AVERAGE DATA

AUTI-IORS       AND YEAR                             DATA                                                RELEVANT CONCLUSIONS

Rapping (1967)                                  1960 Census of Population,           Profits per hour, proportion of workers in unionized plants,
                                                1958 Census of Manufacturers,        industry concentration, and assets per hour all have
                                                other sources.  Dependent variable   positive wage effects. The wage equations include no
                                                is log of average hourly wage for    controls for labor quality besides a percent black
                                                                                             I
                                                                                     va r jab e.
                                                19 manufacturing industries.

Masters (1969)                                  1963 Census of Manufacturers         Industry union density and proportion of workers in large
                                                Dependent variable is average        plants have significant, positive effects on wages; the
                                                hourly wage for L417                 ratio of wages to value added has a significant negative
                                                manufacturing industries.            impact, Concentration appears to be insignificantly related
                                                                                     to wages once other industry characteristics are used as
                                                                                     controls. The industry wage equations estimated in this
                                                                                     study do not include any controls for labor quality
                                                                                     or other worker characteristics.

Haworth and Rasmussen (1971)                    1963 Census of Manufacturers,        This paper adds controls for industry labor force quality
                                                1950 Census of Population            and demographic characteristics to a specification and data
                                                Dependent variable is average        set similar to Masters (1969). Plant size and the capital/
                                                hourly wage for 390 industries.      labor ratio have large positive effects on wages.
                                                                                     Union density and concentration have positive, but
                                                                                     statistically insignificant impacts.
            I       ;i'iil .Johflson   (1972)   1960 Census of Population,           Percent union has a large positive effect on wages in an
                                                other sources.  Dependent            OLS model; hilt a generally insignificant and quite unstable
                                                variable is log of average           impact in 2SLS and 3SLS specifications in which percent
                                                hourly wage for 19 manufacturing     union arid median years of schooling are treated as
                                                industries.                          endogenous. Concentration has a small, insignificant effect
                                                                                     on wages. The small sample size limits the authors to few
                                                                                     control variables (schooling, percent female, percent south).

Kurnar (1972)                                   Canadian government data.            Value added per hour, industry concentration ratio, and
                                                Dependent variable is average        the industry unionization rate have large positive effects
                                                                     I                                      I
                                                                                     on wage rates for unski led labor. After-tax profits as a
                                                hourly wage for iinski led workers
                                                in 23 Canadian manufacturing         percentage of sales has small positive, but insignificant,
                                                                                                                                  I
                                                                                                    I
                                                industries.                          impact on tinski led wages. Unskilled and ski led wages are
                                                                                     strongly positively correlated across industries.

ilawnrth and Reuther            (1978)          Censuses of Manufacturers,           Concentration and percent union have much stronger positive
                                                Censuses of Population               wage effects during periods of slack demand (1958) than
                                                Dependent variable is log of         during periods of strong demand (1967).  Plant size has a
                                                average hourly wage fOr 207          strong positive effect on wages of approximately the same
                                                industries (1958) and 359             magnitude for the sample years. Value added per worker has
                                                industries (1967).                   a larger positive effect on earnings in 1967 than in 1958.
                                                                                     Two years of data make it difficult to really differentiate
                                                                                     cyclical effects from secular changes in relationships.
                                                73 manufacturing industries          A measure of excess profit per hour  and fraction workers in
Pugel (1980)
                                                based on IRS minor industry          large plants have  large positive effects on wages. The
                                                classification for 1968-70.          excess profit measure has a much stronger relationship to
                                                Dependent variable is log of         wages than does the concentration ratio. Fraction of workers
                                                average hourly earnings per          in unionized plants has small and generally insignificant
                                                employee averaged over 1967-70.      wage impact.
Heywood (1985)                    Sample consists of 93 four-digit    Unionization rate, average industry plant size, and
                                  manufacturing industries for 1970    concentration all have positive and significant effects
                                  and 1979. Dependent variable is     on wages, while percentage of industry supply from imports
                                  log of average wage for             has a negative and significant impact on wages. The other
                                  production workers.                 control variables are median age, percent of industry workers
                                                                      with high school education, percent female, and proportion of
                                                                      industry production in the south.
Lawrence and Lawrence (1965)      Sample consists of 57
                                  manufacturing industries for        Proportion of workers in large plants and capital/labor
                                  1960,   1970,
                                              1980, and 19814; data   ratio have substantial positive effects on earnings across
                                  from various sources. Dependent     specifications and sample years. Concentration found
                                  variables utilized are log of       insignificant for earnings, but positive and significant
                                  average hourly earnings for         in some specifications for total compensation. Unionization
                                  production worker and total         rate has positive, although not consistently significant,
                                  compensation per employee.          impact on earnings.

Hodson and England (1986)         Industrial Characteristics from     This paper estimates separate industry median earnings
                                  the 1970 Census; other sources.     equations for male and females including a large number or
                                  Sample consists of 188 private      industry characteristics and limited labor quality controls
                                  sector industry groups at the       as independent variables. The extent of unionization and
                                  three-digit 1970 Census code        and profit rate have positive and significant effects on
                                  level. The dependent variables      both male and female earnings. The capital/labor ratio
                                  utilized are median earnings for    and proportion of industry sales to government have strong
                                  males and median earnings for       positive impacts on male earnings and and much weaker
                                  fema es.                            relationships to female earnings. Concentration and firm
                                                                      size have small and insignificant effects for both groups.

Moore, Newman, and               Pooled May CPSs for 1973-79.         Sample stratification into cells of union and nonunion
Cunningham (1985)                Aggregated separately for            workers permits the authors to estimate the distinct impact
                                 union and nonunion workers into      of alternative union density measures on union and 000(10100
                                 broad industry—occupation-region     wages. Industry union density and average plant size are
                                 groups. Sample consists of           found to have strong positive effects on both union and
                                 private sector male employees.       nonunion wages. The authors utilize only a limited range of
                                                                      controls for worker characteristics relative to the typical
                                                                      microearningsequation. The inclusionof
                                                                      the plant size variable substantially reduces the impact
                                                                      of industry union density on nonunion wages for
                                                                      manufacturing.




Statistical significance here refers to statistical significance at the 5 percent level in   a   one—tail test.




                                                                                                                  2
                                                 TABLE   3

    EMPIRICAL STUDIES OF INDUSTRY ATTRIBUTES AND WAGES UTILIZING INDIVIDUAL DATA ON EARNINGS AND WORKER
                                              CHARACTER 1ST ICS
Authors and Year                        Data                                            Relevant Conclusions

Weiss (1966)                     1960 Census of Population. 1960       Industry concentration and unionization rate have positive
                                 Annual Survey of' Manufacturers.      effects on annual earnings. These positive impacts are
                                 5181 males in various industries.     greatly reduced when detailed personal characteristics are
                                 Dependent variable is private wage    included as controls. No control for individual union status
                                 and salary income for 1959.           is available.
Kalachek and Raines (1976)       National Longitudinal Survey for      After controlling for labor quality, the rate of return
                                 1966 and 1969; men aged 5-59 in       has significant positive wage effects for union workers and
                                 1966. Rate of return from IRS         has little wage effect for nonunion workers.
                                 Corporation Income Tax Returns
                                 (1963,66,68). Dependent variable
                                 is log of reported hourly wage.

Dalton and Ford (1977)           PubI ic use sample, 1970 Census       Industry concentration, employment growth and durable
                                 of Population.   Limited to 5353      goods industry dummy have strong positive wage effects in
                                 nonsupervisory workers aged 1t4-65    equations including extensive individual controls and
                                 in manufacturing or utility           union density. Union density has only a small impact.
                                 industries.   Dependent variable      No control for individual union status was available.
                                 annual earnings and log of
                                 earnings adjusted by
                                 BLS cost of living index.
Bloch and Kuskin (1978)          May 1973 Current Population          This study estimates separate union and nonunion
                                 Survey(CPS) limited to 778 union     wage equations including standard labor quality
                                 and 1296 nonunion white              controls, concentration, and industry average estab—
                                 non-Spanish males aged 25-6Z4 in      I
                                                                       ishment size. Concentration has significant negative
                                 manufacturing ndustr es.             wage effects for union workers and insignificant
                                 Dependent variable is log of         negative effects for nonunion workers. Establishment
                                 average hourly earnings.             size is not significant for either group.
Jenny (1978)                     5171 individuals from the 196'j       Industry-level measures of plant size, fixed costs, and union
                                 French Census. Dependent variable     density have strong positive effects on wages. Concentration
                                 is log of wage income divided by      has a negative effect in highly unionized industries and a
                                 average hours worked in industry.     positive effect in low union density industries. Equations
                                                                       include no control for individual union status.

Freeman and Medoff (1981)        May CPS for 1973-75 merged with   This paper estimates separate earnings equations for
                                 3—digit SIC code industry data    union members and nonunion workers including labor
                                 from various sources. Sample is   quality controls, state dummies, 2—digit SIC code
                                 limited to production workers in  industry dummies, and four 3-digit SIC code industry
                                 manufacturing. Dependent variable level variables. Industry average firm size and injury
                                 is log of usual hourly earnings.  rate have significant positive effects on wages for
                                                                   both groups. Industry unionization rate has a significant
                                                                   positive association with union wages and virtually no
                                                                   association with nonunion wages. Concentration is
                                                                   insignificant for both groups.
Mellow (1982)                    May 1979 CPS; 18,551 workers.         Individual—level firm and plant size measures and industry
                                 Dependent variable is log of          union density have strong positive effects on wages. A
                                 average hourly earnings or log       union status dummy and detailed individual controls are
                                 of hourly total compensation.         included. Positive effect of concentration is larger
                                                                       for nonunion workers and for workers in large firms.


                                                                                                            3
                                                                                                                            size
Kwoka   (1983)                         1977 Quality of [mployment Survey; Concentration and individual-level establishment
                                       250 blue collar workers in         measures have a strong positive effect on in equations
                                       mantifactur, ng industries.        with a union status dummy and an extensive liSt of
                                       Dependent  variable   is log of    personal, job, and locational characteristics. The positive
                                       reported hourly wage.              impact of concentration is much larger for nonunion workers.

Long and Link (1983)                   !966 National Longitudinal          Industry concentration, Union density, and firm size have
                                       Survey; 151ts men aged L45-59 in   strong positive wage effects in equations with controls for
                                       manufacturing and utilities.       personal characteristics but no control for union status.
                                                                          Minimum price regulation has positive associationwithwages.

Pleywood   (1986)                      1005 household heads in             Concentration and two industry-level measures of
                                       manufacturing industries from       establishment size have large positive effects in equations
                                       Panel Study of Income Dynamics.     including controls for individual worker characteristics,
                                       Dependent variable is log of        hours worked, and union status. An interaction term for
                                       average hourly wage for 1981.       concentration and Union status has a significant negative
                                                                           impact on earnings.

              (1986)                   1979 CPS Sample separated by        Union density has strong positive impact on wages for
Podgursky                                                                                                                  IittlO
                                       establishment size. Includes        nonunion workers in large and medium plants and
                                       only private sector production      impact on wages for nonunion workers in plants with less than
                                       workers. Dependent variable is      lOoemployees. Author interprets his findinqs as indicating
                                       log of average hourly earnings.     that large nonunion employers tend to match union wages and
                                                                           that small nonunion employers set wages below union scale.




Statistical      significance here refers to statistical   significance at the 5 percent level in a one-tail test.
                                                                              TABLE    14


                               BASIC RESULTS OF INDUSTRY WAGE STUDIES UTILIZING INDUSTRY AVERAGE DATA
                                                                                            Variable
Authors and Year                                       %UNI0N         CONCEP4    CONUN        PLTSIZE     IMPORTS    K/L     %FEMALE   LC/TC       VA/HRS   PROFIT

                                                                       +                                                                             —
Ppp nq      (                                               +(+)
   t prç    (   (}   )                                      ++         +                       ++
Haworth and Rasmussen                                                  +                       ++                    ++        ——
                                  (1971)

Ashenfelter and           Johnson (1972)
Kumar (1972)                                                ++         ++                                                                            ++     +

Haworth    and Retither (1978)                                                                 ++

Pugel (1980)                                                +(+)       +(+)                    ++

Heood (19)                                              +4             ++                      +(+)
lawrence and Lawrence (1985)                                                                   ++         -(-)
P.rn ru, 4iwnian and Cunningham            (   1985)    ++                                     4+
Hodson and England (1986)                               +              -                                            ++(-)e     +(+)                          +4


%UNION  is the measure of the unionization rate.
CONCEN  is the measure of industry concentration.
CON*UN is the interaction between concentration and unionization rate.
PLTSI?.E is the measure of establishment size.
IMPORTS is percent of industry supply provided by imports.
K/L is the ratio of capital stock to labor used.
%FEMALE is the percent of the labor force that is female.
LC/TC is the ratio of labor costs to total costs.
VA/HRS is the ratio of value added to hours worked.
PROFIT is an industry profit rate variable.

++,--                                   .05 level in
           statistically significant at at        positive/neqative direction.
+(+),—(—)     statistically significant    .05 level
                                                  in some specifications, not significant in others.
4,— direction     of
                 effect,     not
                             statistically significant at .05 level.
Blank, not included in primary reported specifications.
a. Concentration*union*value added.
b.         per manhour.
      Profits
c. positive in           OLS   model, negative         in    2SLS   model.
ii.Labor cost/value added.
e. Positive and significant formates;                            negativeand    insignificant forfemales.

Statistical     signifficance here refers to significance                         in    one—tail tests.




                                                                                                                                               5
                                                            TABLE 5
                 BASIC RESULTS OF INDUSTRY WAGE STUDIES UTILIZING INDIVIDUAL DATA ON EARNINGS AND WORKER
                                                                 I
                                                     CHARACTER SI, CS
                                                                         Variables
Authors and Year                          %UNION     CONCEN     CON*UN     PLTSIZE       FIRMSIZE   K/L   %FEMALE   EGROWTH       INJURY   PROFIT


Weiss (1966)                                ++       +(+)        --(+)     +(+)                            --       +

Kalachek and Raines           (1976)                                                                                                        ++(+)t)

Dalton and Ford (1977)                      +        ++                                                             ++

Bloch and        Kuskiri   (1978)                    —(-)

Jenny        (1978)                         ++       ++                    ++

Freeman and Medoff (1981)                   ++(+)b   +(—)c                               ++                                         ++
   I   I   OW (1982)                        ++       ++          - -e      ++            ++
Kwoka (1983)                                                     -e        ++

Long        and Link (1983)                 ++       ++          -C-)
                                                     ++          --e       ++
Heyiood (1986)
                                            4+       +(+)                  ++
Podgursky (1986)

%UNION  is the measure of the unionization rate.
CONCEN is the measure of industry concentration.
CON4UN is the interaction between concentration and unionization rate.
PLTSIZE is the measure of establishment size.
FIRMSIZE is the measure of firm size.
K/L is the ratio of capital stock to labor used.
%FEMALE is the percent of the labor force that is female.
EGROWTH is the measure of employment growth.
 INJURY is annual number of days lost per worker because of injury.
PROFIT is pretax corporate income/net worth.

+4-,
           -- statistically significant at .05 level in positive/negative direction.
4.(4j(.)         statistically significantat  .05 level in some specifications, not significant mothers.
+,—        direction of effect, not statistically significant at .05 level.
Blank,        not included in primary reported specifications.

a. Negative and significant when no labor quality controls included; positive and insignificant when
labor quality controls included.
b. Positive and significant for unionworkers; positive and insignificant for nonunion workers.
c. Positive for nonunion workers, negative for union workers.
d. Fixed costs/employment.
e. Union status*concentration.



Statisitical significance here refers to significance in one-tail               tests.


                                                                                                                              6
                                                                       TABLE    6

                                           CORRELATIONS_OF INOIJSTRY ATTRIBUTES. 198OS
Variables*                 FE Non FE               Avg.       Avg.      Quit         Labor     Edtica—   Tenure Exper— %Fem         %Black Layoff Injury Hours
                           Union        Union      Wage       Inc.       Rate        Prdct     tion               ience                    Rate   Rate
Industry Fixed Effect       1   .000
 for Nonunion Workers            216
Industry Fixed Effect       0.647        1.000
 for Union Workers               209       209
Average Wage                0.8314      0.790      1.000
                                 160      159        160
v'raqe Weekly    Income     0.860       0.781      0.98?      1.000
                                 160      159         160       160
Quit Rate                  -0.595 -0.568          -O.6'sl    -0.6110     1.000
                                  80       80          80         80        80
Labor Productivity          0.619       0.551      0.573      0.631-0.1427           1.000
                                  77       7i          71        77      75             17
Years of Education          0.1146      0.166      0.262      0.229 -0.1482          0.730     1.000
                                216       209         160        160        80          77       223
Years of Job Tenure         0.140t1     0.21414    0.5141     0.593 -0.320           0.1431   -0.166
                               1914        190        152        152        76          73        200      200
Years of Experience         0.391       0.2014     0.140'i    0.1465   -0.362 -0.238 -0.198              0.322    1.000
                              216          209160    160                    8(1         77        223      200      223
Percent Female             -0.1451 -0.5148 -0.671 -0.708                0.3214 -0.2014         0.172 -0.388 -0.338         1.000
                               173     172    157    157                    78          76
                                                                                         173   1614                  173     173
Percent Black              -0.025 -0.0148 0.008 -0.005                  0.128 -0.0514 -0.181 0.156                0.201    0.101    1.000
                               175     172    154    151i                  76      73    180   172                   180      163     180
Layoff Rate                -0.352 -0.286 -0.286              -0.2914    0.381 -0.389 -0.507 -0.012                0.2148   0.0149   0.0314    1.000
                                80    80     80                   80       80      75     80    76                   80        78      76        80
Injury Rate                 0.1014 0.136 0.176                0.189     0.362 -0.366 -0.555              0.2014   0.2146 -0.1473    0.1140    0.453        1.000
                                 1147      1146       1141      1141        80          77        153      1147     153      1145     1146       80          153
Hours of Work per           0.737       0.579      0.6814    0.797 -0.397            0.563     0.01414   0.5714   0.572 -0.680 -0.033 -0.170               0.259    1.000
 Week                            160       159        160       160     80              7/       160       152     160   157    1514             80          141      160
Hours of Overtime           0.222       0.388      0.292     0.1403 -0.092           0.303     0.189     0.258 -0.071 -0.398 -0.039           0.078        0.171    0.722
 per Week                      77           77         77         77        75          17         77       73      77    76     73               75          77        77
Ratio of Total Comp         0.591       0.607      0.726     0.7143    -0.630        0.1439    0.51414   0.678    0.205 -0.479 -0.15?        -0.0814   -0.109       0.557
 to Wage and Salary            72           72         72     72            70    72     72                 68       72     71     68            70           7?       72
Average Unemployment       -0.075       0.009     -0.0811 -0.093        0.351 -0.375 -0.606              0.06?    0.097 -0.236 0.027          0.423        0.399 -0.084
 Rate,  79 82 814               200        196        157    157            77    77    2014               1914     2014     170      175        77           148     157
Union Coverage              0.5148      0.1491     0.637     0.653     -0.1457      -0.067    -0.2148    0.1480   0.569 -0.512      0.174     0.250        0.1420   0.527
                                216        209        160       160        80           77       223       200      223      173      180        80           153     160
Employees per               0.516       0.255      0.437     0.1463 -0.388          0.113 -0.060         0.529    0.532 -0.217      0.338 -0.178           0.029    0.1408
 [stahl ishment                  1140      139        136       136     78              76        1140     1314     140      138       136     78    1214             136
Employees per Firm          0.2314      0.153      0.2148    0.2614    -0.296 0.629            0.127     0.301    0.125 -0.037      0.1314 -0.225 -0.087            0.127
                                 1140      139        136       136         18          76        1140     134      1140     138       136     78    1214             136
Sales per Firm              0.278       0.226      0.3214    0.3149    -0.17?       0.657     0.103      0.272    0.110 -0.125      0.054 -0.122       -0.0914      0.226
                                185        183        159       159        79           76        191      182      191      172      174        79          152      159
Four Firm Concen-           0.265       0.268      0.310     0.306 -0.385           0.172     0.239      0.128    0.302 -0.056      0.066     0.083 -0.203          0.176
 tration Ratio                    73        /3         73        73         71          73         73       73       73       72       69        71           73       73
* See Appendix   1   for a description of the variables and their sources.

The number belov the correlation coefficient                  is the    number of industries with data on both variables.




                                                                                                                                                       8
                                                       TARLE 6 (CONTINUED)
                                                                                    S.     1980S

                           FE Non Ii          Avg.     Avg.     Quit     Labor    Educa-Tenure Exper- %Fem  %BIRCk Layoff Injury Hours
Variables*                                                                                      enre               Rate   Rate
                           Union Union        Wage     Inc.     Rate     Prdct    tiofl
R&t)   Expenditures!        0.3914 0.156      0.173    0.207 -0.330      0.262 0.678 -0.006 -0.069 0.078 -0.010 -0.330 -0.1459 0.297
                                                                   75        77      77    73     77     76    73     75     77      17
 fPs                           77       77       77        77
                                              0.373    0.023 -0.2214     0.143(4 -0.073 0.385 0.359 —0.339 0.201 —0.031 0.138    0.'438
Capital/Labor Ratio        0.382     0.198                                                                                             72          121       135
                                                                    7?    68    159    150    159                   1140     1143
                               158   155    135    135
                           -0.551 -0.399 -0.510 -0.562          0.291 -0.639 -0.268 -0.389 -0.306                 0.358    0.089  0.068 0.033 -0.570
Percent ProductIon                                                                                                  157      153     80    llil  159
                               159   158    159    159             80     77    159    151    159
 Workers                                                                          0.190          0.116    0.136 -0.101     0.055 -0.373 -0.150 0.337
Net-Income/Sales            0.366    0.138    0.273    0.309 -0.118      0.023
                                                                   79       76       191           18?      191     172      17(4       19      152           159
                              185      183      159       159
                                              0.080    0.101    0.131    0.350    0.136          0.019    0.067 -0.010 -0.086 -0.292         0.11(,        0.161)
Avg.   Rate of Return       0.178 -0.002                                                                                     171i       79      152           159
                                       183       159      159      79       76       191           182      191     172
 on Capital                   185                                                                                                                          11.121
                            0.170    0.121    0.161    0.180    0.193    0.538    0.150          0.103 -0.091 -0.002 -0.071         -0.182   0.033
Net-Income per worker                                                                              133      139     137      135        17         123       135
                              139      138       135      135      77       75       139

                           Over-                       Union    Emply/   Emply/ Sales! Conc.              R&D!    K/L      %Prod. Netlnc Return Netlnc
Variables*                           Comp.    Avg.
                           time               Unemp.   Covrg    Est.     Firm   Firm   Ratio              Sales            Worker /Sales on K per E
Hours of Overtime           1.000
 per Week                      77
Ratio of Total Comp         0.280    1.000
 to Wage and Salary            72       12
Average Unemployment       -0.001 -0.198      1.000
 Rate,     79   82    80       17        72     20(4
Union Coverage              0.250    0.531    0.151     1.000
                               71        72     20(4      223
                           -0.078    0.320    0.003     0.580   1.000
Employees per                                                     ilsO
 Establishment                 76       71      137       100
Employees per Firm          0.255    0.293 -0.002       0.201   0.377    1.000
                               76       71       137      100     100      100
                            0.137    0.231    0.018     0.187   0.096    0.650     1.000
Sales per Firm                                                                       191
                               76       71       186      191     139      139
                           -0.035    0.3140   -0.099    0.302   0.590    0.130     0.0141        1.000
Four Firm Concen-                                                  7        72            72        73
 tration Ratio                 73       68        73  73
                           -0.067    0.215 -0.016 -0.201        0.091    0.162    -0.0114        0.328    1.000
R&D Expenditures!                                                           76            76         73      77
 Sales                         77       72     77     77            76
                                              0.070     0.399   0.081    0.186     0.173         0.083
                                                                                                 0.060   1.000
Capital/Labor Ratio         0.562    0.518
                                                          159      120     12Ii          14414
                                                                                             65      68    159
                               68       63       152
                                              0.095 -0.292 -0.500 -0.171          -0.180 -0.122 -0.6(42 -0.515             1.000
Percent Production         -0.076 -0.338                                                                     77     1314     159
                               77        12      156      159     136      136           158         73
 Workers                                                                                         0,091    0.017   0.357 -0.553       1.000
Net-Income/Sales           —0.071    0.llfl   -0.205    0.080   0.313    0.151     0.126
                                                                           139           191         72      76     10(4     158       191
                                76       71      186      191     139
                                                                         0.028     0.078 -0.070           0.111   0.191    -0.312    0.628       1.1(110
                           -0.059 -0.029 -0.065 -0.083          0.031
Avg. Rate of Return                                                                      191        72       76     1014      158      191          191
 on Capital                    76        71      186        139
                                                          191              139
                                                                         0.017     0.169         0.076    0.061   0.008 —0.170       0.036       0.14s9    1.000
Net-Income per worker       0.183    0.105 -0.135 -0.123 -0.108                                                              135       139          139      139
                                         70      136      139     139      139           139        71       75     123
                               75

*   See Appendix     1
                 for a description of the variables and their sources.
                                                           of industries with data on both variables.
The number below the correlation coefficient is the number




                                                                                                                                             9
                                       TABLE 7


                  Dependent Variables are Industry Fixed Effects
                   from Nonunion and Union Wage Regressions
                                           Coefficients
                                (Standard Errors in Parentheses)

                           Nonunion           Nonunion               Union
                          Full Sample       Manufacturing     Full        Man
Variables                 1        2         3        4        5             6


Intercept              - .050    .407     - .915   - .269    .229        .619
                       (.344)   (.325)    (.419)   (.379)   (.385)      (.395)
Years of Education      .071     .071      .152     .085     .082        .100
                       (.018)   (.018)    (.029)   (.024)   (.021)      (.026)
Years of Job Tenure    - .006   - .006     .015    -.013    - .007      - .017
                       (.012)   (.006)    (.008)   (.009)   (.007)      (.010)
Years of Experience     .006     .003      .005     .006    -.000        .005
                       (.005)   (.004)    (.006)   (.005)   (.005)      (.006)
Fraction Female        -.049    -.223     -.335    -.280    -.343       -.368
                       (.079)   (.066)    (.065)   (.079)   (.071)      (.080)
Fraction Black         -.017    -.016      .760     .441     .357        .702
                       (.314)   (.323)    (.270)   (.244)   (.361)      (.295)
Layoff Rate              --       --      1.148     .836      --        -.359
                                          (.747)   (.665)               (.749)
Injury Rate             .007      --        --      .005      --        -.003
                       (.005)                      (.005)               (.005)
Hours of Work per       .012      --        --      .011      --        -.017
 Week                  (.005)                      (.009)               (.009)
Hours of Overtime        --       --      - .008   -.037      --         .040
 per Week                                 (.011)   (.014)               (.016)
Ratio of Non Wage        --       --      - .669   - .080     --        - .023
 Comp. to total                           (.273)   (.228)               (.239)
Avg Unemployment         --      .150      .426    -.138     .012            --
 Rate, 79 82 84                 (.867)    (.531)   (.666)   (.662)
Union Coverage          .089     .236      .121     .056     .429        .354
                       (.087)   (.087)    (.089)   (.082)   (.100)      (.088)
Employees per           .698      --        --      .168      --        -.260
 Establishment/l000    (.375)                      (.292)               (.323)
Employees per          -.007                --      .050      --        - .039
 Firm/1000             (.021)                      (.041)               (.048)
Sales per Firm          .228                --      .091      --         .319
 (in millions of $)    (.143)                      (.178)               (.201)
Four Firm Concen-        --       --       .004    - .070     --         .042
 tration Ratio                            (.065)   (.061)               (.063)
R&D Expenditures/        --       --       .020     .010      --         .000
 Sales                                    (.005)   (.005)               (.005)
Capital/Labor            --      .106      .165     .144     .012            --
 Ratio                          (.092)    (.067)   (.058)   (.097)




Table 7                                                                           38
Fraction Production        .077     .209       .546     .361       .020      -.053
 Workers                  (.117)   (.lLd)     (.128)   (.120)     (.133)     (.123)
Net -Income/Sales           --      .791     -1.017      -   -         --    - .302
                                   (.456)     (.613)                         (.534)
Avg Rate of Return                            1 .964    .945        277       .286
 on Capital                                   (.517)   (.287)     (.416)     (.467)
Net-Income per              045      -   -   - .058                           .072
 Worker                   (.106)              (.227)                         (.228)


Includes Missing           NO       NO        NO       YES        NO          YES
 Value Dummies?
Includes Industry          YES      YES       NO       YES        NO          YES
 Dummies?

     N                      111      116         52          76        115      76

Standard Error             .072     .086       .049     .046       .   118    .051

     R2                    .832     .765       .854     .895           499   .909

* Observations      with missing data are deleted

*   Dummy variables included for mining, construction, durable manufacturing
    primary metals, fabricated metals, machinery, transportation, communications,
    wholesale, retail, FIRE, entertainment, and business, repair, personal
    and professional services. Left out category is non-durable manufacturing.

*Dummy variables included for durable manufacturing, primary metals fab-
   ricated metals, and machinery. Left out category is non-durable manufacturing.

See Appendix I for a description of the variables and their sources.




Table 7                                                                               39
                                                                   TABLE 8

                                         CORRELATIONS OF INDUSTRY             ATTRIBUTE          1939
Variables*            Skill       Unskill     Avg.       Labor      Educa- Median %Fem             Oischg Layoff Hours   Union Empl./ Netlec
                      Wage        Wage        Wage       Prdct      tion      Age                  Rate   Rate           Coverg Est.  /Sales
Hourly Wage for        1.000
 Skilled Workers          20
Hourly Wage for        0.653       1.000
 Unskilled Workers        20          20
Average Wage in        0.942       0.815       1.000
 Industry                 20             20       32
Value Added per        0.5141      0.663      0.618      1.000
 Worker                   20             20       28         28
Quit   Rate           -0.569      -0.1411     -0.630    -0.51414    1.000
                             15       15          22         21        22
Median Age             0.172      0.'488      0.14145    0.1401    -0.526     1.000
                          20          20          23         23        18           23
Percent Female        -0.368      -0.1490
                                       -0.578 -0.513               0.14141   -0.529      1.000
                            20      20     28     28                   21           23      28
Discharge Rate        -0.14514 -0.3'41 -0.303 -0.082               0.180 -0.133 -0.170             1.000
                             15          15       22         21        22        18     21     22
Layoff Rate            0.180      0.302 -0.081 -0.010              0.179     0.1142 -0.051 -0.182         1.000
                             15          15       22         21        22        18     21     22            22
Hours of Work per     -0.227 -0.175 -0.186               0.230 -0.007 -0.129 -0.257               0.7014 -0.081  1.000
 Week                     20          20          32         28        22           23      28        22     22     32
Union Coverage         0.629      0.1411      0.639 -0.038 -0.623            0.320 -0.127        -0.551   0.270 -0.657   1.000
                          20          20         20     20     15               20     20             15      15    20      20
Employees per         -0.161      0.136       0.325 0.071 0.010              0.103 0.083         -O.2'46
                                                                                                 -0.097 -0.413           0.116   1.000
 Establishment            20          20          28         28        21           23      28        2121   28             20      28
Net-Income/Sales       0.427      0.695       0.496      0.653 -0.281        0.173 -0.099 -0.519 -0.0314 -0.019          0.087   0.039   1.000
                          19             19       19         19        114          19      19          14   114   19       19      19       19
* See Appendix 2 for a description of the variables and their sources.

The number below the correlation coefficient is the number of industries with data on both variables.




                                                                                                                                         7
                                               TABLE 9



                          Industry Wage Regression for 1939 Data

                  Dependent Variable is the Average Wage in the Industry

                                         Coefficients
                                 (Standard Errors in Parentheses)

V a r jab 1 e s              1             2                 3         4

Intercept                     804        .400        .573         .718
                          (.283)       (1.121)      (.426)       (.666)
Median Age                - . 008      - .007       - .001       - .010
                          (.008)        (.017)      (.012)       (.013)
Fraction Female           • . 399      - .464       -   .419     -   .505
                          (.084)        (.167)      (.123)       (.124)
Layoff Rate                            - .092                    —.171
 per worker                              (.156)                   (.111)
Hours Per Week                           .010            -   -       .004
                                        (.020)                   (.012)
Employees per                            .051            -   -     . 240
 Est./l000                              (.208)                   (.086)
Fraction Union             .370          .506         344          .424
 1embers                  (.066)        (.194)      (.103)       (.127)
Net-Income as %            .020          .014        .020          .018
 of Sales                 (.005)        (.013)      (.007)       (.007)
                                               *                     YES
Includes Missing            NO           NO             YES
 Value Dummies?

       N                    19            14             32           32

Standard Error             .059          .071           .095         .083

       R2                  .857          .901           .630         .765

* Observations       with missing data are deleted

See Appendix 2 for a description of the variables and their
sources.




Table 9                                                                     40
                                         TABLE 10
                             Principal Components Analysis of
                       Modern Industry Data -- Manufacturin9 Sample
                                                 Principal    Components
             *
Va   r I ables ________________         1             2              3             4
                                  __________________________________________________
Industry Fixed Effect             0.27909b       0.040241      0.028349      - .078938
  for Nonunion Workers
Industry Fixed Effect             0.240699       0.175164      -.103017      0.146879
 for Union Workers
Average Wage                      0.263985       0.185531      -.017910      0.011535
Average Weekly Income             0.278388       0.181349      -.058897      0.001291
Quit Rate                         - .258583      - .078123     -.048272      0.231999
Labor Productivity                0.250559      -.128419       0.019524      0.272632
Years of Education                0.273933      -.175471       - .097277     - .068561
Years of Job Tenure               0.176854      0.132270       0.029844      -.116893
Years of Experience               - .054283     0.254256       0.251315      - .213894
Percent Female                    -.144813      -.238896       0.276705      - .071100
Percent Black                     -.053456      0.150568       0.363469      0.353811
Layoff Rate                       -.136996      0.189025       -.020651      0.007460
Injury Rate                       -.113896      0.214439       -.271891      0.226371
Hours of Work per Week            0.214410      0.064470       -.229061      - .022335
Hours of Overtime                 0.085482      0.139317       -.284982      0.290774
 per Week
Ratio of Total Comp               0.241067      0.144401       -.055856      -.171445
 to Wage and Salary
Average Unemployment              -.198260      0.203757       0.117877      0.072194
 Rate,      79 82 84
Union Coverage                    0.051234      0.381811       -.002393      -.006479
Employees per                     0.159122      0.112288       0.335395      -.218529
 Estabi ishment
Employees per Firm                0.   179483   0.121971       0.165473      0. 06 3664
Sales per Firm                    0.   127839   0.074233       0. 391611     0.345716
Four Firm Concen-                 0.   139215   0. 091265      0.330612      -.128959
 tration Ratio
R&D Expenditures!                 0.169533      -.233373       0.054914      -.280764
 Sales
Capital/Labor Ratio               0.202029      0.084637      -.094095       0.110411
Percent Production                -.208602      0.246455      0.121315       -.064260
 Workers
Net-Income/Sales                  0.181256      -.294118      0.097990       0.075421
Avg. Rate of Return               0.098331      - .310545     0.032183       0.087441
 on Capital
Net-Income per worker             0.142578      -.158295      0.187294       0.426753

Eigenvalue                        9.612         5.162         2. 863         1.870
Percent of Variance                .343           .185          . 102         .067
   Explained
Cumulative Percent of              .343           .528           630          .697
   Variance Explained

  See Appendix I for a description of variables and sources.



Table 9                                                                                   41
REFERENCES




Abowd, 3. "Collective Bargaining and the Division of the Value   of   the Enterprise."
Mimeo, University of Chicago, October 1985.

Akerlof, G.A. "Gift Exchange and Efficiency Wages: Four Views." American_Economic
Review 74 (May 1984): 79-83.

Akerlof, G.A. and Yellen, J. "A Near Rational Model of the Business Cycle, with
Wage and Price Inertia." Quarterly Journal of Economics 100 (August 1985a).

Ashenfelter, 0. and C. Johnson. "Unionism, Relative Wages and Labor Quality in
U.S. Manufacturing Industries." International Economic Review 13 (October 1972):
488-508.

Bergmann, B. "The Effect on White Incomes of Discrimination in Employment."
Journal of Political Economy 79 (March-April 1971): 294-313.

Bloch, F. and M. Kuskin. "Wage Determination in the Union and Nonunion Sectors."
Industrial and Labor Relations Review 31 (January 1978): 183-92.

Brown, C. and J. Medoff. "The Employer Size Wage Effect." Mimeo, Harvard Univer-
sity, November 1985.

Buchele, R. "Jobs and Workers: A Labor Market Segmentation Perspective on the Work
Experience of Young Men," unpublished doctoral dissertation, Harvard University,
Nay l976a.

Buchele, R. "Jobs and Workers: A Labor Market Segmentation Perspective on the Work
Experience of Middle-Aged Men," unpublished paper submitted to the Secretary of
Labor's Conference on the National Longitudinal Survey of the Pre-Retirement
Years, Boston, 1976b.

Bulow, 3. I. and Summers, L. H. "A Theory of Dual Labor Markets with Application
to Industrial Policy, Discrimination and Keynesian Unemployment." Journal of
bor Economics, forthcoming 1986.

Dalton, J.A. and E.J. Ford. "Concentration and Labor Earnings in Manufacturing
and Utilities." Industrial and Labor Relations Review 31 (October 1977): 45-60.

Dickens, W.T. "Error Components in Grouped Data: Why Its Never Worth Weighting."
NBER Technical Working Paper No. 43, February 1985.

Dickens, W.T. "Wages, Employment and the Threat of Collective Action by Workers."
NBER Working Paper No. 1856, March 1986.

Dickens, W.T. and B.A. Ross. "Consistent Estimation Using Data from More than One
Sample." NBER Technical Working Paper No. 33, March 1984.

Dickens, W.T. and L.F. Katz. "Industry Wage Patterns and Themies of Wage Deter-
mination." tlimeo, U.C. Berkeley, March 1986.


References                                                                          42
Dunlop, J. "Industrial Relations and Economics: The Common Frontier of Wage De-
termination.1? IRRA Proceedpgs 1984, 1985.

Fisher, F.M. and J.J. McGowan. "On the Misuse of Accounting Rates of Return to
Infer Monopoly Profits." American Economic Review 73 (March 1983): 82-97.

Foulkes, F. Personnel Policies in Large Nonunion Companies Englewood Cliffs, N.J.:
Prentice-Hall, 1980.

Freeman, R.B. and J. Medoff. "The Impact of Percentage Organized on Union and
Nonunion Wages." Review of Economics and Statistics 63 (November 1981): 561-72.

Garen, J. "Worker Heterogeneity, Job Screening, and Firm Size." Journal of
itical Economy 93 (August 1985): 715-39.

Groshen, E.L. "Sources of Wage Dispersion: How Much Do Employers Matter?." Mimeo,
Harvard University, December 1985.

Haworth, C.T. and D.W. Rasmussen. "Human Capital and Inter-Industry Wages in
Manufacturing." Review of Economics and Statistics 53 (November 1971): 376-80.

Haworth, C.T. and C.J. Reuther. "Industrial Concentration and Interindustry Wage
Determination." Review of Economics and Statistics 60 (February 1978): 85-95.

Heywood, J.S. "Market Structure and Wages: The Role of Imports." Mimeo, University
of Michigan, February 1985.

}ieywood, J.S. "Labor Quality and the Concentration-Earnings Hypothesis." Review
of Economics and Statistics, forthcoming 1986.

Hodson, R. and P. England. "Industrial Structure and Sex Differences in Earnings."
Industrial Relations 25 (Winter 1986): 16-32.

Jenny, F. "Wage Rates, Concentration, and Unionization in French Manufacturing
Industries." Journal of Industrial Economics 26 (June 1978): 315-27.

Kahneman, D., J. Knetsch, and R. Thaler. "Perceptions of Unfairness: Constraints
on Wealth Seeking." Mimeo, University of British Columbia, October 1985.

Kalachek, E. and F. Raines. "The Structure of Wage Differences Among Mature Male
Workers." Journal of Human Resources 11 (1976): 484-506.

Katz, L.F. "Efficiency Wage Theories: A Partial Evaluation." In S. Fischer, ed.,
NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1986. Cambridge, Na. : MIT Press, forthcoming 1986.

Kay, J.A. and C.P. Mayer. "On the Application of Accounting Rates of Return."
Economic Journal 96 (March 1986): 199-207.

Krueger, A. and L.H. Summmers. "Efficiency Wages and the Inter-Industry Wage
Structure." Harvard U., Mimeo, February 1986.




References                                                                      43
}(umar, P. "Differentials in Wage Rates of Unskilled Labor in Canadian Manufac-
turing Industries." Industrial and Labor Relations Review 26 (October l72):
631 -45.


Nwoka, J. "Monopoly, Plant, and Union Effects on Worker Wages." Industrial and
Labor Relations Review 36 (January 1963): 251-57.

Lang, K. and Dickens, W.T. "Sociological and Neoclassical Perspectives on Seg-
mooted Labor Markets," in Paula England and George Farkas, eds. Firms, Jobs and
Workers: Sociological and Economic Approaches, Plenum Press (forthcoming).

Lawrence, C. and R. Lawrence. "Relative Wages in U.S. Manufacturing: An Endgame
Interpretation." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (1985:1): 47-106.

Lewis, H.G. Unionism and Relative Wages in the United States, Chicago: University
of Chicago Press, 1963.

Lewis, }i.G.   Union Relative Wage Effects: A Survey. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1986.

Long, J.E. and Link, A.N. "The Impact of Market Structure on Wages, Fringe Bene-
fits, and Turnover." Industrial and Labor Relations Review 36 (January 1983):
239-50.

Masters, S.H. "Wages and Plant Size: An Interindustry Analysis." Review of
nomics and Statistics 51 (August 1969): 341-45.

Mellow, W. "Employer Size and Wages." Review of Economics and Statistics 64 (Au-
gust 1982): 495-501.

Moore, W.J., R.J. Newman, and J. Cunningham. "The Effect of the Extent of Unionism
on Union and Nonunion Wages." Journal of Labor Research 6 (Winter 1985): 21-44.

Moulton, B.R. "Random Group Effects and the Precision of Regression Estimates,"
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics Working Paper, November 1985.

Murphy, K.M. and R. Topel. "Unemployment, Risk, and Earnings: Testing for Equal-
izing Wage Differences in the Labor Market." Mimeo, UCLA, March 1986.

Oi, W. "The Fixed Employment Costs of Specialized Labor." In 3. Triplett, ed.,
The Measurement of Labor Cost. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1983.

Oster, G. "A Factor Analytic Test of the Theory of the Dual Economy," Review of
Economics and Statistics, February 1979, 61,33-51.

Petersen, F. "Extent of Collective Bargaining," Monthly Labor Review, May 1942.

Phillips, A. "A Critique of Empirical Studies of Relations Between Market Power
and Profitability." Journal of Industrial Economics 24 (June 1976): 241-9.

Podgursky, N. "Unions, Establishment Size, and Intra-Industry Threat Effects."
Industrial and Labor Relations Review 39 (January 1986): 277-84.




References                                                                       44
Pugel, T. "Profitability, Concentration and the Interindustry Variation in
Wages." Review of Economics and Statistics   62 (Nay   1980): 248-53.

Rapping, L.A. "Monopoly Rents, Wage Rntcs, and Union Wage Effectiveness."
terly Review of Economics and Business 7 (Spring 1967): 31-47.

Saunders, C. and D. Marsden. Pay Inequalities in the Europeon Communities. London:
Buttersworth, 1981.

Searle, S. Linear Models. New York: Wiley, 1971.

Slichter, S. "Notes on the Structure of Wages." Review of Economics and
Statistics32 (February 1950): 80-91.

Stiglitz, J.E. "Theories of Wage Rigidity." NBER Working Paper #1442, September
1984.

U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. Area Wages Survey: Cleveland, Ohio Metropolitan
Area September 1985. Bulletin 3030-45, November 1985.

Wachtel, H. and C. Betsey. "Employment at Low Wages." Review of Economics and
Statistics 54 (May 1972): 121-28.

Weiss, Leonard. "Concentration and Labor Earnings." American Economic Review 56
(March 1966): 96-117.

Yellen, J. "Efficiency Wage Models of Unemployment." American Economic Review
Proceedings 74 (May 1984): 200-205.




References                                                                     45
