                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  IMPACTS OF THE AFFORDABLE CARE ACT DEPENDENT COVERAGE PROVISION
            ON HEALTH-RELATED OUTCOMES OF YOUNG ADULTS

                                          Silvia Barbaresco
                                       Charles J. Courtemanche
                                             Yanling Qi

                                         Working Paper 20148
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w20148


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2014




We thank Yaa Akosa Antwi, Kitt Carpenter, Jim Marton, Melinda Pitts, Anne Royalty, Chris Ruhm,
Kosali Simon, Erdal Tekin, and audiences at the American Society of Health Economists Biennial
Conference, University of Virginia, and Vanderbilt University for valuable comments. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Silvia Barbaresco, Charles J. Courtemanche, and Yanling Qi. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Impacts of the Affordable Care Act Dependent Coverage Provision on Health-Related Outcomes
of Young Adults
Silvia Barbaresco, Charles J. Courtemanche, and Yanling Qi
NBER Working Paper No. 20148
May 2014, Revised January 2015
JEL No. I12,I13,I18

                                              ABSTRACT

The first major insurance expansion of the Affordable Care Act – a provision requiring insurers to
allow dependents to remain on parents’ health insurance until turning 26 – took effect in September
2010. We estimate this mandate’s impacts on numerous outcomes related to health care access, preventive
care utilization, risky behaviors, and self-assessed health. We estimate difference-in-differences models
with 23-25 year olds as the treatment group and 27-29 year olds as the control group. For the full sample,
the dependent coverage provision increased the probabilities of having health insurance, a primary
care doctor, and excellent self-assessed health, while reducing body mass index. However, the mandate
also increased risky drinking and did not lead to any significant increases in preventive care utilization.
Subsample analyses reveal particularly large gains for men and college graduates.


Silvia Barbaresco                                    Yanling Qi
Georgia State University                             Georgia State University
Box 3992                                             Andrew Young School of Policy Studies
Atlanta, GA 30302                                    Department of Economics
sbarbaresco1@student.gsu.edu                         Atlanta, GA 30302
                                                     yqi3@gsu.edu
Charles J. Courtemanche
Georgia State University
Andrew Young School of Policy Studies
Department of Economics
P.O. Box 3992
Atlanta, GA 30302-3992
and NBER
ccourtemanche@gsu.edu
I. Introduction

       The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA) of March 2010 aimed to achieve

nearly universal coverage in the United States through a combination of mandates, subsidies,

Medicaid expansions, and health insurance exchanges (Gruber, 2011). Although the majority of

the ACA’s provisions just took effect in 2014, one important component of the law – a

dependent coverage provision – was implemented on September 23rd, 2010. This provision

allows dependents to remain on a parent’s private health insurance plan until the start of the first

plan year after they turn 26 years old. Previously, private insurers often dropped non-student

dependents at age 19 and student dependents at age 23 (Anderson et al., 2012 and 2014).

       Many states already had some form of dependent coverage mandate before the ACA, but

the state laws are typically weaker. Most state laws have an age threshold below 26 or require

additional criteria, such as being a full-time student, living with one’s parents, or not being

married. Moreover, state laws do not apply to self-funded benefit programs, and more than half

of private sector workers with employer-provided health insurance are in self-funded plans

(Monheit et al., 2011). Perhaps because of these limitations, Monheit et al. (2011) and Levine et

al. (2011) find that state dependent coverage mandates only lead to small increases in dependent

coverage that are offset by a decline in young adults holding their own policies. In contrast, the

ACA provision applies to all young adults under age 26 and all private plans. It therefore has the

potential to dramatically affect young adults across the country, including in states with a pre-

existing dependent coverage provision.

       The ACA dependent coverage expansion provides a unique opportunity to study the

impacts of a health insurance intervention specific to young adults, the age group with the

highest uninsured rate (Levine et al., 2011). Prior to the ACA, the uninsured rate was 29%



                                                                                                  2
among individuals ages 18-24 and 27% among those 25-34, compared to 19% for 35-44 year

olds and 14% for 45-64 year olds (DeNavas-Walt et al., 2010). Since any attempt to obtain

universal coverage necessarily involves large coverage expansions among young adults, it is

important to understand the effects of insurance on this group. It is unclear the extent to which

results from other contexts – such as Medicaid, Medicare, or the Massachusetts health care

reform of 2006 – are applicable. Young adults are generally healthier than the populations

covered by these programs, and therefore may experience smaller gains from health insurance.

Alternatively, young adults may be relatively poor and therefore respond strongly to reduced out-

of-pocket costs of medical care.1

         Given the short amount of time since its implementation, researchers are only beginning

to study the impacts of the ACA dependent coverage provision. Cantor et al. (2012) and

Sommers and Kronick (2012) show that the mandate increased health insurance coverage for

young adults across all racial groups and regardless of employment status. Sommers et al. (2013)

find that the provision increased insurance coverage among young adults, while reducing delays

in getting care and care foregone because of cost. Akosa Antwi et al. (2013) again find an

increase in insurance coverage, but they also present evidence of labor market consequences

such as young adults shifting from full-time to part-time jobs. Akosa Antwi et al. (2014) show

that the mandate increased young adults’ utilization of inpatient care, particularly for mental

illness. Chua and Sommers (2014) do not find any evidence that the provision affected health

care use, but they do find a reduction in out-of-pocket medical expenses and increases in

excellent self-reported physical and mental health.



1
  Aside from age, the ACA dependent coverage mandate is also a unique coverage expansion in that it represents an
expansion of private rather than public insurance, and that, since it only affects those whose parents have insurance,
the treated population may be of higher socioeconomic status than that of other interventions.

                                                                                                                    3
       These papers all share a common general research design: comparing changes in

outcomes among the treated age range 19-25 to those of other young adults. The age range used

for the control group varies across these studies, with some including individuals up to 34 years

old (Sommers and Kronick, 2012; Sommers et al., 2013; Chua and Sommers, 2014). Slusky

(2013) questions the validity of this approach, arguing that different age groups are often subject

to different economic shocks. He runs placebo tests using data from before the mandate and

artificial “treatment” dates, finding that the same specification estimates significant “effects”

more often than could be attributed to chance. He suggests narrowing the age bandwidths of the

treatment and control groups as a possible solution.

       We contribute to this literature on the ACA dependent coverage provision in four ways.

First, we consider a number of new outcomes. Using data from the Behavioral Risk Factor

Surveillance System (BRFSS), we investigate 18 outcomes related to health care access,

utilization of preventive care, risky health behaviors, and self-assessed health. The health care

access measures include having insurance, a primary care doctor, and any foregone care because

of cost. Our preventive care measures are dummies for recent flu vaccinations, well-patient

checkups, and pap tests. The health behavior outcomes reflect smoking, drinking, body mass

index, exercise, and pregnancy. The self-assessed health variables relate to overall, mental, and

physical health as well as health-related functional limitations. Of these outcomes, only

insurance coverage, foregone care because of cost, and self-assessed physical and mental health

are studied in other papers in the literature. To our knowledge we are the first to investigate the

ACA dependent coverage provision’s impact on preventive care or health behaviors. Moreover,

although Chua and Sommers (2014) examine self-assessed physical and mental health, their

measures and ours are meaningfully different. They use dummies for self-reporting excellent



                                                                                                 4
physical and mental health, so their estimates only capture changes at the upper end of the health

distribution. In contrast, we utilize five measures that should together capture changes at various

parts of the distribution. A dummy for excellent overall health reflects the high end, a dummy for

very good or excellent health reflects a somewhat lower portion, and three more severe outcomes

– number of days of the past 30 not in good physical health, not in good mental health, and with

health-related limitations – reflect an even lower portion. This distinction will prove critical to

the results.

        Our second contribution is to push further than prior studies toward addressing the

methodological concerns raised by Slusky (2013), both by using narrow age ranges for the

treatment and control groups and by validating these selections through placebo testing. Our

treatment group consists of individuals ages 23-25, slightly below the dependent coverage

provision’s age cutoff, and our control group consists of those slightly above the cutoff at ages

27-29. We run placebo tests checking for “effects” of artificial interventions in the pre-treatment

period. Our classifications perform well in the placebo tests, whereas the wider age ranges

commonly used in the literature prove more problematic.

        Another contribution is that we use over three full years of post-treatment data (2011

through 2013, plus a few months after implementation at the end of 2010). To our knowledge,

none of the prior papers in the ACA dependent coverage provision literature have used more

than one full year of post-treatment data, which leaves the estimates susceptible to confounding

from temporary age-specific shocks and fluctuations. If estimated effects persist with three years

of post-treatment data, we can be more confident that they are not driven by transitory

movements in unobserved characteristics.




                                                                                                 5
        Finally, we contribute to the literature by testing for heterogeneous effects. Of the

outcomes included in our paper, heterogeneity in the effects of the ACA dependent coverage

provision has only previously been evaluated for insurance coverage (Akosa Antwi et al., 2013;

Sommers et al., 2013) and cost being a barrier to care (Sommers et al., 2013). We will find

important heterogeneous effects on other outcomes as well, such as self-assessed health.

Moreover, although Akosa Antwi et al. (2013) and Sommers et al. (2013) evaluate whether

effects differ by certain demographic characteristics, neither paper tests for heterogeneous effects

by socioeconomic status.2 We will find that the effects of the dependent coverage provision vary

considerably by education level.

        Our difference-in-differences results from the full sample suggest that the ACA

dependent coverage provision improved health care access for young adults, had little effect on

preventive care use, had mixed effects on risky health behaviors, and improved self-assessed

health at the high end of the distribution. Specifically, we document improvements in four of the

eighteen outcomes: health insurance coverage, access to a primary care doctor, excellent self-

assessed health, and body mass index. However, we find evidence of an increase in risky

drinking, and no clear effects in either direction on the remaining thirteen outcomes.

        We evaluate heterogeneity in the effects of the mandate through subsample analyses,

finding the greatest improvements in outcomes for men and college graduates. The increase in

health insurance coverage was greater for men than women, and only men experienced

statistically significant gains in any outcomes beyond health insurance: primary care access,

exercise, and overall self-assessed health. Stratifying by education reveals that the insurance


2
  Sommers et al. (2013) note that testing for heterogeneity by educational attainment is difficult because many
individuals in their treatment group – 19 to 25 year olds – are still in the process of completing their education.
Another advantage of using a narrow age range for the treatment group – 23 to 25 year olds – is that excluding the
prime college ages largely ameliorates this concern.

                                                                                                                 6
expansions were similar for college graduates and non-college graduates. However, only college

graduates experienced significant gains in any other outcomes besides insurance – specifically,

primary care access, cost being a barrier to care, body mass index (BMI), obesity, and overall

self-assessed health. Young adults with different education levels therefore appear to respond

differently to exogenously obtaining health insurance.


II. Health Insurance and Health-Related Outcomes

       The most obvious theoretical implication of health insurance is that by lowering the

effective price of health care, health insurance should increase its utilization. However, increased

health care utilization does not necessarily improve health. Diminishing marginal returns suggest

that health care can only improve health up to a certain level (e.g. Grossman, 1972). Whether the

additional consumption of medical care induced by insurance generates substantial gains in

health therefore depends on the initial level of health capital. Since the uninsured can often

obtain essential needs by paying directly or receiving charity care, these individuals need not

have low baseline levels of health. Moreover, the marginal returns to health care differ for

different outcomes. Risky health behaviors such as smoking, excessive drinking, and overeating

might be particularly difficult to improve through health care, as they require lifestyle changes.

Medical professionals’ ability to influence health behaviors is generally limited to providing

accountability, information, strategies, and sometimes drugs to make behavioral changes easier.

       Another relevant issue when evaluating the impact of health insurance on health is that

obtaining insurance could induce individuals to take more health risks, since the provision of

health insurance decreases the financial losses associated with sickness. This concept is known

as ex ante moral hazard (Ehrlick and Becker, 1972). Theoretically, ex ante moral hazard could

both increase risky behaviors and reduce investments in preventive care.


                                                                                                  7
       Finally, exogenous provision of health insurance could lead to income effects for

individuals who used to purchase their own insurance policy but now are able to receive free or

subsidized coverage, or for the newly-insured if their out-of-pocket medical expenses drop. The

available evidence from natural experiments suggests that additional income increases health

care utilization (Acemoglu et al., 2013), either increases BMI or has no effect (Lindahl, 2005;

Schmeiser, 2009; Cawley et al., 2010), increases smoking along the intensive but not extensive

margin (Apouey and Clark, 2014), and increases drinking (Apouey and Clark, 2014). The

income effect may therefore improve health via medical care but worsen health via risky

behaviors. Accordingly, evidence of income’s causal effect on overall health is mixed, with

Lindahl (2005) and Frijters et al. (2005) finding that it improves self-assessed health, Apouey

and Clark (2014) finding that it improves mental health but not overall health, and Snyder and

Evans (2006) showing that it raises mortality risk among seniors.

       In sum, the effects of insurance on preventive health care utilization, risky health

behaviors, and overall health status are theoretically ambiguous. Insurance may improve these

outcomes through direct price effects, worsen them through ex ante moral hazard, or affect them

in either direction through income effects. The net effects could differ for different outcomes.

For instance, direct price effects might dominate for primary care utilization but moral hazard

might dominate for risky behaviors. Empirical analysis is necessary to resolve this ambiguity.

       Causally interpretable evidence generally confirms the prediction that insurance increases

health care utilization for U.S. adults. Manning et al. (1987) analyzed the randomized RAND

Health Insurance Experiment, finding that lower copayments increased doctor visits. Medicaid

and Medicare expansions have been shown to increase utilization of primary and hospital care

(Currie and Gruber, 1996a; Finkelstein et al., 2012; Taubman et al., 2014; Lichtenberg, 2002;



                                                                                                 8
Card et al., 2008). Other evidence suggests that the Massachusetts universal coverage initiative

of 2006 increased preventive services while reducing emergency room utilization, avoidable

hospitalizations, and medical needs unmet because of cost (Miller, 2011; Kolstad and Kowalski,

2012; Miller, 2012; Van der Wees et al., 2013). More directly relevant to our study population,

Anderson et al. (2012 and 2014) exploit the sharp drops in coverage on parents’ insurance at

ages 19 and 23 to show that losing coverage reduced young adults’ emergency room and hospital

visits. Finally, as mentioned previously, Akosa Antwi et al. (2014) show that the ACA dependent

coverage provision increased hospital admissions, although Chua and Sommers (2014) find no

significant effects on survey measures of hospital, primary care, or prescription drug utilization.

       The evidence of health insurance’s effect on health is mixed. The RAND experiment only

found that better insurance coverage improved health for certain subgroups (Brook et al., 1983).

Medicaid expansions increase self-reported overall, physical, and mental health and reduce

mortality, but have no statistically detectable effects on laboratory-measured health outcomes

(Currie and Gruber, 1996b; Finkelstein et al., 2012; Sommers et al., 2012; Baicker et al., 2013).

Card et al. (2009) find a reduction in the mortality rate among recently hospitalized Medicare

recipients, but Finkelstein and McKnight (2008) find no significant effect of Medicare on the

mortality rate of seniors in general. Evidence suggests that the Massachusetts reform improved

self-assessed overall, physical, and mental health, while decreasing functional limitations, joint

disorders, and mortality (Van der Wees et al., 2013; Courtemanche and Zapata, 2014; Sommers

et al., 2014). As mentioned previously, Chua and Sommers (2014) find that the ACA dependent

provision increased the probabilities of self-reporting excellent physical and mental health.

       Evidence on the causal effects of health insurance on risky health behaviors is also mixed.




                                                                                                      9
Brook et al. (1983) find no evidence that insurance affected smoking or body weight in the

RAND experiment. Dave and Kaestner (2009) report that Medicare decreased physical activity

while increasing smoking and drinking. Finkelstein et al. (2012) do not find any significant

impacts of Medicaid on smoking or BMI. Courtemanche and Zapata (2014) find that the

Massachusetts reform reduced body mass index and did not affect smoking or physical activity.

       In sum, there is little prior evidence on the effects of health insurance on young adults’

access to care, preventive care utilization, risky health behaviors, or health. Given the theoretical

ambiguities and variation in empirical findings discussed above, we cannot assume prior results

from other contexts such as Medicaid and Medicare generalize. For instance, young adults’

relatively high baseline levels of health might lead them to have relatively inelastic demand for

health care or a low marginal effect of health care on health. On the other hand, young adults’

demand for health care could be relatively elastic given their generally low income and wealth

levels. Moreover, one might expect young adults to be the most susceptible to ex ante moral

hazard since this is often the life stage in which opportunities to engage in particular risky

behaviors (e.g. binge drinking) are introduced.


III. Data

       Our main data source is the BRFSS, a telephone survey conducted by state health

departments in conjunction with the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention to collect

information on health and health behaviors. The survey is conducted monthly through a random

digit dialing method that selects a representative sample of respondents from the non-

institutionalized population of adults at least 18 years old. The BRFSS provides several

advantages for our analyses. First, it contains a wide range of appropriate outcome variables.

Second, it includes demographic characteristics as well as state, month, and year identifiers that


                                                                                                  10
allow us to construct the treatment variable and jointly control for many different factors. Next, it

contains a much larger number of observations than other datasets with the necessary variables.

Finally, the BRFSS includes a number of pre-treatment waves that allow for detailed testing of

differential trends in the outcomes between treatment and control groups.

        Our primary analysis sample consists of the 2007-2013 waves, which include the year the

ACA dependent coverage mandate took effect plus three years on both sides. One reason we

exclude the years before 2007 is to limit our sample to years of relatively poor economic

performance. This reduces the possibility of confounding from differential impacts of

macroeconomic shocks on the health-related outcomes of different age groups. However,

robustness checks and placebo tests will utilize data as far back as 2001. We do not use any

waves before 2001 because the BRFSS made major changes to the survey in that year. Many of

the questions used to construct our outcome variables are either not available in earlier years or

differ in non-trivial ways.

        Most of our analyses use ages 23-25 as the treatment group and ages 27-29 as the control

group. Following much of the prior literature, 26 year olds are excluded because their treatment

status is ambiguous: they may still be covered by the ACA mandate depending on their birthdate

and the start date of their parents’ insurance plan year (Akosa Antwi et al., 2013). Although the

prior literature uses 19-25 as the treatment group, we prefer 23-25 for two reasons.3 First, prior to

the ACA, insurers most commonly dropped non-student dependents from parents’ plans at age

19, but most commonly dropped student dependents at age 23. Excluding 19-22 year olds

therefore results in a “cleaner” treatment group, i.e. a higher proportion of the treatment group

actually being affected by the treatment. Accordingly, Akosa Antwi et al. (2014) show that the

3
 Studies in the literature utilize somewhat different control groups. Cantor et al. (2012) use 27-30 year olds;
Sommers and Kronick (2012), Sommers et al. (2013), and Chua and Sommers (2014) use 26-34 year olds; Akosa
Antwi et al. (2013) use 16-18 and 27-29 year olds; and Akosa Antwi et al. (2014) use 27-29 year olds.

                                                                                                            11
ACA dependent coverage provision’s impact on having insurance was more than twice as large

for 23-25 year olds as for 19-22 year olds. Second, Slusky (2013) shows that the models from

prior papers with ages 19-25 as the treatment group lead to poor placebo test results for insurance

and labor market outcomes. He suggests narrowing the age bandwidth as a potential solution.

Indeed, we will show that wider age ranges lead to problematic placebo test results for our

outcomes as well, and that our narrower age range performs better.

        We utilize eighteen different health-related dependent variables. The first three relate to

health care access: dummy variables reflecting whether the respondent has any health insurance,

has a primary care physician, and had any medical care needed but not obtained because of cost

in the previous year. Unfortunately, the BRFSS does not include more detailed questions on

health insurance, such as the source of coverage. The next three outcomes – dummies for having

a flu vaccination (shot or spray), a well-patient doctor check-up visit (e.g. physical), and a pap

test (for women) in the previous year – reflect preventive care utilization.4 The next category of

variables relates to risky health behaviors: a dummy for whether the individual currently smokes,

number of alcoholic drinks in the past 30 days, a dummy for being a risky drinker (more than 30

drinks total or at least one occasion with four or more drinks for women, more than 60 drinks

total or at least one occasion with five or more drinks for men),5 body mass index (BMI=weight

in kg/height in m2),6 a dummy for obese (BMI≥30), a dummy for whether an unmarried female

respondent is pregnant (the only proxy for risky sexual activity available in the BRFSS), and a

4
  Other preventive care variables typically studied in the literature, such as mammograms and prostate exams, are
not relevant for our study population of young adults.
5
  The dummy for risky drinker is created to come as close as the BRFSS data will allow to the National Institute on
Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism’s definition of at-risk drinking: more than 7 drinks per week total or at least one
occasion with three or more drinks for women, and more than 14 drinks per week total or at least one occasion with
four or more drinks for men. See http://pubs.niaaa.nih.gov/publications/womensfact/womensfact.htm.
6
  Body mass index is based on self-reported height and weight, which are prone to measurement error (Cawley,
2004). Researchers have repeatedly found that this measurement error does not affect the signs and significance of
regression estimates with BMI as a dependent variable, though it may slightly attenuate the magnitude of the
estimates (e.g. Lakdawalla et al., 2002; Courtemanche et al., 2014; Courtemanche et al., forthcoming).

                                                                                                                12
dummy for obtaining any recreational exercise in the past 30 days. 7 Finally, we include several

variables related to self-assessed health status: a dummy for whether overall health is very good

or excellent, a dummy for whether overall health is excellent, and days of the last 30 not in good

mental health, not in good physical health, and with health-related functional limitations.

Although self-assessed health is subjective, research has repeatedly found it to be correlated with

objective measures of health such as mortality (e.g. Idler and Benyamini, 1997; DeSalvo et al.,

2006; Phillips, Der, and Carroll, 2010). Self-assessed health is also a global measure of health

that captures the full range of possible diseases and limitations (Idler and Benyamini, 1997).8

         We also utilize a wide array of control variables. These include dummy variables for each

year of age, gender, race/ethnicity, marital status, education, household income category, number

of children in the household, whether the respondent reports her primary occupation as student,

and whether the respondent is unemployed. Additionally, we control for monthly state

unemployment rate, obtained from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. As mentioned previously, we

are concerned about different impacts of the recession on different age groups, so controlling for

several variables related to economic conditions at both the individual and aggregate levels could

potentially be important. We also control for whether the respondent’s state had any dependent

coverage mandate covering her age*marital status*student status group in the survey year based

on information from the National Conference of State Legislatures (2010).9 Additionally, in the

flu vaccination regressions we control for interactions of the age fixed effects with the number of

positive influenza tests in the country during the particular flu season (a proxy for severity of the

7
  Unfortunately, the more detailed BRFSS questions on physical activity are only available in odd numbered survey
years and changed dramatically in 2011, so they are not useful for our analyses.
8
  Moreover, other commonly-used measures of health are not practical in our context. Mortality rates are likely too
low among young adults to estimate effects of coverage expansions with meaningful precision, while measures of
avoidable hospitalizations confound insurance’s impact on health with the reduction in effective prices.
9
  Note that not everyone coded as a 1 for state mandate is actually “treated” by such a mandate. Additional qualifiers
beyond age, student status, and marital status exist in some states, while young adults whose parents’ employers
self-insure are also not covered by state mandates.

                                                                                                                   13
flu season). Flu seasons in the post-treatment years were much more severe than those in the pre-

treatment years, so adding these interactions prevents the estimates from being confounded by

differential responses to flu season severity by young adults of different ages.10

         Finally, we include a dummy for whether the respondent is part of a “cell phone only”

component of the sample, added in 2011 (this variable is 0 for all respondents before 2011). The

fact that individuals who only used cell phones were not explicitly included in the sample until

2011 raises the question of whether our sample makeup meaningfully changed at about the same

time the post-treatment period began. To address this issue, we not only control for “cell phone

only” users but also utilize the BRFSS sampling weights in all analyses. We found that these

weights eliminate any sharp changes in sample demographic characteristics in 2011.

Additionally, this issue would only bias our regression estimates if the relationship between the

outcomes of landline and cell phone users is different among 23-25 year olds than among 27-29

year olds, and in a way that is not captured by the controls. It is not obvious why this would be

the case. Accordingly, we have verified (results available upon request) that dropping individuals

who only use cell phones from our sample has very little effect on the coefficient estimates,

though it does generally increase the standard errors due to the reduced sample size.

         After excluding observations with missing data for any of the control variables, Table 1

reports the sample sizes for the regressions for each dependent variable, along with the numbers

of individuals in the treatment and control groups. The sample sizes differ slightly across

dependent variables for two reasons. First, each health-related variable is missing for a different


10
  Specifically, for the pre-treatment years 2007, 2008, and 2009, there were 23,753, 39,827, and 27,682 positive
influenza test results in the corresponding flu seasons 2006-2007, 2007-2008, and 2008-2009. For the post- or
during-treatment years 2010, 2011, 2012, and 2013, there were 157,449, 55,403, 27,012, and 75,342 number of
influenza test results in the corresponding flu seasons 2009-2010, 2010-2011, 2011-2012, and 2012-2013 (CDC,
2014). The large 2009-2010 flu season number largely reflects the swine flu pandemic, but two of the three
subsequent seasons were still relatively strong. Our results suggest that younger young adults respond more strongly
to flu season severity than older young adults; therefore, omitting these interactions would lead to biased estimates.

                                                                                                                   14
number of respondents. Second, the health-related variables have different “reflection periods;”

some apply to the present (e.g. current smoker), while others refer to a 30-day period (e.g.

number of alcoholic drinks in the past 30 days) and others to a one-year period (e.g. any well-

patient doctor visit in the past year). We are concerned that short-run estimates would be

misleading for variables with a long reflection period.11 We therefore drop respondents surveyed

during this period of ambiguity; e.g. for well-patient doctor visit in the past year we drop October

2010 through September 2011, while for drinks in the past 30 days we drop only October 2010.12

        Table 2 lists the control variables and compares the pre-treatment (January 2007 through

September 2010) summary statistics of the treatment and control groups. Individuals in the

treatment group are less likely to be married, have a college degree, earn a high income, and

have children in the household, and they are more likely to be students or employed.

        Table 3 reports the pre- and post-treatment sample means of the outcome variables for the

treatment and control groups, and calculates the simple difference-in-difference of means. Prior

to the ACA dependent coverage provision, the uninsured rate was higher for young adults in the

treatment group than those in the control group. The treatment group had lower rates of health

care utilization and health care access than the control group; higher drinking and unmarried

pregnancy rates but healthier levels of risky drinking, BMI, obesity, and exercise; and broadly

similar levels of smoking and self-assessed health. Comparing changes in the post- and pre-

treatment means for the treatment and control groups, the difference-in-differences are positive

and significant for any insurance, primary care doctor, excellent health, and risky drinker;


11
   For example, suppose a respondent is surveyed in November 2010, the second month of the post-implementation
period. The respondent would be classified as post-treatment, but her answer about well-patient doctor visits in the
past year would reflect only two months of the post-treatment period and ten months of the pre-treatment period.
12
   For flu vaccinations in the past year, we only drop October 2010 through December 2010, as opposed to dropping
a full year. We feel a shorter reflection period is appropriate in this case because flu vaccinations are typically
administered in the fall. For instance, if someone surveyed in March 2011 reports being vaccinated in the past year,
that vaccine almost certainly occurred during the post-treatment period (October 2010 or later).

                                                                                                                 15
negative and significant for body mass index and obesity; and insignificant for the other

outcomes – including all those in the preventive care category.

       Simple difference-in-differences estimates account for fixed differences in unobservable

characteristics between the treatment and control group, but are still susceptible to bias from

time-varying observables and unobservables. Figures 1-3 show that at a first glance the pre-ACA

trends for the treatment and control groups appear generally similar for most outcomes,

providing preliminary evidence that changes over time in observables and unobservables may

not be substantially different for 23-25 year olds and 27-29 year olds. We next turn to regression

analyses that adjust for changes in observables. Later, we will also conduct more formal tests of

the assumption of common trends in unobservables.


IV. Average Effects of the ACA Dependent Coverage Mandate

Baseline Model

       We estimate the effects of the ACA dependent coverage provision on the eighteen health-

related outcomes using reduced-form difference-in-differences regressions. While it is tempting

to estimate instrumental variables models using the mandate as an instrument for having

insurance coverage, we are not confident that the exclusion restriction would hold in such

models because there are several other mechanisms through which the mandate could affect

health-related outcomes besides the extensive margin of health insurance coverage. Other

possible mechanisms include the intensive margin of coverage (switching from high deductible

catastrophic coverage to more comprehensive coverage), income effects, and peer effects.

       Our baseline regression is of the form

                                                                                               (1)




                                                                                               16
where         is the health-related outcome for individual i of age g living in state s in time t,

expressed in a month/year combination.13                    is a dummy variable for whether age g is in the

treated age range 23-25 as opposed to the control age range 27-29.                              indicates whether

period t is after the implementation of the provision (October 2010 or later).                   is the difference-

in-differences coefficient and it captures the difference between the effects of the mandate on the

treatment and control groups.               is a vector of the aforementioned control variables for sex,

race, marital status, education, income, children, cell phone survey, student status, individual and

state unemployment, and state dependent coverage mandate. We also include fixed effects for

each year of age, month/year of time (e.g. January of 2007), and state, denoted by                     ,      , and    ,

respectively.         is the error term. 14 We do not separately include                         and            in the

model because               is perfectly collinear with the age fixed effects while                        is perfectly

collinear with the month/year fixed effects.

         We report heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors clustered at the level of treatment:

age. Following convention when there are a small number of clusters (six in our case), for

hypothesis testing we use a t-distribution with degrees of freedom equal to the number of clusters

minus one. The critical values used in our hypothesis tests are therefore considerably more

stringent than those using the standard normal distribution. It is possible that even using stringent

critical values might not be sufficient to eliminate the tendency to over-reject when the number

of clusters is small (Cameron et al., 2008). However, the placebo tests in the next section will

reject the null hypothesis even fewer than the expected number of times, suggesting that our

13
   Even though most of our outcomes are binary or non-negative count, we estimate linear models because they
typically give reliable estimates of average effects (Angrist and Pischke, 2008). In unreported regressions (available
upon request), we verify that the average treatment effects are very similar using probit regressions for the binary
outcomes and negative binomial regressions for the count outcomes.
14
   In unreported regressions (available upon request) we have verified the results remain virtually identical if we
replace the state fixed effects with fixed effects for each state-by-year combination.

                                                                                                                      17
hypothesis tests are sufficiently conservative. One of our robustness checks will also address this

issue.

         The key identifying assumption in a difference-in-differences model is common

counterfactual trends between the treatment and control groups; i.e. in the absence of the

intervention the treatment and control groups would have experienced the same changes in

outcomes. Slusky (2013) argues that this assumption is problematic when studying the impact of

the ACA dependent coverage provision on labor market-related outcomes (e.g. sources of health

insurance coverage, employment status, and work hours) since cyclical fluctuations in the

economy have different effects on different age groups. Since economic fluctuations are related

to health, 15 Slusky’s concern could also apply to health-related outcomes. As discussed

previously, this is one of our main reasons for using narrow age bandwidths of 23-25 and 27-29.

Robustness Checks

         We also estimate several variations of (1) as robustness checks. First, we run regressions

including only the demographic controls (the sex, age, race, children, and marital status dummies)

and fixed effects, excluding the economic controls since they may be endogenous to the

dependent coverage provision. Obtaining access to parents’ insurance could potentially influence

a young adult’s decisions about employment and education, which would then affect income.

Including covariates related to employment, education, and income might therefore “control

away” part of the causal effect of the policy.

         Our next several robustness checks vary the time period included in the sample. In order

to verify that the results are not driven by our chosen length of the pre-treatment period, we

consider two alternatives: starting the sample in 2004 and 2001. Additionally, we run regressions

15
  Research generally shows that recessions are associated with improvements in health and health behaviors (e.g.
Ruhm, 2000, 2002, 2005), although recent evidence suggests that the countercyclical nature of health observed in
prior recessions may not have been present during our sample period (Ruhm, 2013; Tekin et al., 2013).

                                                                                                             18
dropping March 2010 through December 2010, as these months are somewhat ambiguous with

respect to their treatment status. We drop March-September because the ACA was passed in

March, so some insurance plans may have complied preemptively prior to the dependent

coverage provision’s official implementation in September. We drop October-December because,

even though the mandate was implemented in September, insurers did not have to comply until

the start of the next plan year, which is often January.16

          Our final robustness check addresses the potential concern that standard errors may be

understated because of autocorrelation given the small number of clusters. We collapse the data

into one observation for each year of age in the pre-treatment period and one observation for

each year of age in the post-treatment period, for a total of twelve observations. We then estimate

                                                                                                             (2)

where the lines above variables indicate averages across all individuals of age                 in time period

(pre- or post-treatment) , weighted by the individual BRFSS sampling weights. Since the small

sample size prevents all the control variables from being separately included,                      is a single

variable that summarizes the influence of all the controls.            is computed by regressing outcome

     on the controls using the individual-level pre-treatment data, then predicting              for the whole

sample based on the coefficient estimates, then aggregating in the same manner described above.

Results

          Table 4 presents the results for the baseline model and robustness checks. In addition to

reporting estimated treatment effects and standard errors, for the baseline regressions we also

report (in brackets) the treatment effects expressed in standard deviations of the dependent

variables to provide some comparability of effect sizes across the different outcomes.
16
  Akosa Antwi et al. (2013) include two treatment variables to separately model the effects of the mandate during
the implementation period and after full implementation. We have considered this specification in unreported
regressions and the estimated post-implementation effects remain very similar.

                                                                                                              19
        The results suggest sizeable improvements in health care access along at least some

dimensions. We estimate that the ACA dependent coverage provision statistically significantly

increased the insurance coverage rate of 23-25 year olds by between 5.5-6.7 percentage points,

depending on the model. This is somewhat larger than the around 3-5 percentage point increase

estimated by previous studies that use the broader treated age range of 19-25 (Cantor et al., 2012;

Sommers and Kronick, 2012; Akosa Antwi et al., 2013; Sommers et al., 2013).17 Additionally,

the mandate increased the probability of having a primary care doctor by 2.0-3.4 percentage

points and decreased the probability of having any care needed but foregone because of cost by

1.6-2.3 percentage points. The effect on primary care doctor access is statistically significant in

all specifications, but the effect on care foregone because of cost is never significant.

        Despite this improved access, we do not find any evidence of increased preventive care

utilization. We estimate a total of eighteen models across the three preventive care measures, and

none of these models reveal a statistically significant positive effect of the dependent coverage

provision. The estimated effects on flu vaccinations and pap tests are negative in most

specifications and occasionally statistically significant. The estimates for well-patient checkup

are all positive but never significant.

        We find mixed evidence regarding the dependent coverage provision’s impacts on risky

health behaviors. No significant estimates are observed for smoking, pregnancy, or alcoholic

drinks per month. However, the mandate statistically significantly increased the probability of

risky drinking (excessive drinks per month or any binge drinking) in all specifications, with

magnitudes ranging from 0.8-1.4 percentage points. The dependent coverage expansion therefore


17
   This discrepancy is consistent with Akosa Antwi et al.’s (2014) finding that the mandate’s impact on the
probability of having any coverage was around twice as large for 23-25 year olds than 19-22 year olds (4 compared
to 2 percentage points). Alternatively, estimates using the treated age range 19-25 could be biased downward given
the problems documented in our placebo tests and those of Slusky (2013).

                                                                                                               20
appears to affect drinking at only the high end of the distribution, which is consistent with an ex

ante moral hazard explanation since mild to moderate drinking generally does not increase the

need for medical services. In contrast, the dependent coverage provision appears to improve

weight-related behaviors. The mandate reduces BMI in all six specifications, with magnitudes

ranging from -0.098 to -0.175. All but one of the six estimates for BMI are significant, with the

remaining one being nearly significant. The effect on obesity is also negative in all six models,

though it is only significant in three. The effect on probability of having any exercise is positive

in all specifications but only significant in one. It is possible that our inability to measure

exercise in greater detail – e.g. calories burned per day from physical activity – prevents the

emergence of further significant results. It is also possible that the reduction in BMI is coming

via reduced caloric intake, which we are unable to measure in the BRFSS.

        It is theoretically conceivable that insurance coverage could increase risky drinking but

reduce weight. Health care access may be more helpful for losing weight than reducing drinking.

Gains in information and accountability may both be greater for weight control than drinking:

dieting strategies can be complicated and benefit greatly from professional advice, and

accountability is greater for weight since patients are weighed at each visit. Additionally, the ex

ante moral hazard effect could be stronger for risky drinking than weight-related behaviors.

Binge drinking has a non-trivial chance of resulting in immediate medical needs, either from

alcohol poisoning, drunk driving accidents, or other injuries.18 In contrast, expenditures to treat

diseases associated with obesity typically occur years down the road. Perhaps uninsured young

adults assume that they will be insured by time these downside risks are realized, in which case

ex ante moral hazard would not apply. In short, the direct price effect could dominate for BMI,

18
  In the US, approximately 80,000 cases of alcohol poisoning and 10,322 alcohol-impaired driving crashes occur
annually, with these incidents disproportionately involving young adults (CDC, 2012; NHTSA, 2014). 599,000
alcohol-related injuries occur annually among 18-24 year old college students (NIAAA, 2013).

                                                                                                           21
while the ex ante moral hazard effect could dominate for drinking. Income effects may play a

role as well, especially for alcohol consumption given the aforementioned evidence of a positive

causal effect of income on drinking (Apouey and Clark, 2014).

       Turning to the self-assessed health outcomes, the mandate increased the probability of

young adults reporting excellent overall health by 1.3-1.5 percentage points and very

good/excellent health by 1.1-1.8 percentage points. However, only the estimates for excellent

health are significant, as the standard errors for very good/excellent health are larger. We do not

find any evidence of effects on the variables representing more severe health problems: days not

in good mental health, not in good physical health, and with health-related functional limitations.

The lack of effects on our mental and physical health outcomes is particularly interesting in light

of Chua and Sommers’ (2014) finding that the ACA dependent coverage provision increased the

probabilities of reporting excellent mental and physical health. Chua and Sommers’ mental and

physical health variables emphasize changes at the high end of the health distribution and may

therefore correspond more closely to our variable for excellent overall health than our physical

and mental health variables, which focus on “not good” health. In other words, both our results

and those of Chua and Sommers are consistent with the provision’s effects on mental and

physical health being concentrated in the high end of the health distribution.

       Finally, we provide a brief discussion of the relative magnitudes of the effects on

different outcomes by comparing the treatment effects expressed in standard deviations of the

dependent variables. Not surprisingly, the largest effect of 0.13 standard deviations is on the

probability of having any health insurance coverage. The next largest statistically significant

effect is on primary care doctor access (0.065 standard deviations), then excellent health (0.032

standard deviations), then risky drinker (0.026 standard deviations), then finally BMI (-0.017



                                                                                                22
standard deviations). The largest statistically insignificant effects are on flu vaccinations (-0.033

standard deviations) and very good/excellent health (0.031 standard deviations).


V. Placebo Tests

       We next provide a series of placebo tests to evaluate whether the previous results can

credibly be interpreted as causal effects of the ACA dependent coverage provision. Following

Slusky (2013), we estimate variants of equation (1) that test for “effects” of artificially-timed

“treatments” during pre-treatment years. We estimate models for three different seven-year

windows of pre-treatment data (to match the seven years used in our main 2007-2013 analyses):

2003-2009, 2002-2008, and 2001-2007. Since the first month after the implementation of the

actual dependent coverage mandate was the 46th month (October 2010) of our 2007-2013 sample,

in each placebo test sample we date the implementation of the artificial intervention to the 46th

month (e.g. October 2006 for the 2003-2009 sample). We estimate (1) for each of the eighteen

dependent variables in each of the three placebo test samples.

       Table 5 reports the coefficient estimates of interest from these placebo tests. We run three

tests for each of the eighteen dependent variables, though a test is not possible for checkups

using 2001-2007 data since the checkup question was not asked until 2005. This leaves a total of

53 regressions. Given the large number of estimates, we would expect some significant results

even for valid models. Specifically, approximately 0-1 estimates should be significant at the 1%

level, about 2-3 at the 5% level, and about 5 at the 10% level. We obtain numbers even smaller

than these. No estimated “treatment effects” are significant at the 1% level, 2 (3.8%) are

significant at the 5% level, and 3 (5.7%) are significant at the 10% level. Moreover, we do not

obtain more than one placebo test rejection for any outcome. In other words, it is not clear that

there are any outcomes for which our baseline difference-in-differences model is inappropriate.


                                                                                                  23
        In the interest of contributing to the broader debate in the literature about the

appropriateness of different age bandwidths when using difference-in-differences models to

estimate the effects of the ACA dependent coverage provision, we also run the same set of

placebo tests for the most common age ranges used in the literature: treatment group 19-25 and

control group 26-34 (Sommers and Kronick, 2012; Sommers et al., 2013; and Chua and

Sommers, 2014). We obtain 4 placebo test rejections (7.5%) at the 1% level, 7 (13.2%) at the 5%

level, and 11 (20.8%) at the 10% level. The full table of results is available upon request.


VI. Heterogeneity

        Having established our baseline results and assessed the validity of our model, we next

turn to an examination of heterogeneity in the treatment effects. We considered stratifications by

sex, race/ethnicity, education, and state pre-ACA dependent coverage law status, but we did not

observe any statistically significant differences in effects across the subgroups for race/ethnicity

and pre-ACA law, so we only report the results for the stratifications by sex and education. For

education, we stratify into two groups: college graduates and non-college graduates.19

        Theoretically, the ACA dependent coverage provision could have heterogeneous effects

on health-related outcomes for three reasons. First, there could be heterogeneous effects on the

probability of having insurance coverage. In the pre-treatment portion of sample, females were

more likely to have insurance than males (76% versus 67%), and college graduates were much

more likely to have insurance than non-college graduates (88% versus 64%). One might

therefore expect larger gains in coverage among males and non-college graduates. On the other

hand, young adults of high socioeconomic status may be more likely to have parents with


19
  Further stratification by education led to estimates that were too imprecise to be useful. Note that we do not
include a separate category for current students because our sample only includes those 23 and older, so the
proportion of our respondents reporting “student” as their primary occupation is low.

                                                                                                             24
employer-provided coverage, so the gains in coverage could potentially be larger for college

graduates.

       A second possible source of heterogeneity is that, even if the gains in health insurance are

the same among all groups, different groups could respond differently to receiving coverage. For

instance, Grossman (1972) argues that education enables individuals to become more efficient

producers of health. More education may therefore better equip individuals to make the most out

of the newly-acquired insurance (e.g. more easily find providers who accept the insurance, ask

better questions at doctor’s appointments, or better follow medical advice). Alternatively, the

price elasticity of medical care could be strongest among low-income individuals, in which case

the effects of obtaining insurance on health care utilization and health could be largest for non-

college graduates. The price elasticity of medical care could also differ by sex. For instance,

evidence suggests that females are more risk averse than males (e.g. Jiankoplos and Bernasek,

1998). One might therefore expect females to be more likely to obtain medical care regardless of

its price, whereas males might only utilize care if the cost is minimal; i.e. males might have

stronger price elasticities. Indeed, in our pre-treatment data uninsured females had higher rates of

primary care doctor access, flu vaccination, and well-patient checkups than uninsured males.

       Third, as discussed at the beginning of Section IV, the dependent coverage provision

could affect health-related outcomes through mechanisms besides the extensive margin of

insurance coverage – particularly the intensive margin of coverage – and there could be

heterogeneous effects along these dimensions. For instance, suppose part of the reason females

and college graduates had lower pre-ACA uninsured rates was because they were more likely to

privately purchase a bare-bones, catastrophic plan if they did not have access to employer-

provided coverage. In that case, the ACA dependent coverage provision may lead to larger gains



                                                                                                 25
along the intensive margin of coverage for women and college graduates, leading to larger

improvements in health-related outcomes among these groups.

       The first two columns of Table 6 report the results for females and males. Males

experienced a 2.9 percentage point larger gain in health insurance coverage than females, and the

difference is significant at the 1% level. Moreover, only males experienced statistically

significant favorable effects on any outcomes besides insurance coverage. Specifically, males’

rates of primary care doctor access, having any exercise, reporting very good/excellent health,

and reporting excellent health increased substantially – by 4.6, 1.9, 2.9, and 3.1 percentage points,

respectively. These effects are all significantly different from zero, and three of the four (all but

very good/excellent health) are also statistically different from the corresponding effects on

females. The only statistically significant result for females (besides insurance coverage) is an

adverse effect on days with health-related limitations. In sum, the results suggest that males

experienced larger improvements in health-related outcomes from the ACA dependent coverage

provision than females, and that there appear to be multiple reasons for this heterogeneity. Gains

in insurance coverage were larger for males, consistent with them having a higher pre-ACA

uninsured rate. Responses to obtaining insurance coverage also appear to have been stronger for

males, perhaps indicating a larger price elasticity of demand for medical care.

       The last two columns of Table 6 report the results stratifying by college degree

attainment. Both groups experienced similar gains in insurance coverage as a result of the ACA

dependent coverage provision. However, statistically significant improvements in outcomes

besides health insurance are only observed for college graduates. The mandate led to large and

significant gains for college graduates in the following outcomes: primary care doctor access (5.1

percentage points), cost being a barrier to care (reduction of 3.4 percentage points), BMI



                                                                                                  26
(reduction of 0.25 units), obesity (reduction of 1.7 percentage points), and excellent self-reported

health (increase of 3.7 percentage points). Besides insurance, the only significant effects for non-

college graduates are unfavorable: a 2.2 percentage point reduction in flu vaccinations and a 1.6

percentage point increase in risky drinking. In short, college graduates experienced greater

improvements in health-related outcomes than non-college graduates, and this appears to be due

to heterogeneous effects of coverage rather than heterogeneous effects on coverage. This is

consistent with a Grossman-style story in which education enables individuals to better take

advantage of their health care opportunities. However, the results could also be partly

attributable to greater gains along the intensive margin of coverage for college graduates, which

we cannot measure in our data. Regardless of the reason, these results suggest that the mandate

increases SES-based disparities in health.


VII. Discussion

       The first major insurance expansion under the ACA – a provision requiring insurers to

allow young adults to remain on their parents’ health insurance until turning 26 – was

implemented in September 2010. This paper uses data from the BRFSS to examine the effects of

this mandate on various outcomes related to health care access, preventive care utilization, risky

health behaviors, and self-assessed health. We implement a difference-in-differences model with

individuals slightly below the mandate’s age cutoff (ages 23-25) as the treatment group and those

slightly above the cutoff (ages 27-29) as the control group.

       We first estimate average effects for the entire sample. The results suggest that the ACA

dependent coverage provision increased health care access but not utilization of preventive care,

had mixed effects on risky health behaviors, and improved health at the high end of the

distribution. Specifically, we observe significant and robust favorable effects on health insurance,


                                                                                                 27
access to a primary care doctor, probability of having excellent self-assessed health, and BMI.

However, we also find an adverse effect on risky drinking consistent with ex ante moral hazard

and no clear effects on the other outcomes. We then validate our model through a series of

placebo tests and show that our classifications of treatment and control groups perform better in

these tests that the wider age bandwidths common in the literature. Finally, we conduct

subsample analyses, finding particularly striking improvements in outcomes for men and college

graduates. Men had larger gains in health insurance coverage than women, and only men

experienced statistically significant gains in any outcomes beyond health insurance – specifically

primary care access, exercise, and overall self-assessed health. Insurance expansions were

similar for college graduates and non-college graduates, but only college graduates experienced

significant gains in any other outcomes: primary care access, cost being a barrier to care, BMI,

obesity, and overall self-assessed health.

       The ACA dependent coverage mandate provides a unique opportunity to study a health

insurance intervention specific to young adults as opposed to seniors (Medicare), the poor

(Medicaid), or the uninsured population at large (the Massachusetts reform). In general, our

results suggest that health insurance affects health-related outcomes of young adults more

modestly than prior studies have observed for these other populations. First, we find no evidence

of increased preventive care utilization, in contrast to prior results from both Medicaid

(Finkelstein et al., 2012) and the Massachusetts reform (Kolstad and Kowalski, 2012). Second,

we only find statistically significant improvements in overall self-assessed health at the top of the

distribution, as reporting of excellent health increases but there is no clear evidence of an effect

on reporting very good or excellent health. We do not observe any gains in the variables

reflecting more severe health conditions: days not in good physical health, days not in good



                                                                                                  28
mental health, and days with functional limitations. This contrasts the clear gains in these same

outcomes observed for both Medicaid (Finkelstein et al., 2012) and the Massachusetts reform

(Van der Wees et al., 2013; Courtemanche and Zapata, 2014). Interestingly, Chua and Sommers

(2014) find that the ACA dependent coverage provision increased the probabilities of self-

reporting excellent physical and mental health. Combining their results with ours suggests that

physical and mental health did improve, but only at the high end of the distribution.

         While our results suggest that health insurance expansions for young adults are less

impactful than those for other age groups, it is still important to emphasize that we do observe

some improvements in important outcomes, including health care access, excellent self-assessed

health, and BMI. One might have initially worried that a coverage expansion for young adults

would not lead to any health improvements given the generally good baseline health of this age

group.

         An important contribution of our paper is that we provide, to our knowledge, the first

empirical investigation of ex ante moral hazard that focuses specifically on young adults. We

find evidence consistent with ex ante moral hazard in only one domain: risky drinking (binge

drinking or excessive number of drinks per month). In contrast, we find evidence that the

dependent coverage improved weight-related behaviors while not affecting smoking and

pregnancies. Our results therefore suggest that ex ante moral hazard is domain-specific.

         Another interesting result is that, since the improvement in health is concentrated among

college graduates, the ACA dependent coverage provision appears to increase SES-based

disparities in health. This is contrary to the usual impacts of public policies to expand health

insurance. Medicaid has been shown to improve at least some health outcomes (Currie and

Gruber 1996a and 1996b; Finkelstein et al., 2012; Sommers et al., 2012), implying reduced



                                                                                               29
income-based disparities in health. The Massachusetts reform also appears to have reduced

income-based disparities, as Courtemanche and Zapata (2014) found the largest gains in self-

assessed health among low-income individuals.

         Several caveats to our analyses provide directions for future research. First, since we

study eighteen different dependent variables, we might expect one or two results to emerge as

significant at conventional levels simply by chance. We did not employ multiple hypothesis test

adjustments in this paper because, even though such adjustments control the Type I error rate

(probability of falsely rejecting any null hypotheses), they do so at the cost of substantially

increasing the Type II error rate (probability of failing to reject false null hypotheses). 20 However,

future research should revisit our questions using different data to see if any of our findings

could be attributable to chance rather than genuine causal effects of the mandate.

         Next, we focus on estimating the ACA dependent coverage provision’s effects on 23-25

year olds, ignoring possible effects on 19-22 year olds because of the greater difficulty in finding

a suitable control group and the weaker ex ante expectations of significant effects. Further

understanding whether benefits accrue to young adults besides 23-25 year olds is obviously

important in order to fully evaluate the policy.

         Further research is also necessary to understand the mechanisms through which the

mandate improves health. Increased health care utilization is an obvious possibility, but early

evidence on the ACA provision’s impact on health care consumption is mixed. Akosa Antwi et


20
  For instance, the simple Bonferroni correction involves multiplying all p-values by the number of hypotheses
being tested, which is eighteen in our case. This would make it virtually impossible to reject any null hypothesis in
regressions that already demand quite a bit of the data by including fixed effects and clustering at an aggregated
level. It is not clear to us that it would be preferable to, for example, fail to reject five false null hypotheses for the
sake of not rejecting one true null hypothesis. This seems especially true in cases such as ours, where null results are
an important part of the story. Moreover, we view our analyses as testing for eighteen distinct effects, some of which
are more plausible theoretically than others, as opposed to testing for one effect that may manifest itself through
eighteen different measures. It is not clear why, for instance, we should inflate the p-values in the health insurance
regressions merely because we also study smoking, pregnancies, etc.

                                                                                                                        30
al. (2014) report a rise in hospitalizations using administrative data, but Chua and Sommers

(2014) find no evidence of changes in survey-based measures of hospital care, primary care, or

prescription drug utilization, while we find no significant increases in preventive care. Another

possible explanation is that self-assessments of health improve due to a “warm glow” from the

peace of mind of having insurance. Finkelstein et al. (2012) proposed this as an explanation for

their finding from the Oregon Medicaid experiment that most of the gains in self-assessed health

appeared to occur before changes in utilization.

       Finally, and critically, our results should not be interpreted as providing a full accounting

of the benefits of expanding insurance coverage among young adults. The primary purpose of

insurance is to protect individuals from financial risk, and gains along this dimension may be

especially substantial for young adults given their relatively low income and wealth levels.

Moreover, expanding coverage among young adults is an important component of the overall

strategy behind the ACA since it is necessary to offset the additional costs of insuring older and

sicker individuals under community rating. In other words, the costs and benefits of the different

components of the ACA need to be evaluated together, as the different pieces of the reform are

designed to work synergistically.


References

Acemoglu, D., Finkelstein, A., and Notowidigdo, M. J. (2013). Income and Health Spending:
     Evidence from Oil Price Shocks. Review of Economics and Statistics, 95, 1079-1095.

Anderson, M., Dobkin, C., and Gross, T. (2012). The Effect of Health Insurance Coverage on
      the Use of Medical Services. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 4, 1-27.

Anderson, M., Dobkin, C., and Gross, T. (2014). The Effect of Health Insurance on Emergency
      Department Visits: Evidence from an Age-Based Eligibility Threshold. Review of
      Economics and Statistics 96, 189-195.

Angrist, J. D. and Pischke, J. S. (2008). Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An Empiricist’s
       Companion. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
                                                                                                 31
Akosa Antwi, Y., Asako, S. M., and Simon, K. (2013). Effects of Federal Policy to Insure Young
      Adults: Evidence from the 2010 Affordable Care Act Dependent Coverage Mandate.
      American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 5, 1-28.

Akosa Antwi, Y., Asako, S. M., and Simon, K. (2014). Access to Health Insurance and the Use
      of Inpatient Medical Care: Evidence from the Affordable Care Act Young Adult Mandate.
      National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper #20202.

Apouey, B. and Clark, A. E. (2014). Winning Big but Feeling No Better? The Effect of Lottery
      Prizes on Physical and Mental Health. Health Economics, forthcoming.

Baicker, K., Taubman S. L., Allen, H. L., Bernstein, M., Gruber, J. H., Newhouse, J. P.,
       Schneider, E. C., Wright, B. J., Zaslavsky, A. M., and Finkelstein, A. N. (2013). The
       Oregon Experiment – Effects of Medicaid on Clinical Outcomes. New England Journal
       of Medicine, 368, 1713-1722.

Brook, R. H., Ware, J. E., Rogers, W. H., Keeler, E. B., Davies, A., Donald, C., Goldberg, G. A.,
       Lohr, K., Masthay, P. C., and Newhouse, J. P. (1983). Does Free Care Improve Adults’
       Health? Results From a Randomized Controlled Trial. New England Journal of Medicine,
       309, 1426-1434.

Cameron, A. C., Gelback, J.B., and Miller, D.L. (2008). Bootstrap-Based Improvements for
      Inference with Clustered Errors. Review of Economics and Statistics, 90, 414-427.

Cantor, J. C., Monheit, A. C., DeLia, D., and Lloyd, K. (2012). Early Impact of the Affordable
       Care Act on Health Insurance Coverage of Young Adults. Health Services Research, 47,
       1773-1790.

Card, D., Dobkin, C., and Maestas, N. (2008). The Impact of Nearly Universal Insurance
      Coverage on Health Care Utilization: Evidence from Medicare. American Economic
      Review, 98, 2242-2258.

Card, D., Dobkin, C., and Maestas, N. (2009). Does Medicare Save Lives? Quarterly Journal of
       Economics, 124, 597-636.

Cawley, J. (2004). The Impact of Obesity on Wages. Journal of Human Resources, 39, 451-
      474.

Cawley, J., Moran, J., and Simon, K. (2010). The Impact of Income on the Weight of Elderly
      Americans. Health Economics, 19, 979-993.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2012). Binge Drinking is Bigger Problem than
       Previously Thought. Available
       http://www.cdc.gov/media/releases/2012/p0110_binge_drinking.html, accessed 12/13/14.



                                                                                              32
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2014). Past Weekly Surveillance Reports.
       Available http://www.cdc.gov/flu/weekly/pastreports.htm, accessed 12/12/14.

Chua, K.P. and Sommers, B.D. (2014). Changes in Health and Medical Spending among Young
       Adults under Health Reform. Journal of the American Medical Association, 311, 2437-
       2439.

Courtemanche, C. and Zapata, D. (2014). Does Universal Coverage Improve Health? The
      Massachusetts Experience. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 33, 36-69.

Courtemanche, C., Heutel, G., and McAlvanah, P. (forthcoming). Impatience, Incentives, and
      Obesity. Economic Journal.

Courtemanche, C., Pinkston, J., and Stewart, J. (2014). Adjusting Body Mass for Measurement
      Error with Invalid Validation Data. National Bureau of Economic Research Working
      Paper #19928.

Currie, J. and Gruber J. (1996a). Health Insurance Eligibility, Utilization of Medical Care, and
        Child Health. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111, 431-466.

Currie, J. and Gruber, J. (1996b). Saving Babies: The Efficacy and Cost of Recent Changes in
        the Medicaid Eligibility of Pregnant Women. Journal of Political Economy, 104, 1263–
        1296.

Dave, D. and Kaestner, R. (2009). Health Insurance and Ex Ante Moral Hazard: Evidence from
      Medicare. International Journal of Health Care Finance and Economics, 9, 367-390.

Dafny, L. and Gruber, J. (2005). Public Insurance and Child Hospitalizations: Access and
       Efficiency Effects. Journal of Public Economics, 89, 109-129.

DeNavas-Walt, C., Proctor, B. D., and Smith, J. C. (2010). Income, Poverty, and Health
     Insurance Coverage in the United States: 2009. U.S. Census Bureau. Washington, D.C.:
     U.S. Government Printing Office, 1-79.

DeSalvo, K. B., Bloser, N., Reynolds, K., He, J., and Muntner, P. (2006). Mortality Prediction
      with a Single General Self-Rated Health Question. A Meta-Analysis. Journal of General
      Internal Medicine, 21, 267–275.

Ehrlick, I. and Becker, G. S. (1972). Market Insurance, Self-Insurance, and Self-Protection.
       Journal of Political Economy, 80, 623-648.

Finkelstein, A.N, and McKnight R. (2008). What Did Medicare Do? The Initial Impact of
       Medicare on Mortality and Out of Pocket Medical Spending. Journal of Public
       Economics, 92, 1644-1668.



                                                                                             33
Finkelstein, A. N., Taubman, S., Wright, B., Bernstein, M., Gruber, J., Newhouse, J. P., Allen,
       H., Baicker, K., and The Oregon Health Study Group. (2012). The Oregon Health
       Insurance Experiment: Evidence from the First Year. Quarterly Journal of Economics,
       127, 1057-1106.

Frijters, P., Haisken-DeNew, J. P., and Shields, M. (2005). The Causal Effect of Income on
        Health: Evidence from German Reunification. Journal of Health Economics, 24, 997-
        1017.

Grossman, M. (1972). On the Concept of Health Capital and Demand for Health. Journal of
      Political Economy, 80, 223-255.

Gruber, J. (2011). The Impacts of the Affordable Care Act: How Reasonable Are the Projections?
       National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper #17168.

Idler, E. L. and Benyamini, Y. (1997). Self-Rated Health and Mortality: a Review of Twenty-
        Seven Community Studies. Journal of Health and Social Behavior, 38, 21-37.

Jianakoplos, N.A. and Bernasek, A. (1998). Are Women More Risk Averse? Economic Inquiry,
       36, 620-630.

Kolstad, J.T. and Kowalski, A.E. (2012). The Impact of Health Care Reform on Hospital and
       Preventive Care: Evidence from Massachusetts. Journal of Public Economics, 96, 909-
       929.

Lakdawalla, D. and Philipson, T. (2002). The Growth of Obesity and Technological Change: A
      Theoretical and Empirical Investigation. National Bureau of Economic Research
      Working Paper # 8946.

Levine, P. B., McKnight R., and Heep S. (2011). How Effective are Public Policies to Increase
       Health Insurance Coverage among Young Adults? American Economic Journal:
       Economic Policy, 3 (1): 129-156.

Lichtenberg, F.R. (2002). The Effects of Medicare on Health Care Utilization and Outcomes. In
       Frontiers in Health Policy Research, Volume 5, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Lindahl, M. (2005). “Estimating the Effect of Income on Health and Mortality Using
       Lottery Prizes as an Exogenous Source of Variation in Income.” Journal of Human
       Resources, 40(1), 144-168.

Manning, W. G., Newhouse, J. P., Duan, N., Keeler, E. B., Leibowitz, A., and Marquis, M.S.
      (1987). Health Insurance and the Demand for Medical Care: Evidence from a
      Randomized Experiment. American Economic Review, 77(3), 251-277.

Miller, S. (2011). The Effect of Insurance on Outpatient Emergency Room Visits: An Analysis
        of the 2006 Massachusetts Health Reform. Journal of Public Economics, 96, 893-908.

                                                                                              34
Miller, S. (2012). The Impact of the Massachusetts Health Care Reform on Health Care Use
        among Children. American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings, 102(3), 502-507.

Monheit, A., Cantor, J., DeLia, D. and Belloff, D. (2011). How Have State Policies to Expand
      Dependent Coverage Affected the Health Insurance Status of Young Adults? Health
      Services Research, 46, 251-267.

National Conference of State Legislatures. (2010). "Covering Young Adults through their
       Parents' or Guardians' Health Policy." Retrieved from
       http://www.ncsl.org/research/health/dependent-health-coverage-state-
       implementation.aspx

National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (2014). “Traffic Safety Facts 2012: Alcohol-
       Impaired Driving.” Available at http://www-nrd.nhtsa.dot.gov/Pubs/811870.pdf, accessed
       12/14/14.

National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (2013). “College Drinking.” Available at
       http://pubs.niaaa.nih.gov/publications/CollegeFactSheet/CollegeFactSheet.pdf, accessed
       12/14/14.

Phillips A. C., Der, G., and Carroll, D. (2010). Self-Reported Health, Self-Reported Fitness, and
        all-Cause Mortality: Prospective Cohort Study. British Journal of Health Psychology, 15,
        337-346.

Ruhm, C. J. (2000). Are Recessions Good For Your Health? Quarterly Journal of Economics,
      115(2), 617-650.

Ruhm, C. J. (2002). Does Drinking Really Decrease in Bad Times? Journal of Health Economics,
      21(4), 659-678.

Ruhm, C. J. (2005). Healthy Living In Hard Times. Journal of Health Economics, 24(2), 341-
      363.

Ruhm, C. J. (2013). Recessions, Healthy No More? National Bureau of Economic Research
      Working Paper #19287.

Schmeiser, M. D. (2009). Expanding Wallets and Waistlines: The Impact of Family
      Income on the BMI of Women and Men Eligible for the Earned Income Tax Credit.
      Health Economics, 18, 1277-1294.

Slusky, D. J. G. (2013). Revisiting the Labor Effects of the Affordable Care Act. Princeton
       University Working Paper.

Snyder, S. E. and Evans, W. N. (2006). The Impact of Income on Mortality: Evidence from the
       Social Security Notch. Review of Economics and Statistics, 88(3), 482-495.

                                                                                              35
Sommers, B. D., Baicker, K., and Epstein, A. M. (2012). Mortality and Access to Care among
     Adults after State Medicaid Expansions. New England Journal of Medicine, 367, 1025-
     1034.

Sommers, B. D., Buchmueller, T., Decker, S. L., Carey, C. and Kronick, R. (2013). The
     Affordable Care Act Has Led to Significant Gains in Health Insurance and Access to
     Care for Young Adults. Health Affairs, 32, 165-174.

Sommers, B. D., and Kronick, R. (2012). The Affordable Care Act and Insurance Coverage for
     Young Adults. Journal of the American Medical Association, 307 (9): 913–4.

Sommers, B. D., Long, S.K., and Baicker, K. (2014). Changes in Mortality After Massachusetts
     Health Care Reform: A Quasi-Experimental Study. Annals of Internal Medicine, 160(9),
     585-593.

Taubman, S.L., Allen, H.L., Wright, B.J., Baicker, K., and Finkelstein, A.N. (2014). Medicaid
     Increases Emergency-Department Use: Evidence from Oregon’s Health Insurance
     Experiment. Science, 343, 263-268.

Tekin, E., McClellan, C., and Minyard, K.J. (2013). Health and Health Behaviors during the
       Worst of Times: Evidence from the Great Recession. National Bureau of Economic
       Research Working Paper #19234.

Van der Wees, P.J., Zaslavsky, A.M., and Ayanian, J.Z. (2013). Improvements in Health Status
      after Massachusetts Health Care Reform. Milbank Quarterly, 91, 663-689.




                                                                                           36
Figure 1 -- Trends in Access to Care and Preventive Care Variables by Age Group


          Health Insurance Coverage                     Personal Doctor Visits                     Cost Barrier to Care




                                             .7




                                                                                       .3
  .8




                                                                                    .25
                                           .65
.75




                                                                                       .2
                                             .6
  .7




                                                                                    .15
                                           .55




                                                                                       .1
.65




                                             .5
       2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013         2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013        2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013

                Age23~25        Age27~29                   Age23~25      Age27~29                    Age23~25        Age27~29
                Fit line         95% CIs                   Fit line      95% CIs                     Fit line         95% CIs


                    Flu Shots                             Patient Checkups                               Pap Tests
  .3




                                                                                       .8
                                           .56




                                                                                    .75
.25




                                           .54




                                                                                       .7
  .2




                                           .52




                                                                                    .65
.15




                                             .5




       2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013         2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013   .6   2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013

                Age23~25        Age27~29                   Age23~25     Age27~29                     Age23~25        Age27~29
                Fit line         95% CIs                   Fit line      95% CIs                     Fit line         95% CIs




                                                                                                                                 37
Figure 2 -- Trends in Health Behavior Variables by Age Group



                                     Smokers                           Alcoholic Drinks per Month                                 Risky Drinkers
 .32




                                                                                                              .85
                                                                  25
                     .3




                                                                  20




                                                                                                                        .8
 .22 .24 .26 .28




                                                                                                              .75
                                                                  15
                                                                  10




                                                                                                                        .7
                           2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013            2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013                  2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013


                                     23~25         27~29                           23~25         27~29                                 23~25         27~29
                                     Fit line     95% CIs                          Fit line     95% CIs                                Fit line    95% CIs



                              Body Mass Index                                       Obesity                                         Any Exercise




                                                                                                              .82 .84 .86
                     28




                                                                  .3
                                                                .25
                     27
                     26




                                                                  .2




                                                                                                                        .8
                                                                                                              .78
                                                                .15
                     25




                           2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013            2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013                  2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013


                                     23~25          27~29                          23~25         27~29                                 23~25          27~29

                                     Fit line     95% CIs                          Fit line     95% CIs                                Fit line     95% CIs



                                   Pregnancy
 .02 .03 .04 .05 .06 .07




                           2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013


                                     23~25          27~29
                                     Fit line     95% CIs




                                                                                                                                                                  38
Figure 3 -- Trends in Self-Assessed Health Variables by Age Group


                           Overall Health - Very Good & Excellent                              Overall Health - Excellent                  Days Not in Good Mental Health
.62 .64 .66 .68




                                                                       .3




                                                                                                                                     5
                                                                   .28




                                                                                                                               4.5
                                                                   .26




                                                                                                                                     4
                                                                   .24




                                                                                                                               3.5
             .6
.58




                                                                   .22




                                                                                                                                     3
                               2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013                         2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013             2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013

                                        Age23~25      Age27~29                                     Age23~25       Age27~29                        Age23~25      Age27~29
                                        Fit line       95% CIs                                     Fit line        95% CIs                        Fit line       95% CIs


                                Days Not in Good Physical Health                            Days with Functional Limitations
         2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8




                                                                                      2
                                                                    1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8
                           2
         1.8




                                                                                      1




                               2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013                         2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013

                                        Age23~25      Age27~29                                     Age23~25       Age27~29
                                        Fit line       95% CIs                                     Fit line        95% CIs




                                                                                                                                                                              39
Table 1 – Sample Sizes for Different Outcomes

                                                                                  Treatment           Control
Outcome Variable                                                   Total
                                                                                   (23-25)            (27-29)
Health care access
   Any health insurance coverage                                 126,702            53,057             73,645
   Any primary care doctor                                       118,392            49,520             68,872
   Cost prevented care in past year                              107,831            45,041             62,790
Preventive care utilization
   Flu vaccination in past year                                  118,394            49,502             68,892
   Well-patient checkup in past year                             107,931            45,085             62,846
   Pap test in past year (women only)+                            26,919            10,799             16,120
Risky health behaviors
   Currently smokes cigarettes                                   125,616            52,607             73,009
   Alcoholic drinks in past 30 days                              120,958            50,521             70,437
   Risky drinker in past 30 days                                 120,037            50,110             69,927
   Body mass index                                               120,373            50,529             69,844
   Obese                                                         120,373            50,529             69,844
   Any exercise in past 30 days                                  122,720            51,337             71,383
   Pregnancy (unmarried women only)                               39,499            19,610             19,889
Self-assessed health
   Overall health very good or excellent                         126,662            53,102             73,560
   Overall health excellent                                      126,662            53,102             73,560
   Days of last 30 not in good mental health                     124,773            52,386             72,387
   Days of last 30 not in good physical health                   124,861            52,387             72,474
   Days of last 30 with health-related limitations               125,365            52,615             72,750
+
The pap test variable is only available in even-numbered years, reducing the sample size for that outcome.




                                                                                                                40
Table 2 – Pre-Treatment Means and Standard Deviations for Control Variables

Control Variable                              Treatment (Ages 23-25)                   Control (Ages 27-29)
Age dummies (age=23 is omitted)
   Age=24                                          0.349 (0.477)                                  --
   Age=25                                          0.322 (0.467)                                  --
   Age=27                                                --                                 0.310 (0.462)
   Age=28                                                --                                 0.343 (0.475)
   Age=29                                                --                                 0.347 (0.476)
Female                                             0.505 (0.500)                            0.508 (0.500)
Race/ethnicity dummies (non-Hispanic white is omitted)
   Non-Hispanic black                              0.112 (0.316)                            0.116 (0.320)
   Hispanic                                        0.224 (0.417)                            0.209 (0.407)
   Other than black, Hispanic, or white            0.087 (0.282)                            0.077 (0.266)
Currently married                                  0.305 (0.460)                            0.564 (0.496)
Education dummies (less than high school degree is omitted)
   High school degree but no further               0.283 (0.450)                            0.257 (0.437)
   Some college but no four-year degree            0.299 (0.458)                            0.271 (0.444)
   College graduate                                0.303 (0.459)                            0.364 (0.481)
Household income dummies (less than $10,000 is omitted)
   Between $10,000 and $15,000                     0.068 (0.252)                            0.049 (0.216)
   Between $15,000 and $20,000                     0.102 (0.303)                            0.077 (0.267)
   Between $20,000 and $25,000                     0.116 (0.321)                            0.097 (0.296)
   Between $25,000 and $35,000                     0.144 (0.351)                            0.129 (0.335)
   Between $35,000 and $50,000                     0.166 (0.372)                            0.165 (0.371)
   Between $50,000 and $75,000                     0.143 (0.350)                            0.187 (0.390)
   $75,000 and over                                0.186 (0.389)                            0.240 (0.427)
Number of children in household dummies (0 is omitted)
   One child                                       0.230 (0.421)                           0.235 (0.424)
   Two children                                    0.159 (0.366)                           0.233 (0.423)
   Three children                                  0.055 (0.229)                           0.110 (0.313)
   Four children                                   0.018 (0.133)                           0.038 (0.192)
   Five or more children                           0.008 (0.090)                           0.016 (0.124)
Cell phone only                                    0.703 (0.457)+                          0.678 (0.467)+
Student                                            0.109 (0.312)                           0.054 (0.226)
Unemployed                                         0.111 (0.314)                           0.093 (0.290)
State unemployment rate                            7.032 (2.615)                           7.186 (2.666)
Pre-ACA state mandate                              0.220 (0.415)                           0.033 (0.179)
Notes: BRFSS sampling weights are used. Means are reported, with standard deviations in parentheses. + indicates
the summary statistics are from 2011-2013, since the variable is 0 for all respondents in all prior years.




                                                                                                               41
Table 3 – Means and Standard Deviations for Outcome Variables

                                                        Pre-Treatment Period                          Post-Treatment Period                  Difference-in-
                                                Treatment (Ages Control (Ages 27-             Treatment (Ages       Control (Ages 27-         Differences
Outcome Variable
                                                     23-25)               29)                      23-25)                  29)
Health care access
  Any health insurance coverage                   0.680 (0.466)          0.753 (0.431)          0.709 (0.454)         0.708 (0.455)        0.073 (0.018)***
   Any primary care doctor                        0.564 (0.496)          0.641 (0.480)          0.519 (0.500)         0.558 (0.497)         0.038 (0.010)**
   Cost prevented care in past year               0.241 (0.427)          0.216 (0.411)          0.240 (0.427)         0.235 (0.424)          -0.020 (0.014)
Preventive care utilization
   Flu vaccination in past year                   0.225 (0.418)          0.246 (0.431)          0.239 (0.426)         0.265 (0.441)          -0.006 (0.009)
   Well-patient checkup in past year              0.521 (0.500)          0.545 (0.498)          0.524 (0.499)         0.529 (0.499)          0.019 (0.011)
   Pap test in past year                          0.693 (0.461)          0.724 (0.447)          0.614 (0.487)         0.647 (0.478)          -0.002 (0.013)
Risky health behaviors
   Currently smokes cigarettes                    0.260 (0.432)          0.249 (0.432)          0.257 (0.437)         0.254 (0.435)          -0.009 (0.012)
   Alcoholic drinks in past 30 days              17.359 (43.926)        13.883 (34.703)       19.481 (43.947)        16.841 (40.916)         -0.836 (0.889)
   Risky drinker in past 30 days                  0.775 (0.418)          0.807 (0.394)          0.749 (0.434)         0.769 (0.422)          0.013 (0.005)*
   Body mass index                               26.404 (5.807)         27.253 (6.031)         26.167 (6.019)         27.192 (6.142)       -0.177 (0.050)**
   Obese                                          0.222 (0.415)          0.262 (0.440)          0.197 (0.398)         0.252 (0.434)        -0.014 (0.003)***
   Any exercise in past 30 days                   0.810 (0.392)          0.799 (0.401)          0.819 (0.385)         0.799 (0.401)          0.009 (0.005)
   Pregnancy                                      0.048 (0.215)          0.043 (0.203)          0.044 (0.205)         0.040 (0.195)          -0.001 (0.004)
Self-assessed health
   Overall health very good/excellent             0.607 (0.488)          0.610 (0.488)          0.608 (0.488)         0.589 (0.492)          0.022 (0.011)
   Overall health excellent                       0.255 (0.436)          0.257 (0.437)          0.250 (0.433)         0.236 (0.425)        0.017 (0.003)***
   Days not in good mental health                 4.050 (7.638)          3.844 (7.680)          4.410 (8.067)         4.165 (8.063)          0.040 (0.162)
   Days not in good physical health               2.240 (5.526)          2.303 (5.815)          2.446 (5.999)         2.484 (6.170)          0.025 (0.053)
   Days with health-related limitations           1.589 (4.757)          1.664 (5.177)          1.727 (5.131)         1.739 (5.332)          0.063 (0.104)
Notes: Standard errors, heteroskedasticity-robust and clustered by age, are in parentheses. BRFSS sampling weights are used. Means are reported, with standard
deviations in parentheses. *** indicates the difference-in-difference is significant at the 1% level; ** 5% level; * 10% level.

                                                                                                                                                              42
Table 4 – Difference-in-Difference Regression Estimates of Effects of ACA Dependent Coverage Mandate

Outcome Variable                                              Demographic
                                    Baseline Model                                  Start in 2004        Start in 2001      Drop 3/10-12/10       Collapsed Data
                                                              Controls Only
Health care access
   Any health insurance        0.061 (0.017)** [0.130]       0.067 (0.018)**     0.059 (0.013)***      0.055 (0.012)***     0.064 (0.016)***     0.061 (0.015)***
   Any primary doctor          0.032 (0.010)** [0.065]       0.034 (0.010)**      0.020 (0.006)**      0.021 (0.006)**       0.033 (0.009)**      0.029 (0.011)**
   Cost prevented care          -0.019 (0.014) [-0.044]       -0.019 (0.014)       -0.022 (0.015)       -0.023 (0.015)        -0.020 (0.015)       -0.016 (0.011)
Preventive care utilization
   Flu vaccination              -0.014 (0.007) [-0.033]       -0.011 (0.008)       -0.017 (0.009)       -0.018 (0.008)*       -0.014 (0.008)     -0.020 (0.006)**
   Well-patient checkup          0.013 (0.011) [0.026]        0.015 (0.010)        0.011 (0.010)         0.011 (0.010)        0.017 (0.010)        0.011 (0.006)
   Pap test                     -0.004 (0.015) [-0.009]       -0.003 (0.014)       -0.019 (0.010)      -0.025 (0.015)**       -0.015 (0.015)       0.002 (0.008)
Risky health behaviors
   Currently smokes              0.003 (0.007) [0.007]        -0.006 (0.010)       -0.001 (0.004)       -0.008 (0.005)        -0.001 (0.006)       0.005 (0.007)
   Drinks per month              0.120 (0.906) [0.003]        -0.468 (0.887)       -0.429 (0.604)       -0.597 (0.590)        0.083 (0.840)        0.011 (0.929)
   Risky drinker               0.011 (0.003)** [0.026]       0.008 (0.004)*       0.009 (0.003)**      0.009 (0.007)**      0.014 (0.003)***      0.009 (0.003)**
   Body mass index            -0.098 (0.029)** [-0.017] -0.175 (0.045)**           -0.124 (0.062)      -0.169 (0.061)**      -0.173 (0.074)*     -0.118 (0.033)***
   Obese                        -0.009 (0.008) [-0.022]     -0.014 (0.005)**       -0.010 (0.007)       -0.011 (0.008)       -0.013 (0.006)*     -0.010 (0.004)**
   Any exercise                  0.003 (0.004) [0.008]        0.008 (0.007)        0.005 (0.003)         0.004 (0.004)        0.001 (0.005)       0.007 (0.003)**
   Pregnancy                    -0.003 (0.005) [-0.014]       -0.002 (0.005)       -0.004 (0.004)       -0.002 (0.004)        -0.003 (0.005)       -0.002 (0.004)
Self-assessed health
   Very good/exc. Health         0.015 (0.011) [0.031]        0.018 (0.010)        0.016 (0.011)         0.015 (0.008)        0.011 (0.010)        0.014 (0.009)
   Excellent health            0.014 (0.005)** [0.032]      0.014 (0.003)***      0.013 (0.004)**      0.014 (0.005)**       0.014 (0.006)*      0.015 (0.004)***
   Days not good mental          0.081 (0.158) [0.010]        0.064 (0.144)        0.050 (0.144)         0.036 (0.116)        0.156 (0.156)        0.084 (0.127)
   Days not good phys.           0.059 (0.068) [0.011]        0.045 (0.046)        -0.022 (0.079)       -0.014 (0.076)       0.075 (0.028)**       0.028 (0.063)
   Days health limitations       0.122 (0.099) [0.025]        0.102 (0.093)         0.073 (0.109)       0.065 (0.094)         0.201 (0.107)        0.101 (0.086)
Notes: *** indicates significant at the 1% level; ** 5% level; * 10% level. Standard errors, heteroskedasticity-robust and clustered by age, are in parentheses. All
regressions include the controls plus age, state, and time fixed effects. BRFSS sampling weights are used. For the baseline regression, effect sizes in standard
deviations of the dependent variable (for the treatment group in the pre-treatment period) are in brackets.



                                                                                                                                                                 43
Table 5 – Placebo Regressions

                                                      2003-2009      2002-2008       2001-2007
Outcome Variable
                                                   Treatment 10/06 Treatment 10/05 Treatment 10/04
Health care access
   Any health insurance coverage                     -0.002 (0.005)          0.002 (0.008)         -0.009 (0.007)
   Any primary care doctor                           -0.008 (0.014)          0.002 (0.007)          0.019 (0.011)
   Cost prevented care in past year                  -0.007 (0.011)         -0.017 (0.013)         -0.013 (0.007)
Preventive care utilization
   Flu vaccination in past year                      -0.013 (0.016)         -0.007 (0.008)         -0.001 (0.007)
   Well-patient checkup in past year                 0.002 (0.014)          -0.008 (0.014)               --
   Pap test in past year                             -0.012 (0.014)         -0.024 (0.022)         -0.027 (0.025)
Risky health behaviors
   Currently smokes cigarettes                     -0.019 (0.007)**         -0.006 (0.009)         -0.007 (0.008)
   Alcoholic drinks in past 30 days                 -1.648 (1.035)          -0.659 (0.584)         -1.146 (0.788)
   Risky drinker in past 30 days                    -0.001 (0.006)         -0.014 (0.007)*         -0.009 (0.011)
   Body mass index                                  -0.001 (0.146)          -0.023 (0.196)         -0.082 (0.145)
   Obese                                             0.002 (0.008)           0.005 (0.011)         0.0005 (0.009)
   Any exercise in past 30 days                      0.008 (0.008)           0.008 (0.005)         -0.004 (0.005)
   Pregnancy                                         0.011 (0.010)           0.005 (0.012)         -0.002 (0.007)
Self-assessed health
   Overall health very good/excellent               0.011 (0.003)**          0.002 (0.009)          0.004 (0.009)
   Overall health excellent                          0.004 (0.005)           0.009 (0.005)          0.006 (0.008)
   Days not in good mental health                    -0.064 (0.174)         -0.005 (0.232)         -0.054 (0.143)
   Days not in good physical health                  -0.041 (0.109)          0.034 (0.121)          0.165 (0.107)
   Days with health-related limitations              -0.039 (0.084)         -0.043 (0.051)          0.017 (0.060)
Notes: *** indicates significant at the 1% level; ** 5% level; * 10% level. Standard errors, heteroskedasticity-robust
and clustered by age, are in parentheses. All regressions include the controls plus age, state, and time fixed effects.
BRFSS sampling weights are used.




                                                                                                                    44
Table 6 – Heterogeneity by Sex and Education

                                                                                 Sex                                       Education
                                                                                                                Not College
Outcome Variable                                                  Female                   Male                                 College Graduate
                                                                                                                 Graduate
Health care access
   Any health insurance coverage                   0.045 (0.017)** 0.074 (0.016)***+++ 0.067 (0.019)**    0.061 (0.013)***
                                                                                     +
   Any primary care doctor                          0.016 (0.009)   0.046 (0.012)**       0.025 (0.012)  0.051 (0.006)***++
   Cost prevented care in past year                 -0.019 (0.021)    -0.016 (0.013)     -0.014 (0.017)   -0.034 (0.009)**
Preventive care utilization
   Flu vaccination in past year                     -0.020 (0.012)    -0.012 (0.010)    -0.022 (0.008)**     0.003 (0.009)
   Well-patient checkup in past year                0.013 (0.014)      0.013 (0.016)      0.006 (0.019)      0.035 (0.016)
   Pap test in past year                            -0.004 (0.015)          --           -0.007 (0.021)      0.008 (0.028)
Risky health behaviors
   Currently smokes cigarettes                      0.011 (0.011)     -0.004 (0.016)      0.001 (0.008)      0.002 (0.006)
   Alcoholic drinks in past 30 days                 -0.117 (0.441)     0.359 (1.559)     -0.068 (1.171)      0.398 (0.985)
   Risky drinker                                    0.009 (0.012)      0.015 (0.014)    0.016 (0.004)***    -0.007 (0.007)
   Body mass index                                  -0.133 (0.153)     0.018 (0.160)      0.001 (0.050)   -0.254 (0.096)**
   Obese                                            -0.010 (0.010)    -0.005 (0.012)     -0.004 (0.009)  -0.017 (0.004)***
                                                                                     ++
   Any exercise in past 30 days                     -0.010 (0.007) 0.019 (0.004)***       0.001 (0.006)      0.010 (0.005)
   Pregnancy                                        -0.003 (0.005)          --           -0.005 (0.006)     -0.001 (0.006)
Self-assessed health
   Overall health very good or excellent            0.001 (0.022)    0.029 (0.009)**      0.007 (0.009)      0.029 (0.017)
                                                                                     ++
   Overall health excellent                         -0.003 (0.009) 0.031 (0.005)***       0.002 (0.006)    0.037 (0.012)**
   Days of last 30 not in good mental health        0.100 (0.196)      0.083 (0.160)      0.259 (0.154)   -0.323 (0.193)+++
   Days of last 30 not in good physical health      0.109 (0.081)     -0.011 (0.167)      0.211 (0.145)     -0.262 (0.166)
   Days of last 30 with health-related limitations 0.347 (0.110)**    -0.102 (0.206)      0.265 (0.161)     -0.149 (0.096)
Notes: +++ difference between effects on subgroups is significant at the 1% level; ++ 5% level; + 10% level. See other notes for Table 5.


                                                                                                                                                   45
Appendix Table A1 – Full Regression Output for Selected Dependent Variables
Control Variable                                   Insurance                Smoker              Excellent Health
Treated*Post                                    0.061 (0.017)*           0.003 (0.007)           0.014 (0.005)*
Age=24                                          -0.004 (0.002)*        0.007 (0.001)**           -0.002 (0.001)*
Age=25                                           -0.007 (0.003)        0.022 (0.001)**          -0.004 (0.001)**
Age=27                                           0.012 (0.010)         0.030 (0.002)**          -0.016 (0.002)**
Age=28                                           0.016 (0.011)         0.039 (0.002)**          -0.026 (0.002)**
Age=29                                          0.029 (0.011)*         0.032 (0.002)**          -0.018 (0.003)**
Female                                         0.070 (0.006)**         -0.056 (0.005)**           -0.020 (0.008)
Non-Hispanic black                               -0.012 (0.010)        -0.126 (0.009)**           0.006 (0.007)
Hispanic                                       -0.117 (0.007)**        -0.183 (0.004)**         -0.019 (0.005)**
Other than black, Hispanic, or white             -0.011 (0.010)          -0.025 (0.013)          -0.010 (0.004)*
Currently married                              0.069 (0.008)**         -0.110 (0.008)**         0.027 (0.005)**
High school degree but no further              0.110 (0.012)**         -0.091 (0.017)**         0.039 (0.009)**
Some college but no 4-year degree              0.171 (0.017)**         -0.161 (0.014)**         0.051 (0.008)**
College graduate                               0.251 (0.019)**         -0.310 (0.020)**         0.111 (0.009)**
Between $10,000 and $15,000                     -0.048 (0.014)*          0.007 (0.006)            -0.008 (0.018)
Between $15,000 and $20,000                     -0.070 (0.018)*          0.021 (0.011)            -0.007 (0.013)
Between $20,000 and $25,000                     -0.032 (0.009)*          0.007 (0.009)           0.0001 (0.009)
Between $25,000 and $35,000                    0.051 (0.010)**           -0.020 (0.013)           0.026 (0.013)
Between $35,000 and $50,000                    0.120 (0.009)**           -0.036 (0.014)         0.044 (0.010)**
Between $50,000 and $75,000                    0.169 (0.011)**         -0.063 (0.016)**         0.058 (0.011)**
$75,000 and over                               0.179 (0.012)**          -0.057 (0.015)*         0.108 (0.012)**
One child in household                          0.021 (0.007)*         0.035 (0.009)**          -0.012 (0.003)**
Two children in household                      0.031 (0.005)**          0.044 (0.012)*            -0.010 (0.008)
Three children in household                      0.020 (0.008)         0.055 (0.010)**            -0.025 (0.011)
Four children in household                       0.017 (0.021)          0.071 (0.023)*            -0.038 (0.016)
Five or more children in household              0.065 (0.023)*          0.071 (0.018)*            -0.007 (0.012)
Cell phone only                                  -0.013 (0.006)          0.007 (0.006)            0.011 (0.007)
Student                                          -0.006 (0.016)        -0.035 (0.008)**           0.013 (0.009)
Unemployed                                     -0.164 (0.017)**        0.100 (0.010)**          -0.027 (0.006)**
State unemployment rate                          0.004 (0.003)          -0.009 (0.004)*           0.002 (0.002)
Pre-ACA state mandate                            0.017 (0.010)           0.001 (0.010)           -0.015 (0.004)*
Notes: ** indicates significant at the 1% level; * 5% level. Standard errors, heteroskedasticity-robust and clustered
by age, are in parentheses. All regressions also include the age, state, and time fixed effects. BRFSS sampling
weights are used. Separate variables for “treated” and “post” are not included because they are subsumed by the age
and time fixed effects.




                                                                                                                   46
