                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          IDENTIFYING IDEOLOGY:
          EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE ON ANTI-AMERICANISM IN PAKISTAN

                                          Leonardo Bursztyn
                                            Michael Callen
                                            Bruno Ferman
                                             Saad Gulzar
                                            Ali Hasanain
                                           Noam Yuchtman

                                         Working Paper 20153
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w20153


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2014


Previously circulated as "A Revealed Preference Approach to the Elicitation of Political Attitudes:
Experimental Evidence on Anti-Americanism in Pakistan." We would like to thank Roland Benabou,
Chris Blattman, Sylvain Chassang, Ernesto Dal B o, Stefano DellaVigna, Lena Edlund, Fred Finan,
Ray Fisman, Paola Giuliano, Macartan Humphreys, Matthew Kahn, Ethan Kaplan, Dean Karlan, Asim
Ijaz Khwaja, Jennifer Lerner, David Levine, Aprajit Mahajan, Ted Miguel, Rohini Pande, Petra Persson,
Torsten Persson, Daniel Posner, Jacob Shapiro, Jesse Shapiro, Nico Voigtländer, Romain Wacziarg,
Reed Walker, and seminar participants at the Barcelona GSE Summer Forum, BU, CEGA (Berkeley),
CGU, Chicago, Columbia, CU Denver, Dartmouth, Indiana University, the Munich Center for Advanced
Studies, Mannheim, MIT/Harvard, the NBER Political Economy Spring 2015 meeting, NYU, Pompeu
Fabra, Princeton, PSE/Sciences Po, RAND, Sao Paulo School of Economics, Toronto, UC-Berkeley,
UC-LA, UC-SD, USP, Wharton, and the Yale Conference on Political Economy and Development
for helpful comments and suggestions. Sarah Brierley provided excellent research assistance. We also
thank the Center for Global Management at UCLA Anderson for financial support. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Leonardo Bursztyn, Michael Callen, Bruno Ferman, Saad Gulzar, Ali Hasanain, and Noam
Yuchtman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Identifying Ideology: Experimental Evidence on Anti-Americanism in Pakistan
Leonardo Bursztyn, Michael Callen, Bruno Ferman, Saad Gulzar, Ali Hasanain, and Noam
Yuchtman
NBER Working Paper No. 20153
May 20145HYLVHG)HEUXDU\
JEL No. C90,P16

                                            ABSTRACT

Identifying the role of intrinsic, ideological motivation in political behavior is confounded by agents'
consequential aims and social concerns. We present results from two experiments that implement a
methodology isolating Pakistani men's intrinsic motives for expressing anti-American ideology, in
a context with clearly-specified financial costs, but minimal consequential or social considerations.
Over one-quarter of subjects forgo around one-fifth of a day's wage to avoid anonymously checking
a box indicating gratitude toward the U.S. government, thus revealing anti-Americanism. We find
that ideological expression responds to financial and social incentives, and that measured ideology
predicts membership in a major anti-American political party.


Leonardo Bursztyn                                  Saad Gulzar
Anderson School of Management                      New York University
University of California, Los Angeles              Department of Politics
110 Westwood Plaza, C 513                          19 West 4th St. 2nd Floor
Los Angeles, CA 90095                              New York, NY 10012
and NBER                                           saad.gulzar@nyu.edu
bursztyn@ucla.edu
                                                   Ali Hasanain
Michael Callen                                     Lahore University of Management Sciences
Harvard Kennedy School                             Street 29 Lahore 54792, Pakistan
79 JFK Street                                      hasanain@lums.edu.pk
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER                                           Noam Yuchtman
michael_callen@hks.harvard.edu                     Haas School of Business
                                                   University of California, Berkeley
Bruno Ferman                                       Berkeley, CA 94720
Sao Paulo School of Economics, FGV                 and NBER
Rua Itapeva n 474                                  yuchtman@haas.berkeley.edu
Sao Paulo, Brazil, 01332-000
bruno.ferman@fgv.br
1        Introduction
Political action, from voting to engaging in political protest, has long captured the attention of
social scientists. Economists have typically focused on instrumental or consequential motives for
political behavior: for example, in the pivotal voter model, individuals vote to (probabilistically)
change electoral outcomes and thus policy.1 More recently economists have studied the role of
social incentives in political behavior.2 Less well understood is the intrinsic utility derived from
political expression, which might arise from a particular identity or a set of deeply-held beliefs; we
will refer to political expression motivated by intrinsic utility as “ideological.”3
        A wide range of political behavior appears to be ideologically-motivated: from poor Americans
supporting the Tea Party despite their positions in the income distribution and their reliance on
federal transfers, to suicide bombers’ self-sacrifice for political causes. Yet whether these behaviors
are ideologically-motivated remains far from clear: Tea Partiers may believe that they will rise in
the income distribution or they may participate in the protests for social reasons; suicide bombers
may place a great deal of weight on the consequences of their actions for those whom they leave be-
hind. Disentangling ideological motives from consequential (or social) motives is even more difficult
when these are aligned: for example, wealthy individuals may disproportionately support conser-
vative parties because they believe in liberty and the efficiency of the private sector (ideological
motives) or because the low tax rates favored by conservative parties disproportionately benefit
them (consequential).4 Discovering qualitatively important ideological roots of political behavior
is of more than scientific interest: if political behavior simply reflects consequential concerns or
the social environment, variation in material incentives and the context in which political behavior
occurs will have large effects. On the other hand, the presence of important, ideological motives be-
hind political behavior implies weaker, and far more heterogeneous effects of changed social context
and material incentives.
        Identifying the role of intrinsic motivation (“ideology”) in driving political action requires the
study of political behavior in which one is certain that the private cost of expression exceeds any
anticipated consequential or social benefits. Yet, such behavior may be difficult to interpret if
    1
     See Downs (1957), Palfrey and Rosenthal (1983), Ledyard (1984), and Palfrey and Rosenthal (1985).
    2
     Social incentives may operate through a desire to conform (Bernheim, 1994), through a desire to send a signal
to a particular group, or through the utility derived from social activity. This is true even of the (often) private act
of voting (Gerber et al., 2008, DellaVigna et al., 2013, and Gerber et al., 2013).
   3
     We thus use the term “ideology” in a specific, reduced form way. Intrinsic utility that motivates political
expression may arise from a set of deeply-held beliefs (Bénabou, 2008), or it may be a component of one’s identity
(Akerlof and Kranton, 2000) or culture (Guiso et al., 2006). See also the literature on expressive voting (Riker
and Ordeshook, 1968, Tullock, 1971, Brennan and Buchanan, 1984, Brennan and Lomasky, 1993, Scheussler, 2000,
Feddersen and Sandroni, 2006, Feddersen et al., 2009, and Kamenica and Brad, 2014).
   4
     Gelman et al. (2007) present a rich analysis of the relationship between income and political preferences in the
United States. Forbes magazine presents evidence that of the 50 richest families in America, 28 are solidly Republican
(as measured by campaign contributions), while only 7 are solidly Democratic (the other 15 donate to both parties).
See http://goo.gl/GX5vQC, last accessed January 18, 2016.



                                                           1
individuals’ behavior is distorted by the awareness that their choices are being studied by the
experimenter or due to the artificiality of the setting and action. This tension is visible in existing
empirical work: for example, Kamenica and Brad (2014) sharply test for intrinsic (expressive)
motives for voting behavior, but do so in a lab setting with student subjects, using direct elicitation.
In contrast, the famous “lost letter” methodology (Milgram, 1977) elicits attitudes indirectly, but
cannot isolate intrinsic motives for holding particular attitudes.
       In this paper, we present evidence from two experiments in which we develop and implement a
methodology for identifying intrinsically-motivated, ideological political expression. We minimize
instrumental and social incentives for political expression, and elicit political attitudes in an indirect
manner to reduce concerns about unnatural behavior or experimenter demand effects.5 Our experi-
mental designs allow us to study how ideological expression responds to economic incentives—both
financial costs and the social context in which expression occurs—and to correlate our measure of
ideological expression with relevant, real-world political behavior. Our focus is the expression of
anti-American ideology in Pakistan. Although it is easy to find evidence of anti-American behavior
among some Pakistanis, it is difficult to determine whether there exists intrinsically-motivated,
ideological anti-Americanism.
       Our first experiment implementing our methodology (“Experiment 1”) was conducted in Pak-
istan in July, 2013, with 1,152 participants.6 During each experimental session, groups of Pakistani
men, aged between 18 and 35, were brought into a room where they were asked to complete a
standard “Big Five” personality survey. The intervention of interest occurred after subjects had
completed the survey, though subjects were unaware of this fact. In return for completing the
survey, study participants were offered a “bonus” payment (above a show-up fee they had received
upon arrival). Receiving the bonus payment required checking a box in a form that indicated (from
the subject’s perspective): “I gratefully thank the [funding agency] for its generosity and I accept
the bonus payment offer.” Rejecting the payment required checking a box in the same form that
indicated (again, from the subject’s perspective): “I choose not to accept the bonus payment offer.”
The experiment randomly varied three separate components of the form, at the individual level, in
a 2 × 2 × 2 design:
       The identity of the funding agency: The funding agency was either the U.S. government
or the Lahore University of Management Sciences (LUMS), a leading Pakistani university.7
       The expectation of privacy: In the “private” condition, subjects were told, “If you choose
to accept the bonus payment, your decision will be private; in order to receive this additional
   5
     Social psychologists have long been aware of problems created by experimenter demand effects (Rosenthal, 1963,
1966). Reflecting this, many studies in social psychology make use of indirect elicitation in part to avoid experimenter
demand effects (e.g., Cohen et al., 1996).
   6
     All survey personnel in the field were Pakistani, and no mention was made of the involvement of American faculty
in designing the survey and analyzing responses.
   7
     Funds for bonus payments in fact came from the (public, so government-funded) University of California or from
LUMS.



                                                           2
payment, you will simply replace the letter in envelope 2 and submit it with your other survey
materials at the end of the study, so no other participants will know your choice.” In the “public”
condition, subjects were told: “If you choose to accept the bonus payment, in order to receive this
additional payment, you will be asked to turn the letter in to the survey coordinator in the front
of the room, so other participants will see you turn in the letter.”8
    The amount of money offered: Subjects were either offered a bonus payment of 100 Pak-
istani Rupees (Rs.) or of 500 Rs.; both payments represented a sizable fraction of a day’s wage.9
    Subjects’ willingness to reject payment in order to avoid expressing gratitude to the U.S. gov-
ernment is our indicator of anti-American ideology.10 In our experiment, the “instrumental” de-
terminant of political expression is practically shut down, since accepting or rejecting the money
offer is likely to have only a trivial real-world impact.11 In the “private” condition social incen-
tives to reject payment are also practically eliminated.12 We use experimental variation in the
social visibility of the rejection decision, and in an individual’s private financial cost of rejecting
the U.S. government offer, to estimate the roles of social and financial incentives in an individual’s
expression of (anti-American) ideology. Of course, subjects may wish to reject payment for reasons
other than anti-Americanism, for example, because they do not want to feel indebted to another
party. We thus compare subjects’ rates of rejecting money from the U.S. government to rates of
rejecting money from LUMS in order to “difference out” a propensity to reject bonus payments
from a relatively neutral funder.
    A virtue of our design is our ability to elicit individuals’ ideological views in a setting in which
subjects’ awareness of the elicitation is significantly reduced compared to more direct methods of
eliciting political attitudes.13 Not only was no subject aware of the purpose of the study, but
also, the action through which individuals’ preferences were revealed appeared, from the subjects’
perspective, simply to be part of the process of receiving payment for completing the survey.
Because the choice of whether to accept the bonus payment does not appear to be of scientific
   8
     In fact, all subjects would turn in their materials in exactly the same way: all subjects turned in their envelopes
in the front of the room, and were seen doing so by other participants (as emphasized in the public condition).
But, no subject’s decision regarding the bonus payment was ever observed by any other participant, because all
survey materials were submitted inside subjects’ envelopes. The goal of the intervention was to manipulate subjects’
expectations, without telling them anything that was factually untrue in order to minimize the use of deception in
the study.
   9
     Irfan (2008) finds that in 2003–2004, the average monthly wage among Pakistani men was 4,278 Rs., or around
200 Rs. per day. Conversations with local research assistants indicated that the daily wage for a manual worker in
2013 was roughly 400–500 Rs.
  10
     Of course, “anti-American ideology” can mean different things in different contexts. Here we use the term as a
short-hand for ideological opposition to, or distaste toward, the U.S. government.
  11
     One might still be concerned about subjects’ perceptions of consequential outcomes of their decisions. We discuss
this further in Section 4.
  12
     We discuss the care taken to preserve subjects’ anonymity and privacy in Section 2.1, and also present evidence
suggesting that social concerns did not shape subjects’ rejection decisions in the “private” experimental condition in
Section 4.
  13
     The influence of the experimenter on subjects’ behavior has been shown, e.g., in Hoffman et al. (1996).



                                                           3
interest to the researcher, we are able to observe subjects’ (relatively) natural behavior, reducing
concerns about experimenter demand effects or Hawthorne effects (though these concerns are not
completely eliminated, as subjects’ choices are still made in an artificial setting).
       We find that when individuals express their ideology privately, a significant minority—around
one quarter of subjects—are willing to forgo 100 Rs. to avoid taking an action that would undermine
their ideology: checking a box and thus thanking the U.S. government for its generosity. We also
find that public expression significantly differs from private expression.
       It is not obvious ex ante what will be the effects of leading subjects to believe that their decision
to accept the payment will be observed by the other study participants. On the one hand, in a
context in which some individuals hold very strong ideological views, it is plausible that subjects
with moderate views (i.e., those who accept the payment in private) may feel pressure to reject the
payment offer. On the other hand, because those with strong ideological views are a minority, it is
conceivable that they will wish to conform to the majority around them, making them more likely
to accept the payment offer. In fact, we find that when subjects anticipate that their behavior
will be public, significantly fewer individuals reject the bonus payment—the rejection rate falls by
nearly 10 percentage points.14 This suggests that in our context, a desire to conform to the majority
behavior dominates any anticipated pressure from individuals with strong ideological views.
       Next, we find that individuals’ willingness to check the box thanking the U.S. government is
responsive to the size of the payment. While 25% of subjects are willing to forgo a 100 Rs. payment
rather than check the box indicating gratitude toward the U.S., only around 10% of subjects are
willing to forgo a 500 Rs. payment (this difference is highly statistically significant). Thus, even
among individuals with relatively extreme ideological views (i.e., willing to give up a quarter of a
day’s wage rather than check the box to accept payment), there is a “downward-sloping demand
curve” for ideological expression. Exploiting the experimental variation in prices, we are able to
estimate that the cost of publicly rejecting payment is equivalent to around 200 Rs.
       Our second experiment (“Experiment 2”) was conducted with 1,991 subjects recruited from the
area around Lahore, Pakistan, in September and October, 2015. Rather than recruit subjects into
a lab-like setting, we simplified our methodology to allow us to identify ideological preferences at
subjects’ homes, using standard household survey methods (requiring an Android tablet). Subjects
were asked to privately complete a 10-question personality survey on the Android tablet; then,
analogous to our first experiment, subjects were offered a 100 Rs. bonus payment paid for by the
U.S. government. Using the same language as in the first experiment, subjects needed to indicate
gratitude to the U.S. government to receive the payment. Importantly, subjects were provided with
  14
    In our analysis below, we present results comparing rejection rates for the U.S. government vs. LUMS as the
funding agency. The results are very similar to the raw rejection rates presented here. By differencing out LUMS
rejection rates across conditions we account for rejection for reasons other than anti-Americanism and for other
sources of private/public differences in rejection rates. In fact, LUMS rejection rates are slightly (insignificantly)
higher in the public condition than in the private condition.



                                                          4
“cover” for their choice of whether to accept or reject the payment: although experimenters paid
them directly, payment included a random component, so experimenters did not know whether sub-
jects accepted or rejected the bonus payment offer. Using a different technology, a different subject
pool, drawn from a different part of Pakistan, we find a rejection rate of 34%—a similar rejection
rate to what we found in the first experiment. This indicates that our findings in Experiment 1
have a degree of externally validity and robustness.
       In addition to this replication exercise, our second experiment allows us to match individuals’
decisions to reject the bonus payment offer with their actual political affiliation, as measured in
a previous survey. As we describe in more detail below, we find an economically and statistically
significant association between membership in the Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf (PTI) political party—
the most anti-American in Pakistan—and rejection of the bonus payment offer.
       We interpret our findings using a conceptual framework that clarifies threats to our interpreta-
tion of rejection of the U.S. bonus payment offer as an ideological political expression. In particular,
in Section 4 we explore (i) intrinsic motives for rejecting payment other than political ideology; (ii)
consequential motives for rejecting payment; and, (iii) social motives for rejecting payment. To rule
out a range of possible intrinsic motives to reject payment (e.g., social norms regarding accepting
payments), in Experiment 1, we difference out rejection of payment offers from LUMS; this does not
meaningfully affect our conclusions. In addition, responses to direct survey questions, administered
following our main intervention in Experiment 1, support our interpretation of rejection of payment
from the U.S. government as an expression of anti-American ideology. We find that individuals who
rejected the U.S. bonus payment report significantly more negative views of the U.S. government,
while individuals who rejected the U.S. payment offer are no more likely to report negative views of
the government of Japan. Regarding consequential motives for rejection, the stakes are small, and
subjects are unlikely to view their choices as “pivotal” with respect to any important policy choices.
Finally, regarding social concerns, we note that public expression in our first experiment was more
moderate suggesting that, if there were social concerns in the private condition, they would work
toward finding fewer individuals rejecting payments from the U.S. government. In addition, we
find (again following the main intervention in Experiment 1) that individuals are quite willing to
indicate distaste for the U.S. government in response to direct questions, suggesting their decisions
to reject (or accept) the payment offer were not simply the outcome of perceived intimidation.
       Most generally, our work contributes to a growing empirical literature on intrinsic, extrinsic,
and social motives for a range of behavior.15 Our experiments also contribute to a growing litera-
  15
    Intrinsic motivations for a range of behaviors have long received attention among economists, from the study of
taste-based discrimination (Becker, 1957), to the important role played by identity in shaping economic and social
choices (Akerlof and Kranton, 2000) to individuals’ response to incentives (Bénabou and Tirole, 2003) to altruism
(Andreoni, 1990). Recent empirical work on intrinsic and social motives for behavior include DellaVigna et al.
(2012), who use a field experiment to test for altruism and social pressure in charitable giving; Ariely et al. (2009),
who experimentally evaluate whether larger monetary incentives crowd out social incentives for pro-social behavior,
thus testing the theory in Bénabou and Tirole (2006); Rao (2013), who measures the extent to which students



                                                          5
ture on the measurement of sensitive attitudes.16 Our methodology contributes to these literatures
by isolating intrinsic motives for political expression, using indirect elicitation of individuals’ re-
vealed preferences. Finally, our findings contribute to a growing body of empirical evidence on, and
economic analysis of, social and political outcomes in South Asia, an area of geopolitical impor-
tance.17 We show that a significant minority of Pakistani men in our two experimental samples are
anti-American for intrinsic reasons. We find that some individuals with strongly-held ideological
views will suppress the expression of those views when the financial costs or anticipated social costs
of expression are high enough. However, the existence of intrinsically-motivated anti-Americanism
suggests that there are limits to the effects of policies focused on reducing anti-American political
expression simply by changing financial and social incentives.
    The remainder of the paper is as follows: in Section 2, we describe the implementation of, and
the results from, Experiment 1. In Section 3, we discuss Experiment 2. In Section 4, we interpret
our findings using a conceptual framework that clarifies threats to our interpretation of rejection of
the U.S. bonus payment offer as an ideological political expression. In Section 5 we offer concluding
thoughts.


2     Experiment 1
2.1     Design and Implementation
Our experiment was implemented in two stages: first, a set of pilot studies that served as a “proof
of concept” that our design could be implemented safely and successfully; then, the main study.

2.1.1    Piloting

We developed our protocol in a series of pilots. First, in November 2012, we ran a small pilot and
focus group discussion with 20 undergraduate students at the Lahore University of Management
Sciences (LUMS). Next, before running the full experiment, we ran a larger pilot study in the field
with 143 subjects. The exercise comprised 6 separate sessions, with approximately 24 subjects per
session. 71 subjects participated on June 24th, 2013, in Islamabad and 72 subjects participated on
from elite Indian schools are willing to pay a cost to avoid being paired with lower income students in a sports
competition; and, Augenblick et al. (2012), who conduct an experiment eliciting the beliefs of individuals belonging
to an apocalyptic religious group in an incentivized manner.
   16
      Warner (1965) introduced the “randomized response technique”, Raghavarao and Federer (1979) formalized the
“list experiment” (also called the “unmatched count” and the “item count technique”), and Sniderman and Piazza
(1993) provide, to our knowledge, the first example of an endorsement experiment.
   17
      Clingingsmith et al. (2009) study the impact of the Hajj pilgrimage on a broad range of attitudes among Pakista-
nis. Beath et al. (2012) study the impact of foreign aid on Afghans’ views on security and on the Afghan government,
NGO’s and foreign military forces. Delavande and Zafar (2012) experimentally analyze how Pakistanis’ attitudes
towards the U.S. are affected by provision of information about the U.S. Outside of South Asia, Corstange (2014)
finds that foreign sponsorship of a survey systematically affects response rates in Lebanon. See Gentzkow and Shapiro
(2004) for an overview of anti-Americanism in the Islamic world.


                                                          6
June 25th, 2013, in Peshawar. Anticipating the necessity of having Pakistanis conduct the main
experiment, we used the larger pilot to train our lab coordinators, allowing us to avoid the direct
involvement of any foreigners in the implementation of the main experiment.18
    Data from the pilot allowed us to refine our experimental design and to establish that we could
carry out the activity safely with minimal risk to enumerators or participants. We committed in
advance to using data from the pilot studies only for these purposes, and do not include them in
our main analysis.19

2.1.2    Timeline and Site Selection

We implemented Experiment 1 simultaneously in three cities, Peshawar, Islamabad, and Dera Ghazi
Khan, between July 7th and July 16th, 2013. We selected these dates so that half of our sessions
would be completed prior to Ramadan and half would be completed during Ramadan, which began
on July 11, 2013.20
    One objective of our project was to measure the degree of anti-Americanism among popula-
tions directly affected by the “war on terror”—this is where anti-American views are likely to be
of greatest importance.21 To access these populations, we ran our experiment in areas either di-
rectly affected by the United States-led invasion of Afghanistan (Peshawar) or in cities that have
substantial numbers of refugees from conflict-affected areas (Islamabad and Dera Ghazi Khan).22
    Peshawar and Islamabad have large Pashtun populations and Dera Ghazi Khan has a large
Balochi population, which make them especially interesting locations for the study of anti-American
attitudes. Pashtuns are an ethnic majority in Southern and Eastern Afghanistan and in Northern
and Western Pakistan. Both the Afghan and the Pakistani Taliban draw their support primarily
from Pashtuns in this region and the vast majority of the fighting related to the U.S.-led invasion of
Afghanistan has happened in predominately Pashtun areas. At the time of the study, Balochistan
was home to a very active secessionist movement, and the capital, Quetta, is home to the Quetta
Shura which is the primary faction of the Afghan Taliban. In scouting locations for our initial pilot,
we determined that direct implementation of the experiment either in rural Khyber Pakhtunhwa
or in the Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA) involved too much risk to respondents and
to enumerators, so we opted to work in urban areas with large migrant populations, which are
generally safer.
  18
     Our concern was that the elicitation of anti-American attitudes by a team including Americans would compromise
the validity of our findings.
  19
     Results were qualitatively similar (available from the authors upon request).
  20
     We do not find any differences in our results between the pre-Ramadan and Ramadan sessions.
  21
     Those individuals affected by the “war on terror” may in fact be less anti-American than other Pakistanis because
they may have fled from regions influenced or controlled by the Pakistani Taliban.
  22
     Peshawar lies between Kabul, Afghanistan, and Islamabad on the Khyber pass and is the capital of Khyber
Pakthunhwa Province (formerly Northwestern Frontier Province). Dera Ghazi Khan and Islamabad both lie close to
the provincial border of Khyber Pakthunhwa and have large migrant populations.



                                                          7
2.1.3      Subject Recruitment and Screening

We contracted with local survey firms to recruit men aged between 18 and 35 from neighborhoods
with large migrant populations in Islamabad and Peshawar. In both cities, we asked the recruiters
to target migrants from the Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA), Khyber Pakthunhwa
(KP), and Balochistan.23 In Dera Ghazi Khan, we first selected a tehsil randomly, then selected
a union council randomly, and then used a simple right-hand sampling rule to contact potential
participants. We ran 22 sessions in Peshawar, 10 sessions in Islamabad, and 16 sessions in Dera
Ghazi Khan (Appendix A1, Figure A.1, presents a map of the laboratory locations).
       Upon contacting a potential subject, recruiters asked him to read aloud a short script in order
to verify literacy, and an additional literacy test of comparable difficulty was administered when
a subject reached the study site. Potential subjects who failed either test where not allowed to
participate. Subject literacy was crucial for our experimental design, as the entire study required
subjects to comprehend printed text. Appendix A1, Figure A.2, provides Urdu translations of the
two literacy screening tasks and English translations of both literacy test scripts are reproduced in
Appendix A2.

2.1.4      Enrollment

After subjects arrived at the study site, they were directed to a waiting room, provided with
an informed consent form to read, and asked to wait until they were called to participate. We
relied on verbal informed consent to assure subjects that personally-identifiable information on
their participation and choices was not being collected. The study coordinator called subjects
to enroll one at a time; subjects then received a chit with a randomly assigned subject number,
between 1 and 24, from a research assistant.24 After receiving their number, subjects then went
to the enrollment desk outside of the laboratory (Appendix A1, Figure A.3, provides a picture of
the enrollment desk). At the desk, subjects read the second literacy script aloud, and received
a payment envelope with their subject number printed on it.25 After completing the enrollment
procedure, a research assistant led subjects into the laboratory and seated them at the individual
lab station corresponding to their subject number.
  23
     While we did not record the birth place of subjects to preserve anonymity, in these cities our recruiters drew
subjects from neighborhoods primarily populated by migrants from the Swat and Malakand agencies (agencies are
administrative units in FATA). Both of these agencies, located in FATA, have seen substantial levels of insurgent
conflict in recent years.
  24
     Individual stations were ordered sequentially by subject number inside the lab. Subject numbers were provided
in random order to reduce the chance that subjects would be acquainted with the person sitting next to them—a
concern if acquainted subjects entered the study site together, and station assignments were made in a non-random
order. In practice, a research assistant handed each subject a chit, numbered from 1 to 24, from a shuffled deck. The
number on the chit became a subject’s participant identification number.
  25
     Only one potential subject passed the first reading comprehension test but failed the second; this subject was
replaced from the pool of recruits.




                                                         8
      Lab stations consisted of a chair with a clipboard; laboratory materials were placed on the
chairs, which were positioned approximately four feet apart to prevent subjects from observing
each other’s choices (in Appendix A1, Figure A.4 provides a picture of the experiment site in
Islamabad and Figure A.5 provides a picture of the experiment site in Peshawar). We randomly
assigned survey versions to lab station numbers using a simple computer program (Appendix A1,
Figure A.6, provides the mapping between survey versions and lab stations). All sessions involved
exactly 24 subjects, resulting in a total of 1,152 men participating in the main study. After a session,
research assistants ensured that subjects exited the building; they were bussed off site immediately
and were not allowed to interact with other subjects waiting to participate in the study.

2.1.5      The Experiment

At the beginning of a session, the lab director read a set of instructions aloud. After explaining the
laboratory protocol, the instructor took the subjects through three specific example questions. Each
subject had a printed version of these questions, which were intended to familiarize subjects with
the kinds of multiple choice questions that they would have to answer in activity 1 (a personality
survey). Importantly, these instructions included no content related to politics or ideology. After
completing the instructions, the lab director took questions. The director then indicated that no
questions would be answered during the experiment, allowing subjects one final opportunity to ask
questions before the experiment commenced.26 It is important to emphasize that no details were
provided by the lab director regarding the payment process; research assistants were told to reveal
no more than that payment for completing the study would occur at the end of the session. To
increase subjects’ confidence that they would be paid, subjects were provided their show-up fee of
300 Rupees when they began the first activity in the study.
      The experiment involved four separate activities, each of which required completing a form
contained in a separate envelope, numbered in order. These materials are reproduced completely
in Appendix A2. Upon completion of an activity, subjects were instructed to close their envelope
and place it below their chair before proceeding. Furthermore, they were told not to return to
previously completed activities, and that subjects who did not comply would be asked to leave.
The primary purpose of strictly disallowing participants from returning to previous activities was
to ensure that they could not change their responses in the revealed preference activity (activity 2)
after completing the stated preference activity (activity 4).
      When all subjects had completed the four activities, the lab director and research assistant
collected all laboratory materials except for subjects’ chits, which subjects had received upon
enrollment. The envelopes (on which were written subjects’ participant identification numbers)
were taken into a separate room with the laboratory materials for the calculation of payments for
 26
      We disallowed questions because we did not want subjects’ inquiries to contaminate the research design.




                                                          9
each subject. Payments were placed in envelopes, which were then exchanged for the chits handed
out to subjects at the beginning of the session.

Activity 1

The experiment began as a standard personality survey which was contained in envelope 1 along
with subjects’ “show up” payment. In addition to a few demographic questions, participants
completed a Big 5 personality assessment. The version of the Big 5 assessment used by our team was
adapted to use in Pakistan and validated by psychologists at the National Institute of Psychology
at Quaid-i-Azam University.

Activity 2

After completing the survey, subjects opened the second envelope. This envelope contained an offer
of an additional payment (above that for showing up) in return for checking a box on a letter to the
funding agency. Checking the box indicated acceptance of the payment and gratitude to the agency
for providing funding. This activity measures whether respondents are differentially willing to forgo
a payment, depending on the funder (U.S. government or the Lahore University of Management
Sciences), the amount of the payment (100 Rupees or 500 Rupees), and respondents’ perception
of whether the payment would be public or private. Specifically, envelope 2 contained a piece of
paper with the following information printed on it (italics indicate text that varied depending on
the experimental condition, with slashes dividing the conditions):


“Thank you for completing the survey. In return for completing the survey, we can offer you a
bonus payment. Funding for the bonus payment comes from {Lahore University of Management
Sciences / the U.S. government}. We can pay you {100 Rupees / 500 Rupees} for completing the
survey, but in order to receive the bonus payment you are required to acknowledge receipt of the
funds provided by {Lahore University of Management Sciences / the U.S. government} and thank
the funder. If you choose not to accept the payment, you will forgo the bonus payment of {100
Rupees / 500 Rupees}, but not the payment of 300 Rs. for your participation.”


After this passage, in half of the forms, the language emphasized that subjects’ choices would
be private, while in the other half, the language implied that subjects’ choices to accept the bonus
payment would be observed by other subjects, as follows:


“If you choose to accept the bonus payment, {∅ / your decision will be private;} in order
to receive this additional payment, {you will be asked to turn the letter in to the survey coordinator
in the front of the room, so other participants will see you turn in the letter / you will simply re-



                                                   10
place the letter in envelope 2 and submit it with your other survey materials at the end of the study,
so no other participants will know your choice}. Once you have made your decision on the next
page, please place the letter into envelope 2, whether or not you chose to accept the bonus payment.”


In addition to the sheet of paper with instructions, envelope 2 contained the bonus payment ac-
ceptance/rejection letter, with the following options:


    I gratefully thank {Lahore University of Management Sciences / the U.S. government} for
its generosity and I accept the bonus payment offer.
    I choose not to accept the bonus payment offer.


   It is worth noting that to ensure the safety of participants, in practice, no subject’s choice of
whether to accept the bonus payment was actually public. All participants turned their accep-
tance/rejection letter in to the survey coordinator at the front of the room, having replaced their
letter into envelope 2, and submitting it with the other survey materials (note that we aimed to
minimize the use of deception by not providing false information about what would be required of
participants, as the language in both “public” and “private” conditions was literally true). The lan-
guage in the “public” treatment arm was designed to suggest that the decision to accept the bonus
payment would not be private, but subjects in the “public” condition still may have expected their
decision to be private because they knew that the letter would be enclosed in an envelope. Because
we can only imperfectly manipulate expectations of privacy, we view this exercise as providing a
lower bound estimate of the effect of making the decision to accept the bonus payment public.

Activity 3

In activity 3, participants filled out a self-response survey that began by asking subjects to guess
how many of the other participants where willing to accept the bonus payment. This question was
incentivized: subjects were informed that the three individuals who guessed closest to the actual
number would receive an additional 300 Rupees. Next, the survey collected information on the
number of other participants the respondent knew.
   We then ran a “list experiment,” a method used to measure attitudes toward sensitive topics.
List experiments provide individual respondents with some degree of plausible deniability (“cover”)
for their expression of an unpopular, embarrassing, or stigmatized view, and thus increase the
likelihood that such expression will occur (though truthful expression is not incentivized).
   The list experiment works as follows: first, respondents are (randomly) assigned either into
a control group or to one or more treatment groups. Subjects in all conditions are asked to
indicate the number of policy positions they support from a list of positions on several issues.
Support for any particular policy position is never indicated, only the total number of positions


                                                 11
articulated on the list that a subject supports. In the control condition, the list includes a set of
contentious, but not stigmatized, policy positions. In the treatment condition, the list includes
the contentious policy positions from the control list, but also adds the policy position of interest,
which is stigmatized. The degree of support for the stigmatized position at the population level
is determined by comparing the average number of issues supported in the treatment and control
conditions.
       In our study, we randomly assigned our subjects to a control group or to one of two treatment
groups, with each group containing 384 subjects. In the control condition, we asked respondents:


The following are four policies some government officials express support for. Please report HOW
MANY of the four you support. You do not need to indicate which ones you support, just how
many.

       • Providing the poor with free electricity generators

       • Establishing an independent state in Kashmir that is not part of India and not part of Pakistan

       • Ensuring that civilians (President or Prime Minister) control the military

       • Reducing the number of people eligible for the Benazir Income Support Program, but in-
         creasing payments to those eligible.27

       In the treatment conditions, subjects were asked a question that is identical other than the
inclusion of an additional stigmatized item. In the first treatment group (the “U.S. aid list”), we
added the policy position:

       • refusing humanitarian aid from the U.S. government.

       In the second treatment group (the “PTI list”), we added the position:

       • supporting the activities of Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf (PTI).28

Activity 4

Envelope 4 contained another survey, which asked subjects direct questions to elicit their stated
preference support for: (i) aid provided by the Japanese government to Pakistan; (ii) the Japanese
government overall; (iii) aid provided by the United States; and (iv) the United States government
overall. We also asked a question regarding willingness to take risk using a simple Likert scale
approach; we asked about subjects’ political awareness; and, about their support for Japan and the
U.S. relative to other subjects in the room.
  27
    The Benazir Income Support Program is a popular targeted, unconditional cash transfer program.
  28
    PTI is the most anti-American of the major parties in Pakistan. Support for a party known for its anti-American
stance was a natural policy position reflecting anti-American attitudes for us to include in the list experiment.


                                                        12
Payments

When all subjects had completed the survey, they were asked to come, in order of their subject
number, to the front of the room. They gave their payment envelope and materials packet to the
session coordinator and were asked to return to their seat to await payment. After collecting all 24
packets, two research assistants went into a separate room and calculated total subject payments.
The payments were sealed in an envelope, with the cash payments wrapped in a thick debriefing
handout so that subjects could not tell how much each had been paid. This was important to
ensure that subjects could not be identified as having accepted a bonus payment offer based on the
thickness of the payment envelope.
   Subjects were then called to the front of the room, were paid by providing their chit with the
subject number on it in exchange for the payment, and were sent out of the lab into a waiting
bus—there were no opportunities for subjects who had completed the study to communicate with
subjects who had not yet participated. As soon as all subjects were paid and had exited, the
subsequent session began immediately.

2.2     Empirical Analysis
This section presents our core empirical results from Experiment 1. We first present descriptive
data on our sample and study individuals’ private ideological expression. Next, we explore the role
of social incentives by examining differences in rejection rates between subjects in the private and
public conditions. Then, we study the sensitivity of private ideological expression to the size of the
payment offer. Finally, we use the experimental variation in the financial cost of political expression
to estimate the cost, in monetary terms, of expressing anti-American attitudes in public, and to
estimate the share of subjects who would reject very small bonus payment offers.

2.2.1    Sample Characteristics and Balance Across Conditions

Table 1, column 1, presents the characteristics of our experimental sample. One can see that all of
our participants were men, which was by design. In addition, participants were, on average, young
and relatively well-educated. The latter is again by design, as literacy was required to implement
our study. Around one half of the subjects were engaged in some economic activity at the time of
the study. Around two-thirds of subjects were Pashtun, 10 percent Punjabi, and another 10 percent
Baloch. The bottom row of Table 1 displays the sample sizes in each treatment cell, and columns
2–9 of Table 1 present the characteristics of subjects across experimental conditions. We find that
respondent characteristics, including demographics, education levels, and Big 5 personality traits
are balanced across conditions (see Table 1, column 10).




                                                  13
2.2.2      Ideological Political Expression

We begin by examining rejection rates among subjects offered the 100 Rupees bonus payment in
the “private” condition. We find that 25.2% of subjects offered the 100 Rupees bonus payment
from the U.S. government in the private condition choose to reject it. Of course, it might be the
case that some of these subjects would have rejected money from any funding agency, not only from
the U.S. government. In order to account for this possibility, we can difference out the rejection
rate among subjects offered 100 Rupees from LUMS, in the private condition: in this group, only
8.4% of individuals chose to reject the payment. We subtract this fraction from the overall rate of
rejection of the U.S. government offer to estimate that the proportion of subjects who rejected the
U.S. offer, but would have accepted an offer from LUMS, is 16.8% (the p-value from a test that
this difference equals zero is <0.001).
       Note that 16.8% may represent a lower bound for the fraction of people who are anti-American,
as some of those who rejected the LUMS offer might be anti-American as well. Indeed, LUMS
has an international orientation, and is patterned after universities in the United States. Given
this, subjects may associate LUMS with the United States, biasing our results toward finding less
anti-Americanism when we compare U.S. government offer rejection rates to LUMS offer rejection
rates. Of course, if subjects would have rejected payment from any government, then this would
also result in higher rejection rates for the U.S. government offer than the LUMS offer. We explore
whether attitudes toward foreign governments in general might drive our results in Section 4, below.
       Table 2, column 1, reports these rejection rates in a regression framework: for subjects who
received the 100 Rs. offer in the private condition, we simply regress a rejection dummy variable
on a U.S. government donor dummy. Column 2 reports coefficients from the same regression, but
including session fixed effects. Column 3 reports coefficients from a regression including session fixed
effects and controls for the variables presented in Table 1.29 The estimated treatment effects—i.e.,
the significantly greater rejection of the bonus payment offered by the U.S. government—remain
virtually unchanged, suggesting that the implementation of the laboratory protocol across rounds
and experimental sites was successful.30

2.2.3      The Role of Social Context

We next investigate a second dimension of randomization incorporated into our design: variation in
subjects’ perceptions of whether their choice to accept the bonus payment offer would be publicly
observed by other participants at the end of the session. Examining the raw rejection rates across
conditions, we find that the proportion of subjects who rejected the 100 Rs. U.S. government offer
  29
      Table 2 presents robust standard errors. We have also estimated all of the specifications presented in the paper
with standard errors clustered at the level of the experimental session. Results are extremely similar and are available
from the authors upon request.
   30
      Implementation is of special concern in our study: as outsiders (including the co-author from Eastern Pakistan),
our presence could have affected subjects’ behavior, preventing us from directly monitoring the experiment.


                                                          14
in the public condition was 8.2 percentage points lower than in the private condition (the p-value
from a test that rejection rates in the public and private conditions are the same is 0.093).
   Of course, subjects’ decisions of whether to accept the bonus payment offer might differ between
the public and private conditions even in the absence of any effect of the social environment on
the expression of political ideology, per se. For example, one may be less likely to reject the bonus
payment offer in the public condition out of concern that one will appear ungrateful or foolish.
One might also be less likely to reject payment in public if one worried about family members’
displeasure if they discovered that a financial payment was forgone. On the other hand, one may
be more likely to reject the payment offer in the public condition if one were concerned about being
publicly identified as having just received a large payment. These effects of the public condition in
our study would exist irrespective of the identity of the funding agency.
   We study these effects of the public condition on rejection rates by considering the public versus
private difference in rejection rates for subjects who received a 100 Rs. offer from LUMS. In fact,
the difference between the public and private rejection rates of the 100 Rs. LUMS offer was quite
small—an increase in rejection of 2.7 percentage points—and not statistically significant (p=0.439).
The higher rejection rates in public for the LUMS offer suggests that the lower public rejection
rates we found for the U.S. offer were not a result of a general reduction in rejection rates when
choices are made publicly.
   To isolate the effect of (anticipated) public expression on the willingness to express political
ideology, we calculate the public versus private difference in rejection rates of the U.S. offer, after
differencing out the public and private rejection rates for the LUMS offer. We now estimate a
10.9 percentage point lower rejection rate for the U.S. government offer in the public condition
compared to the private condition (the p-value of the difference is 0.069). We present the effects of
(anticipated) public expression on subjects’ willingness to reject the bonus payment in a regression
framework in Table 3. In column 1, we present coefficients from a regression of a rejection dummy
variable on the interaction of a public condition dummy and a U.S. government donor dummy,
as well as the main effects of the public dummy and the U.S. government donor dummy—this
reproduces the raw differences just described. Column 2 adds session fixed effects to the specification
in column 1, and column 3 includes session fixed effects and subject covariates—the estimated
differences across conditions are qualitatively unchanged.
   Across specifications, our results indicate that social context affects the expression of ideological
positions. Moreover, the direction of the effect of anticipated social incentives, in the context of
our study, is toward moderation: fewer subjects rejected the U.S. offer when they believed their
choice would be made public to other participants.
   An important consideration when evaluating our estimated effects of social incentives is whether
these effects are consistent with subjects’ beliefs about the views of the other subjects around them.
For example, if anti-American subjects moderated the public expression of their political views out


                                                  15
of a desire to conform to the (perceived) majority attitude, then it should be the case that these
subjects correctly perceived that they were in the minority.
       To measure subjects’ beliefs about other subjects’ willingness to accept the bonus payment,
we included additional components in the study after the decision of whether to accept the bonus
payment offer. The third envelope in the experiment (immediately after the bonus payment offer)
included an incentivized elicitation of individuals’ beliefs about the number of other participants
in the room (from 0 to 23) who accepted the bonus payment offer (all sessions included exactly 24
participants). Among respondents who received the 100 Rs. offer from the U.S. government, in the
private condition, the average guess was that 80% (median 95.6%) of other participants in the room
accepted the payment offer. Thus, subjects correctly believed that the majority of others would
choose in private to accept the money from the U.S. government. Importantly, respondents who
rejected the U.S. government offer correctly viewed themselves as belonging to a minority: among
respondents who rejected the 100 Rs. U.S. government offer in private, the average guess was that
62.3% (median 87%) of other respondents accepted the offer.
       We also directly elicited subjects’ views of the individuals around them: in the fourth (and
final) envelope, subjects were directly asked to compare their views to those of others in the room
regarding: (i) the U.S. government; and (ii) accepting U.S. aid. Among those who accepted the “100
Rs.-private-U.S. donor” payment, 17% of subjects viewed themselves as more anti-U.S. government
than the other respondents in the room; among those who rejected that offer, that number rose to
57.2%.31 Moreover, only 14.3% of respondents rejecting the offer report viewing others in the room
as more anti-American than themselves.32
       The results we find in our analysis of the exercises contained in envelopes 3 and 4 paint a consis-
tent picture: rejectors of the U.S. government bonus payment offer believed that a majority of the
other subjects would accept the payment, and also self-identified as belonging to an anti-American
minority. Interestingly, we find that those individuals who have the highest “agreeableness” score
in the Big 5 personality survey also exhibit the largest reduction in rejection rates when they an-
ticipate their choice will be public (results available from the authors upon request). Our results
are thus consistent with anti-American individuals anticipating a (net) social cost when express-
ing their ideology publicly.33 Of course, ex ante, one might have hypothesized that a minority
of extremists might have pressured moderate individuals to express more anti-American attitudes
  31
      Admittedly, one worries that this elicitation is affected by subjects’ decisions regarding the bonus payment, so it
is best viewed as a suggestive complement to the incentivized estimates of other subjects’ behavior.
   32
      When we look at views on accepting U.S. aid, the numbers are very similar: among those who accepted the offer,
18.2% view themselves as more likely to refuse U.S. aid, whereas the percentage is 58.3% among those who reject the
money offer (and only 16.6% of those rejecting the offer view themselves as less likely to refuse U.S. aid than others
in the room).
   33
      Individuals’ desire to signal “conforming” behavior might also help explain the change in rejection rates between
the private and public 100 Rs. conditions. This is analogous to the analysis in Bénabou and Tirole (2006) and the
findings of Ariely et al. (2009). In the 500 Rs. condition, however, there is little signal value of accepting the payment;
indeed, we find very little change in the rejection rates between the private and public 500 Rs. conditions.



                                                            16
in public. While this might occur in some settings, our findings of moderating effects of public
expression are of interest given the theoretical ambiguity.
       Finally, we consider the (non-random) variation in social context arising from respondents’
familiarity with each other from previous interactions outside the study. In the third envelope,
we included a question asking subjects how many people they knew in the room.34 Nearly 60%
of respondents reported knowing at least one other person, suggesting that although the study
occurred in an artificial setting, some of the social connections in the room were natural. We find
that the impact of social incentives on an individual’s ideological expression positively varies with
that individual’s familiarity with others in the room, and that the moderating effect of the public
condition on ideological expression is largest among individuals knowing most of the participants
in the session.

2.2.4      Sensitivity of Political Expression to Payment Size

We next ask: how sensitive is the expression of ideology to the financial cost of that expression?
To answer this question, we exploit the random assignment of bonus payments of 500 Rs., rather
than 100 Rs., to half of the study’s subjects. We find that the rejection rate of the 500 Rs. U.S.
government offer (in the private condition) is just 9.7%. This is a decline in the rejection rate of
15.5 percentage points, from 25.2% to 9.7% (p=0.001), relative to 100 Rs. private condition offer
from the U.S. government.
       Examining subjects’ rejection of the LUMS bonus payment offer, we find a 2.8 percentage point
reduction in rejection rates comparing the (private) 100 Rs. and 500 Rs. offers. Differencing out
the change in the LUMS rejection rate across bonus payment size conditions, we find a reduction
in rejection of the U.S. government offer of 12.7 percentage points (p=0.0128).
       As above, we can examine these differences in a regression framework. In Table 4, we report
the coefficients from regressions of a rejection dummy on the interaction of a high payment dummy
and a U.S. government donor dummy, as well as main effects of the high payment dummy and the
U.S. government donor dummy. Column 1 reports coefficients from a regression without controls;
column 2 reports coefficients of a regression using session fixed effects. Column 3 reports coefficients
of a regression including session fixed effects and a set of subject covariates. Across specifications,
the regression results match the raw differences.

2.2.5      Additional Analyses

We can exploit the experimental variation in prices to estimate several additional parameters of
interest. First, one might wish to estimate the financial cost equivalent to the social cost of public
  34
    Subjects were asked to pick from 5 categories: no other participant; between 1 and 6 other participants; between
7 and 12; between 13 and 18; and, between 19 and 23. This was asked just after subjects estimated the number of
other subjects who accepted the bonus payment.


                                                        17
expression found above. To do so, we assume a functional form for the relationship between the size
of the private, U.S. government bonus payment offer and the rejection rate. Then, we estimate the
financial cost of rejection that would produce the rejection rate we observed above in the 100 Rs.,
public U.S. government, condition. The difference between this amount and 100 Rs. is our estimate
of the financial equivalent to the social cost faced by individuals offered the bonus payment from
the U.S. government in the public condition.
   We first assume that the relationship between rejection and the cost of rejection (i.e., the bonus
payment size) is linear. In this case, we estimate that the social cost of rejecting the U.S. government
offer is 211 Rs. If we instead assume that there is a logistic relationship between rejection and the
size of the bonus payment, we find estimate that the social cost of rejecting the bonus payment
publicly is around 180 Rs.
   One might also be interested in individuals’ private expressions of anti-American attitudes when
the cost of expression is arbitrarily low. This will allow for a more direct comparison with the list
experiment responses, which come at no cost (we turn to this below). We thus predict private
rejection rates of the U.S. offer at price zero, exploiting the experimental variation we observe
between 100 Rs. and 500 Rs. Assuming a linear relationship between expression and cost, the
private rejection rate of the U.S. offer would be 29% at price zero. Assuming a logistic functional
form, the estimated rejection rate at price zero is 31%.
   Finally, we take an initial approach to “validate” our methodology using the results from the list
experiments conducted in activity 3. It is important to emphasize that the list experiments were
conducted after our intervention of interest. Because simply receiving the U.S. government bonus
payment offer may have directly affected stated attitudes toward the U.S., in our analysis of the list
experiments we focus on individuals who received the LUMS bonus payment offer. Note that the
attitudes expressed in the list experiments are somewhat conceptually distinct from our estimates
of ideological anti-Americanism: one might report opposition to foreign aid (or in favor of the PTI)
for reasons unrelated to ideology. However, we believe it is a useful check that the magnitudes we
estimate for ideological anti-Americanism roughly correspond to expressed anti-Americanism when
cover is provided for expressing anti-American views.
   Among subjects receiving the LUMS offer, we estimate that 22% of subjects indicate support
for, “refusing humanitarian aid from the U.S. government,” and that 55.1% indicate support for,
“supporting the activities of Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf (PTI),” the most anti-American of the major
parties in Pakistan. Thus, our estimate of intrinsically-motivated anti-Americanism in the sample
lies between the two list experiment results. This seems reasonable: some individuals who are
broadly anti-American may not oppose American aid for consequential reasons; some individuals
who support the PTI party may do so for reasons other than being ideologically anti-American.




                                                  18
3         Experiment 2
3.1        Design and Implementation
Between September 19 and October 21, 2015, we ran a second experiment in a new location: the
areas surrounding Lahore. This experiment allows us to: (i) address questions about replicabil-
ity and external validity; (ii) test whether our methodology can be implemented not only in a
group/laboratory setting, but also in a door-to-door survey; and, (iii) link rejection of bonus pay-
ment offers to individuals’ actual political party affiliations. Experiment 2 was implemented in two
stages, which appeared, from a subject’s perspective, to be unrelated, and which were conducted
by two different survey teams. In the first stage, a door-to-door survey measured subjects’ political
affiliations; in the second stage, a tablet-based experiment (again based on door-to-door recruiting)
elicited intrinsic anti-American ideology.35

3.1.1        Context

Experiment 2 was implemented in the lead up to the first election under a new local government
system in Punjab, Pakistan. Elections for local government bodies were held in Lahore ten days
after the conclusion of our experiment, on October 31, 2015, with the two largest parties in Pak-
istan, Pakistan Muslim League (Nawaz League), or PML-N, and Pakistan Tehreek-i-Insaf, or PTI,
expected to have a competitive contest. Experiment 2 was thus conducted in an environment where
politics was a salient issue.
         PML-N is a party typically associated with large-scale infrastructure programs. The party has
invested heavily in transport and road development projects, particularly in the provincial capital
Lahore, where we conducted our experiment. PML-N refers to infrastructure spending as the
‘hallmark priority for PML(N)’ in its party manifesto.36
         PTI, in contrast, contested the 2013 elections on a strong anti-corruption and anti-American
(put in terms of anti-“war on terror”) platform. Of particular interest to us is its anti-American
stance, which is repeatedly mentioned in its party manifesto. The manifesto argues that Pakistan
should “not fight others’ wars or act as a surrogate for power. [Pakistan] has been subjected to the
will of external powers with the most recent involvement in the U.S.-led war on terror which has
created polarized and often violent cleavages within Pakistan’s polity [. . . ] Nothing symbolizes this
more accurately than the U.S. imposed war on terror which has degenerated into a war of terror
for ordinary Pakistanis.”37
    35
     A pilot study preceding these stages allowed us to refine our experimental design and to establish that we could
carry out the activities safely, with minimal risk to enumerators and participants.
  36
     See page 13 at http://www.pmo.gov.pk/documents/manifesto.pdf, last accessed January 26, 2018.
  37
     PTI Manifesto, 2013 http://www.scribd.com/doc/134950996/PTI-Manifesto-2013, last accessed January 25,
2016.




                                                         19
3.1.2      Timeline and Site Selection

The experiment was conducted in four neighborhoods of the city of Lahore between September
19th and October 21st, 2015, with the first stage running through October 6th, and the second
stage starting on October 8th. The neighborhoods were selected according to two criteria: first,
they needed to have large enough populations to provide a sample size of around 2,000 people in
the first stage of fieldwork.38 Second, they needed to be areas with mixed political affiliations, to
provide variation in support for the anti-American, PTI party. Using these criteria to guide us, we
conducted fieldwork in Bara Sanda, Chungi Amar Sidu, Shalimar Bagh and Bakr Mandi.

3.1.3      Subject Recruitment and Screening

We contracted the same local survey firm as in Experiment 1 to recruit men aged between 18 and
35 from the targeted neighborhoods.39 The survey firm employed a strict protocol to ensure that
from the perspective of respondents, the two stages of the experiment would appear unrelated. In
addition to using different sets of field enumerators in the two stages, and using different methods
of collecting answers (paper vs. tablets, as discussed below), different survey company names were
used in the two stages. In the first stage, enumerators introduced themselves as belonging to the
survey company SEDCO (Socio Economic Development Concerns) Associates, while in the second
stage, the new enumerators said that they were from DCS (Development Consultancy Services).
Both companies are owned and run by the same organization in Islamabad—as in Experiment 1,
we attempted to minimize our use of deception.
       Upon engaging a potential household for the first stage of the intervention, enumerators inquired
about the presence of men between the ages of 18 and 35 in the household. If there was no one
suitable, that household was skipped and the next household was engaged. If a suitable subject
did reside in the house, but was not available, the enumerators made a return visit to interview the
person later the same day.40 Once a proper respondent was identified and available, enumerators
introduced the study, followed by an exercise to gauge literacy (which was necessary for participation
in stage 2 of the experiment). In the exercise, enumerators handed the respondents an envelope
that contained a single sheet of paper that allowed respondents to write a few brief comments to
the Election Commission of Pakistan regarding the upcoming local bodies election in Lahore. If
the respondents responded they were not literate, or if the enumerator observed that they were
not literate, the interview was concluded and the next household was approached for a suitable
  38
     We aimed to match a total of 1,200 subjects between the two stages; assuming some unsuccessful attempts to
match, we aimed to reach 2,000 respondents in stage 1.
  39
     In both stages, each neighborhood team was headed by a field supervisor who managed four enumerators. Prior
to beginning fieldwork, the supervisors canvassed the neighborhoods and drew paper-based maps of the lanes and
households. Enumerators were then assigned lanes that they were individually responsible for covering. Households
only interacted with enumerators, who reported separately to the supervisors.
  40
     If more than one one suitable man resided in the household, the youngest was selected to be part of the study.



                                                        20
respondent.
      The second stage of the experiment was a modified version of Experiment 1, but rather than
elicit anti-American ideology in a centralized experimental setting, stage 2 of Experiment 2 was
conduced at subjects’ houses, on an Android tablet. The major recruitment challenge was to
conduct stage 2 with the same respondents in the same households as in the first stage. To ensure
that this would be possible, field supervisors kept detailed maps of the neighborhoods for which
they were responsible, along with using form IDs, and other information noted on the survey
questionnaire from the first stage to assist in matching.
      Over the course of the fieldwork in the first stage, enumerators approached 4,000 households,
of which 1,530 households did not have a suitable respondent, 479 had a suitable respondent, but
refused to be interviewed. In total, 1,991 households were successfully interviewed during the first
stage of the intervention. The field team was instructed to match households from stage 1 with
a targeted sample of 1,200 subjects for stage 2. In recruiting for the second stage, 1,674 of the
1,991 households were approached, of which 410 respondents were not available at home and 52
refused the survey. This produced a sample of 1,212 respondents who participated in both stages
Experiment 2. As we show below, the respondents successfully contacted and matched during stage
2 are representative of the full sample of respondents in stage 1.

3.1.4      The Experiment

The fist stage of Experiment 2 simply involved a five-minute survey at the subject’s doorstep.41
After checking for subjects’ literacy using the exercise described above, enumerators asked a series
of questions regarding two major parties: PML-N and PTI. In particular, enumerators asked which
of the two parties respondents believed to be more anti-American, and whether respondents were
members of either party.
      The second stage was modeled after the design in Experiment 1, but modified to allow surveyors
to conduct the study at subjects’ homes using Android tablets. Subjects were asked to (privately)
complete a brief ten-question personality survey. Following this survey, half of the subjects were
randomly assigned to be asked direct questions about their views on the U.S. government and U.S.
government aid to Pakistan (we call this the stated-preference condition). The ideology of the other
half of the subjects was elicited using the methodology developed in Experiment 1 (we call this the
revealed-preference condition).
      Payment in the two conditions was as follows. In the stated-preference condition, subjects
were paid 100 Rs. guaranteed as participation payment. Subjects were told that in addition to
the participation payment, a lottery would determine whether they would receive a payment of
up to 200 Rs. (in practice, the additional payment amount was drawn from a lottery assigning
equal probabilities to the amounts of 0 Rs., 100 Rs., or 200 Rs.). This means that subjects in the
 41
      All of the study materials for both stages are reproduced in Appendix A2.


                                                         21
stated-preference condition could receive 100 Rs., 200 Rs., or 300 Rs. from participating in the
study.
   In the revealed-preference condition, there was also a 100 Rs. participation payment, as well
as the possibility of additional payment to be determined via lottery. In this condition, the lottery
amount payment was up to 100 Rs. (in practice, the additional payment amount was drawn from
a lottery assigning equal probabilities to the amounts of 0 Rs. or 100 Rs.). In addition to the
participation payment and the lottery bonus, subjects in the revealed-preference condition were
offered a bonus payment from the U.S. government, just as in the private condition of Experiment
1. As in Experiment 1, subjects were asked to check a box indicating whether they accepted or
rejected the bonus payment offer, with the language associated with the two check box options
identical to that in Experiment 1. In total, subjects in the revealed-preference condition who
accepted the U.S. government offer could receive 200 Rs. or 300 Rs., while those who rejected the
offer could receive 100 Rs. or 200 Rs.
   We designed the lottery component of subjects’ payment to provide “cover” for a subject’s
choice of whether to accept the bonus payment offer. At the end of the survey, regardless of the
treatment condition, a screen simply told the enumerator the total amount of money the subject
should receive. Enumerators would pay the subject without knowing the treatment condition or the
lottery payment outcome. Thus, regardless of subjects’ choice to accept or reject the bonus payment
offer, the survey enumerator who paid the subject would be unaware of whether the subject was
even offered a payment from the U.S. government, let alone whether the subject accepted the
payment.
   Of course, subjects were not provided with complete information about the experimental design;
thus, it is important to examine the issue of “cover” from the perspective of subjects in the revealed-
preference condition. It is important to note that subjects in the revealed-preference condition were
informed that due to funding constraints, only half of subjects were offered the bonus payment from
the U.S. government. Now, consider a subject who rejected the bonus payment: he would either
receive 100 Rs. or 200 Rs., depending on the outcome of the lottery payment. Because the subject
was informed that some individuals did not receive the bonus payment offer, he should have been
aware that a payment of 100 Rs. might simply result from an individual not receiving the U.S.
offer, and having bad luck in the lottery. A payment of 200 Rs. might result from an individual not
receiving the U.S. bonus payment offer, or from an individual accepting the bonus payment, then
winning 100 Rs. in the lottery. Thus, we feel that subjects who chose to reject the bonus payment
should have done so perceiving little to no pressure from the enumerator.
   Next consider a subject who accepted the bonus payment: he would either receive 200 Rs. or
300 Rs., depending on the outcome of the payment lottery. If the subject received 200 Rs., this
could have come resulted from a choice to reject the payment, plus winning 100 Rs. in the lottery.
However, if the subject ended up with a payment of 300 Rs., the subject might believe that the


                                                  22
enumerator would be certain that he accepted the payment (subjects in the revealed-preference
condition were not aware that individuals in the stated-preference condition had their payment
determined by a lottery with a 200 Rs. top payoff). This raises an important concern: our design
offered subjects perfect cover for their choice of whether to accept the U.S. bonus payment offer;
however, the design only provided imperfect perceived cover if subjects accepted the offer.
   How might (perceived) imperfect cover have affected subjects decisions of whether to accept
the U.S. offer? In Experiment 1, we find that anticipated public expression pushed subjects in
the direction of accepting the bonus payment—this suggests that (perceived) social pressure would
be of greater concern if rejection did not have cover. However, it is possible that some subjects
wanted to accept the offer, anticipated pressure to reject it, and perceived a lack of cover for the
choice to accept the payment. In this case, we would have a higher rejection rate than we would
observe in the complete absence of perceived social pressure. Note that this mis-measurement of
some subjects’ ideology would weaken any association between revealed ideological preferences and
subjects’ party membership.

3.2     Empirical Analysis
3.2.1    Sample Characteristics and Balance Across Conditions

Table 6 presents the mean characteristics of the sample from the two stages of Experiment 2, with
the stage 2 sample the subset of the stage 1 subjects whom were included in both stages. Table
6, column 1 presents the mean values of the same variables in Experiment 1, for comparison. By
looking at Table 6, columns 1–3, one can see that, relative to respondents in Experiment 1, subjects
in Experiment 2 are older (26 vs. 24), less likely to be single (50% vs. 69%), less educated (10 vs.
12 years of education), and more likely to be engaged in an economic activity (80% vs. 50%). This
indicates that the two samples of young men are somewhat different, besides being drawn from
different regions of the country.
   Comparing Table 6, columns 2 and 3, one can observe that there is no evidence of selection into
being included in both stages of the second experiment (p-values reported in Table 6, column 6).
Finally, Table 6, columns 4–5 indicate that the randomization into two treatments in the second
stage of Experiment 2 was successful (p-values in Table 6, column 7).

3.2.2    Replicating Experiment 1

In the second stage of Experiment 2, we find that 34% of the respondents rejected the 100 Rs.,
(private) bonus payment offer from the U.S. government. This number is quite similar to the
rejection rate we observed in the 100 Rs., private condition in Experiment 1. This result is valuable
both for establishing some degree of external validity of our original finding, and for testing the
robustness of our elicitation methodology: it is worth emphasizing that the results in Experiment


                                                 23
2 were found in a different part of Pakistan, with a different sample frame, and a different data
collection method.

3.2.3     Association with Real-world Behavior

By linking respondents’ answers across stages of Experiment 2, we can correlate party membership
collected in stage 1 with U.S. government offer rejection rates from stage 2. To focus on the po-
litically informed and engaged subset of the sample, we examine respondents who consider PTI to
be the more anti-American of the two parties and who planned to vote in the upcoming elections.
Among these respondents, the PTI membership rate was 3% among the 177 individuals who ac-
cepted the offer and 8% among the 89 individuals who rejected it (the p-value of the difference is
0.108). (Alternatively, the rejection rate of the 100 Rs. U.S. offer was 32% among non-members
of the PTI party, while it was 58% for those who were members of the party—the p-value of this
difference is 0.075.) Interestingly, when we examine the correlation between party membership and
stated views about the U.S. government or U.S. humanitarian aid, we find a negative correlation.
This might result from stated preferences providing a noisy signal or possibly from greater sensi-
tivity among PTI members in expressing anti-American attitudes in response to direct questions
without any “cover” provided.


4     Discussion
4.1     Conceptual Framework
We next develop a conceptual framework that clarifies the threats to our interpretation of rejection
of the bonus payment offer from the U.S. government as an ideological political expression. Suppose
that individual j derives utility from rejecting payment through three channels. First, rejecting
payment may provide an individual with utility for instrumental reasons; that is, because expression
changes the world (for individual j or for others) in ways that bring individual j utility. Second,
individual j might derive utility from rejecting the payment for intrinsic reasons: these include
ideology, but can also include other intrinsic reasons to reject payment. Finally, when rejection
of the payment is (anticipated to be) observed by others, it might differentially provide utility (or
disutility) for social reasons.
    In the context of our experiments, these three elements can be enumerated as follows:

    • Consequential utility concerns of individual j are the financial consequences we impose, Cj
        (the money forgone when the bonus payment is rejected), plus any other utility-relevant
        outcomes a subject anticipates, cj (e.g., a utility gain from taking money from the U.S.
        government).



                                                 24
   • Social utility concerns of individual j are those that are generated by our public condition in
        Experiment 1, Sj , plus any other considerations that also exist in the private condition, sj .

   • Intrinsic utility concerns of individual j are ideological motives, Ij , and other intrinsic motives
        for rejecting payment, ij (for example, one might feel guilty accepting additional payment for
        participation beyond the promised show-up fee).

   An idealized view of our methodology is that in the private condition of Experiment 1 and in
Experiment 2, we set Cj > 0, Sj = 0, and ij = cj = sj = 0. In this case, rejection of the U.S.
government bonus payment offer would occur if:


                                                Ij > Cj ,

and rejection would clearly reflect an ideological revealed preference priced at Cj . Of course, this
ideal is unlikely to be perfectly realized. All we can assume is that Cj > 0 and Sj = 0. Thus, in the
private condition of Experiment 1 and in Experiment 2, an intrinsically-motivated (not necessarily
ideological ), revealed preference for rejecting the bonus payment will be observed if the intrinsic
benefits from rejecting payment exceed the consequential costs of rejecting payment plus any social
cost. That is, if:


                                         Ij + ij > Cj + cj + sj

   This equation makes it clear that our treatment of rejection of the bonus payment as an ideo-
logical expression of anti-Americanism relies on: Ij being positive, and arising from anti-American
ideology; and, ij , cj , and sj being “small”. We next discuss these parameters, in turn.

4.2     Interpreting Rejection of the Bonus Payment Offer
4.2.1     Intrinsic Utility for Reasons other than Anti-American Ideology, Ij and ij

An important concern is that subjects in both experiments might have privately rejected the U.S.
bonus payment offer not because they disliked the U.S., but for some other intrinsic reason. For
example, perhaps they felt uncomfortable accepting an additional monetary payment. As discussed
above, however, we address this concern in our analysis of Experiment 1 by differencing out the
private rejection rates from the LUMS offer: we find a substantial fraction of the population
rejecting the U.S. government offer beyond those who reject the LUMS offer.
   Of course, the U.S. government offer differed from the LUMS offer both in the foreignness of
the entity offering the payment, and in the fact that the entity was a government. One might be
concerned that the difference in rejection rates between the U.S. payment and the LUMS payment
conditions arose from anti-foreign or anti-government views, rather than specifically anti-American


                                                   25
views. We can assess this possibility by examining the correlation between rejection of the U.S. offer
and stated preferences. As noted above, in Experiment 1, following subjects’ decisions of whether
to accept the bonus payment, they were asked to answer a number of direct survey questions,
which included elicitations of their stated views on: (i) aid provided by the U.S. government, (ii)
the U.S. government overall, (iii) aid provided by the Japanese government, and (iv) the Japanese
government overall (Japan was picked as a plausibly neutral, rich, foreign nation that is currently
engaged in providing funds to Pakistan).
   For each of these questions, respondents were asked to express their views by picking a number
from 1 to 5, with 1 corresponding to very negative views, and 5 to very positive views. We convert
responses into “negative views” dummy variables equal to 1 if subjects responses were either “1” or
“2”. Subjects were also asked to compare their views on the four aforementioned topics relative to
the other participants in the room, also on a scale from 1 to 5; we converted these into analogous
“negative relative views” dummy variables. Responses to the direct questions on stated views about
U.S. aid and the U.S. government suggest anti-American sentiment among a significant minority
of the sample: 26.4% of respondents report having a negative view of U.S. aid (i.e., picked either 1
or 2 as their answer to the corresponding question) and 29.8% of respondents have a negative view
of the U.S. government overall.
   To examine whether rejection of the U.S. government offer was specifically associated with anti-
American attitudes, we first regress the “negative views on U.S. aid” dummy variable on a dummy
variable indicating whether subjects rejected the bonus payment in the 100 Rs., private, U.S. offer,
condition. In Table 5, column 1, one can see that individuals who rejected the U.S. payment were
around 63 percentage points more likely to express negative views on U.S. aid in response to a direct
question (the coefficient is significant at the 1% level). In Table 5, column 2, we present results
from an analogous regression, but using negative views of the U.S. government as the outcome.
Again, one sees economically and statistically significantly higher rates of expressing negative views
among subjects who rejected the U.S. government bonus payment. In Table 5, columns 3 and 4,
we present results analogous to columns 1 and 2, but based on questions asking subjects about
their views relative to others in the room. One can see that subjects who rejected the U.S. bonus
payment offer view themselves as relatively more anti-American.
   Finally, as a falsification exercise, in Table 5, columns 5–8, we repeat the regressions from
columns 1–4, but study subjects’ views on aid from Japan, and on the Japanese government more
generally. One can see that rejection of the U.S. payment is associated with very small, statistically
insignificant differences in views on Japan. These associations suggest that rejection was specifically
associated with attitudes opposed to the U.S. government: while individuals who rejected the offer
expressed very anti-American views, their views were not differentially negative regarding the
Japanese government. All of these results suggest that the dominant source of intrinsic motivation
to reject the U.S. government bonus payment offer was indeed anti-American ideology.


                                                  26
4.2.2    Consequential Concerns Other Than The Forgone Payment, cj

We designed our study such that the stakes of rejecting the payment offer would be meaningful
for subjects, but trivial for the U.S. government: it is difficult to imagine a meaningful effect on
U.S. finances arising from subjects’ decisions to reject or accept the bonus payment offer. However,
despite the fact that the fiscal stakes for the U.S. government were trivial, subjects may have
believed that their choices in aggregate would have meaningful consequences by sending a signal to
the U.S. government. For example, checking the box may have been viewed as analogous to voting
on American policy.
    Importantly, however, the median subject who rejected the U.S. bonus payment offer in the 100
Rs., private condition believed (as measured in our incentivized elicitation) that 87% of the other
subjects accepted the offer. Thus, it is unlikely that any individual’s decision to reject the bonus
payment would have been viewed as pivotal.42 We thus believe it is likely that cj was perceived to
be “small”.

4.2.3    Social Concerns, sj

We next consider the possibility that subjects’ choices to reject the bonus payment offer were
shaped by social concerns despite our attempts to make their decisions completely private. Note
that our methodology aims to improve upon asking direct survey questions by eliciting subjects’
political attitudes without their being aware of the elicitation. However, the choice that subjects
made regarding accepting the bonus payment intentionally, necessarily, had an ideological compo-
nent. Thus, it is important to consider whether this ideological component led subjects to think
consciously about whether the experimenter was engaged in measuring their ideological positions,
and thus to respond in an inauthentic way to the bonus payment offer.
    However, it is worth remembering that just prior to the attitude elicitation in each experiment,
subjects had completed a survey that was entirely non-ideological. Having completed the survey,
subjects simply made a natural choice about payment, which should have appeared to be ancillary
to the main purpose of the surveys.
    Even if subjects did consider the possibility that their choices might be observable, there are
several reasons to think that this social cost term would have increased the cost of rejecting the
U.S. payment offer (making the revealed ideological preference even stronger). First, if subjects
were concerned about the observability of their choice by the research team, standard experimenter
demand effects would seem to pull in the direction of accepting the payment offer: if a subject is
offered a bonus payment, there might be (if anything) implicit pressure to accept. Second, if subjects
believed that their choice might be revealed to others, our estimate in Experiment 1 of the effect of
  42
     A similar logic applies to individuals who accepted the bonus payment. The median subject accepting payment
believed that over 95% of other subjects accepted payment; thus, it is unlikely that any individual’s decision to accept
payment would have been viewed as pivotal.


                                                          27
anticipated public expression suggests that observability of the choice would again reduce rejection
rates. One still might worry about subjects’ choices being distorted by fear induced by the mention
of the U.S. government. Yet subjects were remarkably willing to express anti-American views in
response to direct questions even if they were offered a payment by the U.S. government: over 70%
of subjects who rejected the U.S. offer openly express negative views of the U.S. government.
    As a check of whether subjects’ choices were likely to have been affected by concerns about
sanctions (by the U.S. government or others) for expressing particular attitudes, we can examine
whether patterns of behavior were similar for subjects with differing levels of risk aversion or
neuroticism. In Experiment 1, envelope 1, we elicited subjects’ Big 5 personality traits; in envelope
4, we measured subjects’ risk preferences using a five-point Likert scale. We create a “neurotic”
dummy variable equal to 1 for subjects with above-median neuroticism, and a “risk averse” dummy
that is equal to one if individuals reported to be either “very unwilling” or “unwilling” to take risks
(around 56% of the sample are thus categorized as risk averse). First, we note that there is no
effect of receiving a U.S. offer on reported risk preferences (neuroticism is elicited prior to the offer,
and is uncorrelated with receiving the U.S. offer). Reassuringly, we find that individuals who are
neurotic or risk averse according to these definitions do not show significantly different rates of
rejection of the U.S. offer in our baseline condition (100 Rs. payment, private condition).


5    Conclusion
Marx and Engels (1970) famously argued that all ideology is ultimately rooted in the material
interests of the ruling class, writing, “The ruling ideas are nothing more than the ideal expression
of the dominant material relationships, the dominant material relationships grasped as ideas.”
In our work we do not take a stance on the ultimate source(s) of intrinsic political motivation,
but we are able to identify a meaningful role for such intrinsic motivation in shaping political
expression. We show that a significant minority of Pakistani men in our two experimental samples
are willing to forgo a sizable payment simply to avoid checking a box that affirms gratitude toward
the U.S. government for providing the funds. This behavior is private, and is unlikely to be of
large “real world” consequence, suggesting that rejection of payment is an intrinsically motivated,
revealed preference expression of anti-American ideology. We also find that some individuals with
strongly-held ideological views will suppress the expression of those views when the financial costs
or anticipated social costs of expression are high enough.
    By implementing a second experiment, in a different setting, and with a different survey technol-
ogy, we show that our finding of a significant presence of intrinsically motivated anti-Americanism
is robust and has some degree of external validity. Generally, our different samples consist of liter-
ate, young men, and are therefore not representative of Pakistan’s population as a whole. However,
our samples include a broad representation from across Pakistani ethnic groups, drawn from four


                                                   28
distinct study sites, and we find the same patterns of results across all main ethnic groups rep-
resented and across all sites. Therefore, although our sample is not representative, our results
broadly hold across a range of literate, young men, whose anti-American attitudes may be of spe-
cial interest (see, e.g., Berman, 2009, and Krueger, 2007, on the role of educated young men in
extremist organizations). Moreover, we also show that ideological motivation, as elicited using our
method, correlates strongly with a real-world political behavior of interest: membership in a major
Pakistani anti-American party. Our findings suggest not only that ideological motives can be at
the root of political behavior, but also that they may play an important role in driving political be-
havior of interest. This suggests that policies aimed at reducing anti-American political expression
simply by changing instrumental incentives will be limited: ideologues are driven by their intrinsic
motivation, not by the consequences of their actions.




                                                 29
References
Akerlof, George A. and Rachel E. Kranton, “Economics And Identity,” Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, August 2000, 115 (3), 715–743.

Andreoni, James, “Impure Altruism and Donations to Public Goods: A Theory of Warm-Glow,”
  Economic Journal, 1990, 100, 464–477.

Ariely, Dan, Anat Bracha, and Stephan Meier, “Doing Good or Doing Well? Image Moti-
  vation and Monetary Incentives in Behaving Prosocially,” American Economic Review, 2009, 99
  (1), 544–555.

Augenblick, Ned, Jesse M. Cunha, Ernesto Dal Bó, and Justin M. Rao, “The Economics
  of Faith: Using an Apocalyptic Prophecy to Elicit Religious Beliefs in the Field,” December
  2012. NBER Working Paper No. 18641.

Beath, Andrew, Fotini Christia, and Ruben Enikolopov, “Winning Hearts and Minds
  through Development: Evidence from a Field Experiment in Afghanistan,” 2012. MIT Political
  Science Deparment Working Paper No. 2011-14.

Becker, Gary S., The Economics of Discrimination, University of Chicago Press, 1957.

Bénabou, Roland, “Ideology,” Journal of the European Economic Association, April-May 2008,
  6 (2-3), 321–352.

  and Jean Tirole, “Intrinsic and Extrinsic Motivation,” Review of Economic Studies, 2003, 70
  (3), 489–520.

  and     , “Incentives and Prosocial Behavior,” American Economic Review, 2006, 96 (5), 1652–
  1678.

Berman, Eli, Radical Religious and Violent: The New Economics of Terrorism, Cambridge: MIT
  Press, 2009.

Bernheim, B. Douglas, “A Theory of Conformity,” Journal of Political Economy, October 1994,
  102 (5), 841–877.

Brennan, Geoffrey and James Buchanan, “Voter choice: evaluating political alternatives.,”
  American Behavioral Scientist, 1984, 28, 181–201.

   and Loren Lomasky, Democracy and Decision: The Pure Theory of Electoral Preference,
  New York: Cambridge University Press, 1993.



                                              30
Clingingsmith, David, Asim Ijaz Khwaja, and Michael R. Kremer, “Estimating the impact
  of the Hajj: Religion and tolerance in Islam’s global gathering,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  2009, 124 (3), 1133–1170.

Cohen, Dov, Richard E. Nesbitt, Brian F. Bowdle, and Norbert Schwarz, “Insult, Ag-
  gression, and the Southern Culture of Honor: An ‘Experimental Ethnography’,” Journal of
  Personality and Social Psychology, 1996, pp. 945–960.

Corstange, Daniel, “Foreign-Sponsorship Effects in Developing-World Surveys: Evidence from a
  Field Experiment in Lebanon,” Public Opinion Quarterly, 2014, 78 (2), 474–484.

Delavande, Adeline and Basit Zafar, “How Deeply Held are Anti-American Attitudes among
  Pakistani Youth? Evidence Using Experimental Variation in Information,” 2012. Working Paper.

DellaVigna, Stefano, John A. List, and Ulrike Malmendier, “Testing for Altruism and
  Social Pressure in Charitable Giving,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2012, 127, 1–56.

  ,   ,   , and Gautam Rao, “Voting to Tell Others,” 2013. Working Paper.

Downs, Anthony, An Economic Theory of Democracy, New York: Addison Wesley, 1957.

Feddersen, Timothy and Alvaro Sandroni, “A Theory of Participation in Elections,” Ameri-
  can Economic Review, 2006, 96, 1271–1282.

  , Sean Gailmard, and Alvaro Sandroni, “Moral Bias in Large Elections: Theory and Ex-
  perimental Evidence,” American Political Science Review, May 2009, 103 (2), 175–192.

Gelman, Andrew, Boris Shor, Joseph Bafumi, and David Park, “Rich State, Poor State,
  Red State, Blue State: What’s the Matter with Connecticut?,” Quarterly Journal of Political
  Science, 2007, 2, 345–367.

Gentzkow, Matthew A. and Jesse M. Shapiro, “Media, Education, and Anti-Americanism
  in the Muslim World,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Summer 2004, 18 (3), 117–133.

Gerber, Alan S., Donald P. Green, and Christopher W. Larimer, “Social Pressure and
  Voter Turnout: Evidence from a Large-scale Field Experiment,” American Political Science
  Review, February 2008, 102 (1), 33–48.

  , Gregory A. Huber, David Doherty, and Conor M. Dowling, “Social Judgments and Po-
  litical Participation: Estimating the Consequences of Social Rewards and Sanctions for Voting,”
  2013. Working Paper.

Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales, “Does Culture Affect Economic Out-
  comes?,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2006, 20 (2), 23–48.

                                                31
Hoffman, Elizabeth, Kevin McCabe, and Vernon L. Smith, “Social Distance and Other-
  Regarding Behavior in Dictator Games,” American Economic Review, 1996, 86 (3), 653–660.

Irfan, Mohammad, “Pakistan’s Wage Structure,” Technical Report, Pakistan Institute of Devel-
  opment Economics Quaid-e-Azam University Campus December 2008.

Kamenica, Emir and Louisa Egan Brad, “Voters, dictators, and peons: expressive voting and
  pivotality,” Public Choice, April 2014, 159, 159–176.

Krueger, Alan B., What Makes a Terrorist: Economics and the Roots of Terrorism, Princeton
  University Press, 2007.

Ledyard, John O., “The pure theory of two-candidate elections,” Public Choice, January 1984,
  44, 7–41.

Marx, Karl and Friedrich Engels, The German Ideology, Vol. 1, International Publishers Co,
  1970.

Milgram, Stanley, The Individual in a Social World: Essays and Experiments, Reading, MA:
  Addison-Wesley, 1977.

Palfrey, Thomas R. and Howard Rosenthal, “A Strategic Calculus of Voting,” Public Choice,
  1983, 41 (1), 7–53.

   and    , “Voter Participation and Strategic Uncertainty,” American Political Science Review,
  March 1985, 79, 67–78.

Raghavarao, Damaraju and Walter T. Federer, “Block Total Response as an Alternative to
  the Randomized Response Method in Surveys,” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, 1979,
  Series B (Statistical Methodology) 41 (1), 40–45.

Rao, Gautam, “Familiarity Does Not Breed Contempt: Diversity, Discrimination and Generosity
  in Delhi Schools,” 2013. Working Paper.

Riker, William and Peter Ordeshook, “A Theory of the Calculus of Voting,” American Po-
  litical Science Review, 1968, 62, 25–43.

Rosenthal, Robert, “On the Social Psychology of the Psychological Experiment: The Exper-
  iment’s Hypothesis as Unintended Determinant of Experimental Results,” American Scientist,
  1963, 51, 268–283.

  , Experimenter Effects in Behavioral Research, New York: AppletonCentury-Crofts, 1966.

Scheussler, Alex, A Logic of Expressive Choice, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2000.

                                                32
Sniderman, Paul M. and Thomas Piazza, The Scar of Race, Harvard University Press, 1993.

Tullock, Gordon, “The Charity of the Uncharitable,” Western Economic Journal, 1971, 9, 379–
  392.

Warner, Stanley L., “Randomized Response: A Survey Technique for Eliminating Evasive An-
  swer Bias,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 1965, 60 (309), 63–69.




                                               33
                  Table 1: Summary Statistics and Covariates Balance in Experiment 1
                                                           LUMS                             U.S. government
                              Full         Low payment         High payment          Low payment       High payment           p-value
                             Sample        Pri    Pub           Pri    Pub           Pri    Pub         Pri    Pub
                               (1)          (2)    (3)          (4)     (5)           (6)    (7)        (8)     (9)            (10)
 Currently engaged            0.504        0.468     0.489      0.518     0.489      0.500     0.529      0.521     0.518      0.97
 in economic activity?       (0.500)      [0.042]   [0.042]    [0.043]   [0.043]    [0.042]   [0.042]    [0.042]   [0.042]
 Age                           23.7        23.2       23.6       23.6      24.2       23.3     23.8        24.2      23.6      0.63
                              (5.0)        [0.4]     [0.5]      [0.4]     [0.4]      [0.4]     [0.5]      [0.5]     [0.4]
 Gender (male=1)                1            1         1          1         1          1         1          1         1          -
                                -            -         -          -         -          -         -          -         -
 Single                       0.692        0.696     0.691      0.691     0.683      0.748     0.669      0.674     0.684      0.90
                             (0.462)      [0.039]   [0.040]    [0.039]   [0.040]    [0.038]   [0.040]    [0.040]   [0.040]
 Years of education            11.9        12.1       11.9       11.8      11.7       12.1     11.5        11.7      12.0      0.55
                              (2.8)        [0.2]     [0.3]      [0.2]     [0.2]      [0.2]     [0.3]      [0.3]     [0.2]

 Ethnic groups
  Punjabi                     0.101        0.090     0.098      0.096     0.104      0.101     0.093      0.119     0.105      1.00
                             (0.301)      [0.025]   [0.026]    [0.025]   [0.027]    [0.027]   [0.026]    [0.028]   [0.027]
  Pashtun                     0.641        0.634     0.632      0.640     0.634      0.643     0.667      0.622     0.654      1.00
                             (0.480)      [0.042]   [0.042]    [0.041]   [0.042]    [0.042]   [0.042]    [0.042]   [0.041]
  Baluchi                     0.091        0.082     0.120      0.103     0.067      0.093     0.093      0.096     0.075      0.88
                             (0.288)      [0.024]   [0.028]    [0.026]   [0.022]    [0.026]   [0.026]    [0.025]   [0.023]
 Religion
  Shia                        0.053        0.037     0.045      0.083     0.060      0.040     0.076      0.045     0.038      0.66
                             (0.224)      [0.016]   [0.018]    [0.024]   [0.021]    [0.017]   [0.023]    [0.018]   [0.017]
  Sunni                       0.853        0.844     0.841      0.812     0.851      0.849     0.855      0.895     0.880      0.67
                             (0.354)      [0.031]   [0.032]    [0.034]   [0.031]    [0.032]   [0.031]    [0.027]   [0.028]
  Muslim (unspecified)        0.076        0.096     0.091      0.090     0.075      0.095     0.061      0.038     0.060      0.37
                             (0.265)      [0.025]   [0.025]    [0.025]   [0.023]    [0.026]   [0.021]    [0.017]   [0.021]

 Big 5
  Openness to experience      3.020        3.062     3.072      2.998     3.014      3.021     3.015      2.990     2.985      0.56
                             (0.424)      [0.032]   [0.039]    [0.036]   [0.035]    [0.038]   [0.036]    [0.035]   [0.032]
  Conscientiousness           4.110        4.110     4.101      4.110     4.121      4.095     4.124      4.064     4.157      0.93
                             (0.563)      [0.047]   [0.048]    [0.044]   [0.044]    [0.058]   [0.045]    [0.043]   [0.047]
  Extraversion                3.590        3.655     3.586      3.572     3.564      3.543     3.543      3.566     3.689      0.14
                             (0.512)      [0.044]   [0.045]    [0.038]   [0.042]    [0.049]   [0.041]    [0.040]   [0.042]
  Agreeableness               3.805        3.812     3.848      3.792     3.740      3.785     3.835      3.797     3.829      0.82
                             (0.566)      [0.047]   [0.051]    [0.047]   [0.048]    [0.046]   [0.044]    [0.048]   [0.047]
  Neuroticism                 2.901        2.902     2.919      2.952     2.869      2.898     2.911      2.880     2.876      0.89
                             (0.530)      [0.047]   [0.041]    [0.038]   [0.046]    [0.046]   [0.040]    [0.046]   [0.049]
 Number of observations       1152         144       144        144       144        144       144        144       144
 Notes: Column 1 presents the mean for each variable based on our sample of 1,152 subjects. The Big 5 characteristics were recorded
on a 1 to 5 Likert scale. Standard deviations are in parentheses. Columns 2 to 10 report the mean level of each variable, with standard
errors in brackets, for each treatment cell. For each variable, column 10 reports the p-value of a joint test that the mean levels are
the same for all treatment cells (columns 2–9). The last row presents the number of observations in each treatment condition. Some
calculations used a smaller sample size due to missing information. The proportion of subjects with missing information for each
variable is never greater than 8%. The ethnic group categories do not sum to one because of a few small omitted categories (e.g.,
subjects identifying as Seraiki speakers) and non-response to this question.




                                                               34
      Table 2: Ideological Political Expression in Experiment 1

 Dependent Variable:                                    Rejected (=1)
                                               (1)           (2)           (3)
 U.S. government                             0.168***     0.169***     0.175***
                                              [0.043]      [0.043]      [0.046]

 Mean LUMS offer (low, private)                0.084        0.084         0.084
                                              [0.023]      [0.023]       [0.023]

 Session FE                                    No            Yes           Yes
 Covariates                                    No            No            Yes
 Observations                                  286           286           243
 Notes: This table reports the coefficients of regressions of rejection on a U.S.
government donor dummy. Column 1 reports coefficients of a regression with no
controls. Column 2 reports coefficients of a regression using session fixed effects.
Column 3 reports coefficients of a regression including session fixed effects and a
set of subject covariates. The sample in these regressions includes subjects who
received the 100 Rs. offer in the private condition. All of the variables presented
in Table 1 are included as covariates in column 3. The sample size in the regression
presented in column 3 is smaller due to missing values for some covariates. Robust
standard errors are in brackets. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; ***
significant at 1%.




                                        35
   Table 3: The Effect of the Public Treatment in Experiment 1

 Dependent Variable:                                     Rejected (=1)
                                                (1)           (2)           (3)
 Public × U.S. government                     -0.109*       -0.107*     -0.141**
                                              [0.060]       [0.060]      [0.064]
 Public                                         0.027        0.028        0.066*
                                               [0.035]      [0.036]       [0.038]
 U.S. government                              0.168***     0.169***     0.179***
                                               [0.043]      [0.043]      [0.045]

 Mean LUMS offer (low, private)                 0.084        0.084         0.084
                                               [0.023]      [0.023]       [0.023]
 Session FE                                     No           Yes           Yes
 Covariates                                     No           No            Yes
 Observations                                   571          571           488
 Notes: This table reports the coefficients of regressions of rejection on the in-
teraction of a public condition dummy and a U.S. government donor dummy,
and main effects of the public condition dummy and the U.S. government donor
dummy. Column 1 reports coefficients of a regression with no controls. Column
2 reports coefficients of a regression using session fixed effects. Column 3 reports
coefficients of a regression including session fixed effects and a set of subject co-
variates. The sample in these regressions includes all subjects who received the
100 Rs. offer. All of the variables presented in Table 1 are included as covariates
in column 3. The sample size in the regression presented in column 3 is smaller
due to missing values for some covariates. Robust standard errors are in brackets.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                         36
                   Table 4: Price Effects in Experiment 1

 Dependent Variable:                                      Rejected (=1)
                                                  (1)          (2)            (3)
 High payment × U.S. government                -0.127**      -0.127**     -0.129**
                                                [0.053]       [0.053]      [0.056]
 High payment                                   -0.028        -0.027        -0.016
                                                [0.030]       [0.033]       [0.033]
 U.S. government                               0.168***     0.169***      0.181***
                                                [0.043]      [0.042]       [0.044]

 Mean LUMS offer (low, private)                  0.084         0.084         0.084
                                                [0.023]       [0.023]       [0.023]
 Session FE                                       No            Yes          Yes
 Covariates                                       No            No           Yes
 Observations                                     572           572          499
 Notes: This table reports the coefficients of regressions of rejection on the inter-
action of a high payment dummy and a U.S. government donor dummy, and main
effects of the high payment dummy and the U.S. government donor dummy. Column
1 reports coefficients of a regression with no controls. Column 2 reports coefficients
of a regression using session fixed effects. Column 3 reports coefficients of a regres-
sion including session fixed effects and a set of subject covariates. The sample in
these regressions includes subjects who received an offer in the private condition.
All of the variables presented in Table 1 are included as covariates in column 3. The
sample size in the regression presented in column 3 is smaller due to missing values
for some covariates. Robust standard errors are in brackets. * significant at 10%;
** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                          37
                                                          Table 5: Revealed and Stated Preferences in Experiment 1
                                                                                  Relatively          Relatively                                                     Relatively            Relatively
                                          Negative           Negative           more negative       more negative           Negative            Negative           more negative         more negative
                                        views about        views about           views about         views about          views about         views about           views about           views about
                                          U.S. aid       U.S. government           U.S. aid        U.S. government         Japan aid       Japan government          Japan aid         Japan government
                                            (1)                 (2)                  (3)                  (4)                 (5)                 (6)                   (7)                   (8)
      Rejected                            0.627***            0.542***             0.401***             0.402***              0.020                0.042                -0.019                0.030
                                           [0.081]             [0.085]              [0.092]              [0.092]             [0.076]              [0.071]               [0.079]              [0.086]

      Mean (accepted U.S. offer)          0.115***            0.152***             0.170***             0.182***            0.175***            0.125***              0.219***              0.248***
                                           [0.032]             [0.035]              [0.038]              [0.039]             [0.038]             [0.033]               [0.041]               [0.042]

      Observations                           139                 141                  135                  135                 139                 140                   140                   141
      Notes: This table reports differences in stated preference views between subjects who rejected and those who accepted the U.S. 100 Rs. private offer. In Column (1), subjects were asked about their
     views toward aid provided by the U.S. government to Pakistan: possible responses were “very negative”, “negative”, “neither negative nor positive”, “positive”, or “very positive”. We coded a “negative
     views about U.S. aid” dummy variable equal to 1 for subjects who answered “very negative” or “negative”. Column (2) uses a question about subjects’ views toward U.S. government in general. Columns
     (3) and (4) are based on questions asking subjects how their views of U.S. aid and the U.S. government in general compare to those of others in the room. Columns (5) to (8) replicate columns (1) to (4)
     using views on Japan instead of the U.S. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




38
                 Table 6: Summary Statistics and Covariates Balance in Experiment 2
                                                                  Experiment 2             Stage 2                 p-value
                                                                                     Revealed Stated              Column
                                            Experiment 1       Stage 1   Stage 2     Preference View         (2)=(3) (4)=(5)
 x                                              (1)              (2)       (3)          (4)        (5)         (6)         (7)
 Currently engaged in economic activity?        0.504           0.797     0.799         0.791      0.807       0.869     0.475
                                               [0.015]         [0.009]   [0.012]       [0.016]    [0.016]

 Age                                             23.7           26.5      26.4          26.2       26.7        0.857     0.150
                                                 [0.2]          [0.1]     [0.2]         [0.2]      [0.2]

 Single?                                        0.692           0.499     0.500         0.514      0.486       0.889     0.329
                                               [0.014]         [0.011]   [0.014]       [0.020]    [0.020]

 Years of Education                              11.9           10.0      10.0          10.1       10.0        0.401     0.615
                                                 [0.1]          [0.1]     [0.1]         [0.1]      [0.1]

 Number of observations                         1152            1991      1212          611        601
 Notes: Column 1 presents the mean for each variable in the first experiment. Columns 2 and 3 present the mean for each variable
respectively in the first and second stage of the second experiment. Columns 4 and 5 present information on subjects from the
second stage of the second experiment separately for those in the revealed preference and in the stated view groups. Column 6
presents p-values of tests that means are the same for subjects in the stage 1 and stage 2 of the second experiment, while column
7 presents p-values of tests that means are the same for subjects in the revealed preference and stated view groups.




                                                             39
 Online Appendix: Not for publication

A1   Appendix Figures and Tables




                             40
41
     Figure A.1: Map of Experiment 1 Laboratory Locations in Pakistan
   Panel A: First Screening Test               Panel B: On-site Screening Test




Figure A.2: Urdu Versions of Literacy Screening Tests for Experiment 1




                                   42
Figure A.3: Experiment 1 Enrollment Desk Outside of the Lab in Islamabad




                                   43
44
     Figure A.4: Experiment 1 Session in Islamabad
45
     Figure A.5: Experiment 1 Session in Peshawar
                                                               ParDcipantEIdenDﬁcaDonENumber
                                      1   2   3   4   5   6     7     8     9     10     11     12     13     14     15     16     17     18     19     20     21     22     23     24
                                  1   l   k   c   v   n   o   u     s     h     w      p      b      a      i      q      m      d      f      t      e      j      g      x      r
                                  2   w   t   q   p   x   m   j     b     s     k      n      l      v      i      d      o      e      a      h      r      g      u      c      f
                                  3   r   w   q   n   c   t   h     i     k     a      d      g      b      o      j      x      e      l      f      v      s      p      u      m
                                  4   k   w   g   r   c   v   u     n     x     i      p      d      t      m      b      a      l      q      s      j      e      h      o      f
                                  5   h   c   w   s   q   d   f     r     v     m      l      u      e      a      g      x      k      t      n      i      o      j      p      b
                                  6   v   t   n   c   q   h   o     e     p     r      j      f      w      a      l      m      s      u      b      d      i      x      g      k
                                  7   k   g   s   i   m   c   v     h     r     p      l      x      o      b      n      j      d      w      f      u      e      q      t      a
                                  8   w   k   d   l   h   s   f     m     g     x      b      a      o      q      p      n      c      v      e      i      u      t      r      j
                                  9   g   x   c   u   q   l   i     j     d     b      m      p      v      t      n      f      e      k      a      s      w      h      o      r
                                 10   m   x   w   b   c   u   l     k     t     d      e      q      p      j      h      i      n      r      o      a      f      v      g      s
                                 11   c   b   h   f   u   w   s     t     a     n      e      o      j      l      g      m      k      v      r      d      q      i      x      p
                                 12   l   v   j   t   i   d   r     m     c     u      b      a      x      p      e      n      o      g      q      h      s      f      k      w
                                 13   c   p   q   a   b   v   d     n     l     x      j      g      r      e      f      k      i      h      w      o      s      t      m      u
                                 14   q   h   a   t   i   p   k     e     c     v      n      x      m      o      r      f      g      d      b      l      s      w      u      j
                                 15   w   j   a   q   b   g   e     t     c     d      h      o      x      m      r      i      k      u      n      p      f      v      l      s
                                 16   r   s   q   g   w   m   o     k     x     p      d      a      c      v      b      e      t      i      j      l      f      u      n      h
                                 17   d   h   n   x   w   c   o     l     f     i      e      r      j      v      m      g      s      a      u      k      t      q      b      p
                                 18   x   e   b   n   l   a   s     h     o     t      d      c      v      j      f      i      q      g      r      w      u      k      m      p
     LaboratoryESessionENumber




                                 19   o   b   r   s   q   i   p     t     e     w      k      c      a      g      n      d      l      j      v      m      h      f      x      u
                                 20   n   l   h   x   q   u   s     m     i     k      b      c      w      e      f      g      v      r      p      a      t      j      o      d
                                 21   r   w   k   q   h   x   v     d     f     n      t      i      s      l      o      e      g      m      a      c      j      b      p      u
                                 22   h   e   w   p   s   t   m     k     f     q      l      b      a      u      r      d      n      i      g      j      o      c      v      x
                                 23   d   v   s   i   j   g   q     n     l     e      r      k      f      p      c      w      b      m      a      t      u      o      h      x
                                 24   c   j   i   n   g   l   a     e     t     b      v      u      k      s      x      o      d      q      f      p      h      m      w      r
                                 25   b   i   c   k   v   a   q     s     m     u      t      h      e      g      l      n      p      j      f      x      r      w      o      d
                                 26   l   j   k   e   s   i   o     a     r     w      x      h      n      v      b      f      c      g      u      t      m      p      d      q
                                 27   c   m   l   o   d   n   v     t     i     w      s      x      u      g      f      j      h      r      q      p      e      b      a      k
                                 28   b   u   i   m   g   l   t     o     k     c      x      s      j      f      r      p      n      h      d      w      e      a      v      q
                                 29   x   b   k   p   j   u   m     v     i     t      n      a      g      d      w      c      q      l      s      o      h      r      f      e
                                 30   t   h   c   v   n   x   o     s     r     j      e      q      d      a      p      k      f      w      m      u      g      i      b      l
                                 31   u   c   b   v   x   f   d     t     s     l      w      o      m      g      k      r      j      a      q      n      i      p      e      h
                                 32   d   j   r   p   i   q   k     e     n     u      o      a      t      g      w      c      v      f      s      x      m      h      b      l
                                 33   i   g   c   f   p   d   q     e     b     a      u      n      w      j      v      o      t      s      r      m      h      x      l      k
                                 34   u   g   e   x   l   p   t     h     m     s      o      f      v      i      r      b      k      a      n      w      j      q      d      c
                                 35   s   k   m   x   f   e   p     c     w     d      i      n      o      b      h      g      r      u      v      l      j      t      a      q
                                 36   p   v   m   r   j   e   k     f     x     g      t      u      i      q      b      c      a      s      o      w      h      l      n      d
                                 37   r   i   f   o   k   p   v     q     h     s      l      g      c      a      n      d      x      t      u      m      j      w      b      e
                                 38   w   b   j   e   d   i   l     h     t     o      c      k      x      n      a      f      q      r      v      m      u      g      s      p
                                 39   a   w   u   c   v   q   g     p     e     o      x      m      h      t      l      k      b      d      i      f      r      n      s      j
                                 40   o   h   v   c   p   r   n     d     m     w      k      b      u      e      f      s      q      l      x      i      a      g      j      t
                                 41   t   c   l   b   w   v   x     k     d     i      j      p      a      s      o      e      r      f      h      q      m      n      g      u
                                 42   a   u   n   j   f   d   t     g     s     x      r      p      e      v      i      q      l      o      c      h      b      k      w      m
                                 43   i   u   m   q   o   r   a     g     x     d      h      p      l      s      n      t      c      v      f      w      k      e      j      b
                                 44   m   t   a   c   f   b   d     p     n     h      i      o      r      g      k      v      l      x      j      e      u      q      s      w
                                 45   t   c   w   d   v   f   o     j     b     n      u      x      a      p      h      l      i      q      s      g      r      e      k      m
                                 46   e   c   f   p   i   o   q     g     a     d      t      u      h      b      l      m      x      r      k      j      n      v      w      s
                                 47   n   a   x   j   w   s   h     c     d     k      o      p      i      m      u      b      l      g      t      q      f      e      v      r
                                 48   t   g   l   d   b   p   e     v     i     m      k      a      n      c      s      x      w      f      r      h      j      o      q      u


Figure A.6: Survey Version to Session-Participant Number Mapping in Experiment 1




                                                                                        46
A2      Experimental Protocols
On-site literacy screening script for Experiment 1
Clean the chicken and then wash it. Add half a cup of water. Add cloves and garlic and cook the
chicken until it is slightly tender. Blend together almonds, pistachios, fig, coconut, ginger, chick
peas, poppy seeds and yogurt in a blender. Put some cooking oil in a pot and warm it. Add some
onion to it and allow it to become green. Then add to it crushed spices, salt, and red chili powder
and cook. Then stuff the cooked spices in the chicken’s stomach. Cover the outside of the chicken
with this preparation as well. Cover the baking dish with cooking oil and put the chicken in the
dish. Then put this dish in an oven pre-heated to 200 degrees centigrade, and let it bake for 35 to 40
minutes. Then put some cooking oil on the chicken and bake it for another 10 minutes. When the
chicken starts turning red, take it out. Your delicious, sweet chicken is ready! Serve with salads.1
(See the Urdu version of our screening tests in Appendix Figure A.2.)

Experiment 1 Materials

Activity/Envelope 1
Standard Big 5 survey adapted to use in Pakistan. This is used in all survey versions (versions
A-X).




  1
    This text was taken from a free online repository of recipes in Urdu (http://www.lawaonline.com/blog/murg-
mewa-dar-recipes-pakistani-cooking-urdu-recipes/), accessed July 7, 2013.
Activity/Envelope1
    Instructions	  for	  filling	  out	  the	  questionnaire:	  

         1. Read	  every	  statement	  carefully	  and	  encircle	  the	  response	  you	  agree	  with.	  
                    a. If	  you	  completely	  disagree	  with	  the	  statement,	  encircle	  (1).	  
                    b. If	  you	  mostly	  disagree	  with	  the	  statement,	  encircle	  (2).	  
                    c. If	  you	  are	  indifferent	  to	  the	  statement,	  encircle	  (3).	  
                    d. If	  you	  mostly	  agree	  with	  the	  statement,	  encircle	  (4).	  
                    e. If	  you	  completely	  agree	  with	  the	  statement,	  encircle	  (5).	  
         2. This	  test	  has	  no	  concept	  of	  right	  or	  wrong,	  nor	  do	  you	  have	  to	  be	  an	  expert	  to	  solve	  
            it.	  Respond	  as	  sincerely	  as	  possible.	  Write	  your	  opinion	  as	  carefully	  and	  honestly	  as	  
            possible.	  Answer	  every	  question	  and	  ensure	  that	  for	  every	  response,	  you	  have	  
            encircled	  the	  right	  option.	  During	  the	  test,	  if	  you	  encircle	  the	  wrong	  option	  by	  
            mistake	  or	  if	  you	  change	  your	  mind	  after	  encircling	  a	  response,	  do	  not	  erase	  it.	  
            Instead,	  mark	  the	  wrong	  response	  with	  a	  cross	  and	  encircle	  your	  correct	  one.	  

    Statements:	  

         1.    I	  am	  not	  depressed	  1	  2	  3	  4	  5	  
         2.    I	  like	  to	  be	  amongst	  lots	  of	  people	  1	  2	  3	  4	  5	  
         3.    I	  don’t	  like	  to	  waste	  time	  day-­‐dreaming	  1	  2	  3	  4	  5	  
         4.    I	  try	  to	  be	  polite	  to	  everyone	  I	  meet	  1	  2	  3	  4	  5	  
         5.    I	  keep	  all	  my	  things	  clean	  and	  tidy	  1	  2	  3	  4	  5	  
         6.    I	  often	  feel	  inferior	  to	  other	  people	  1	  2	  3	  4	  5	  
         7.    I	  laugh	  easily	  1	  2	  3	  4	  5	  
         8.    When	  I	  find	  out	  the	  right	  way	  to	  do	  something,	  I	  stick	  with	  it	  1	  2	  3	  4	  5	  
         9.    I	  often	  get	  into	  quarrels	  with	  my	  family	  members	  and	  coworkers	  1	  2	  3	  4	  5	  
         10.   I	  pace	  my	  work	  such	  that	  I	  am	  able	  to	  complete	  everything	  on	  time	  1	  2	  3	  4	  5	  
         11.   Sometimes	  when	  I	  am	  under	  intense	  psychological	  pressure,	  I	  feel	  as	  if	  I	  am	  about	  to	  
               fall	  to	  pieces	  1	  2	  3	  4	  5	  
         12.   I	  don’t	  consider	  myself	  to	  be	  a	  jolly	  person	  1	  2	  3	  4	  5	  
         13.   Art	  and	  wonders	  of	  nature	  fascinate	  me	  1	  2	  3	  4	  5	  
         14.   Some	  people	  think	  that	  I	  am	  selfish	  and	  egoistic	  1	  2	  3	  4	  5	  
         15.   I	  am	  not	  a	  very	  organized	  person	  1	  2	  3	  4	  5	  
         16.   I	  rarely	  feel	  lonely	  or	  sad	  1	  2	  3	  4	  5	  
         17.   I	  really	  enjoy	  talking	  to	  people	  1	  2	  3	  4	  5	  
         18.   I	  think	  that	  listening	  to	  controversial	  speakers	  can	  confuse	  students	  and	  lead	  them	  
               astray	  1	  2	  3	  4	  5	  
         19.   I	  prefer	  cooperation	  over	  conflict	  1	  2	  3	  4	  5	  
         20.   I	  try	  to	  complete	  all	  tasks	  entrusted	  to	  me	  according	  to	  my	  conscience	  1	  2	  3	  4	  5	  
         21.   I	  often	  feel	  mentally	  stressed	  and	  anxious	  1	  2	  3	  4	  5	  
         22.   I	  often	  long	  for	  thrilling	  situations	  1	  2	  3	  4	  5	  
         23.   Poetry	  has	  very	  little	  or	  no	  influence	  on	  me	  1	  2	  3	  4	  5	  
         24.   I	  am	  mistrustful	  and	  skeptical	  about	  the	  intentions	  of	  others	  1	  2	  3	  4	  5	  
25. My	  objectives	  are	  very	  clear	  and	  I	  work	  to	  achieve	  them	  in	  a	  very	  organized	  way	  1	  2	  
    3	  4	  5	  
26. Sometimes	  I	  feel	  completely	  worthless	  1	  2	  3	  4	  5	  
27. I	  usually	  prefer	  to	  work	  alone	  1	  2	  3	  4	  5	  
28. I	  often	  try	  new	  and	  exotic	  dishes	  1	  2	  3	  4	  5	  
29. I	  believe	  that	  if	  you	  give	  them	  the	  chance,	  people	  will	  always	  exploit	  you	  1	  2	  3	  4	  5	  
30. I	  waste	  a	  lot	  of	  time	  before	  starting	  to	  work	  1	  2	  3	  4	  5	  
31. I	  rarely	  feel	  scared	  or	  depressed	  1	  2	  3	  4	  5	  
32. I	  often	  feel	  full	  of	  energy	  1	  2	  3	  4	  5	  
33. I	  don’t	  pay	  much	  attention	  to	  the	  moods	  and	  feelings	  evoked	  my	  surroundings	  and	  
    circumstances	  1	  2	  3	  4	  5	  
34. People	  who	  know	  me	  usually	  like	  me	  1	  2	  3	  4	  5	  
35. I	  work	  very	  hard	  to	  achieve	  my	  goals	  1	  2	  3	  4	  5	  
36. I	  often	  get	  frustrated	  by	  the	  way	  people	  treat	  me	  1	  2	  3	  4	  5	  
37. I	  am	  a	  jolly	  and	  optimistic	  person	  1	  2	  3	  4	  5	  
38. I	  believe	  that	  we	  should	  consult	  religious	  leaders	  for	  making	  decisions	  involving	  
    moral	  affairs	  1	  2	  3	  4	  5	  
39. Some	  people	  think	  I	  am	  cold-­‐hearted	  and	  selfish	  1	  2	  3	  4	  5	  
40. When	  I	  start	  something,	  I	  don’t	  rest	  until	  I	  finish	  it	  1	  2	  3	  4	  5	  
41. Often	  when	  things	  start	  taking	  a	  turn	  for	  the	  worse,	  I	  give	  up	  and	  abandon	  my	  work	  
    1	  2	  3	  4	  5	  
42. I	  am	  not	  a	  jolly	  and	  optimistic	  person	  1	  2	  3	  4	  5	  
43. Sometimes	  while	  studying	  poetry	  or	  looking	  at	  masterpieces	  of	  art,	  I	  feel	  chills	  of	  
    thrill	  and	  excitement	  1	  2	  3	  4	  5	  
44. I	  am	  strict	  and	  stubborn	  in	  my	  attitude	  1	  2	  3	  4	  5	  
45. Sometimes	  I	  am	  not	  as	  trustworthy	  as	  I	  ought	  to	  be	  1	  2	  3	  4	  5	  
46. I	  am	  rarely	  sad	  or	  depressed	  1	  2	  3	  4	  5	  
47. Fast	  pace	  is	  a	  highlight	  of	  my	  life	  1	  2	  3	  4	  5	  
48. I	  have	  little	  interest	  in	  pondering	  over	  the	  working	  of	  the	  universe	  or	  the	  human	  
    condition	  1	  2	  3	  4	  5	  
49. I	  usually	  try	  to	  be	  concerned	  and	  care	  about	  others	  1	  2	  3	  4	  5	  
50. I	  am	  useful	  person	  and	  always	  do	  my	  work	  1	  2	  3	  4	  5	  
51. I	  often	  feel	  helpless	  and	  wish	  someone	  else	  would	  resolve	  my	  problems	  1	  2	  3	  4	  5	  
52. I	  am	  a	  very	  active	  person	  1	  2	  3	  4	  5	  
53. I	  have	  a	  lot	  of	  intellectual	  curiosity	  in	  me	  1	  2	  3	  4	  5	  
54. If	  I	  don’t	  like	  someone	  I	  let	  him/her	  know	  about	  it	  1	  2	  3	  4	  5	  
55. I	  feel	  that	  I	  can	  never	  keep	  myself	  organized	  1	  2	  3	  4	  5	  
56. Sometimes	  I	  want	  to	  hide	  myself	  due	  to	  shame	  1	  2	  3	  4	  5	  
57. I	  would	  prefer	  to	  live	  on	  my	  own	  terms	  as	  opposed	  to	  being	  a	  leader	  for	  others	  1	  2	  3	  
    4	  5	  
58. I	  often	  enjoy	  abstract	  ideas	  and	  theories	  1	  2	  3	  4	  5	  
59. If	  need	  be,	  I	  am	  ready	  to	  use	  people	  to	  get	  my	  own	  work	  done	  1	  2	  3	  4	  5	  
60. I	  try	  to	  do	  everything	  perfectly	  1	  2	  3	  4	  5	  
Please give us answers to the following questions.

1.1     Are you currently engaged in any economic activity from which you earn income?
        1. Yes
        2. No


1.2      Apart from your main economic activity, are you engaged in any other economic
activity?
         1. Yes
         2. No

1.3     Which of these best describes your secondary economic activity? (S.A.)
        1. Employee receiving wages / salary
        2. Daily paid / casual worker / in temporary employment
        3. Agricultural crops or livestock related self employment
        4. Other self employment
        5. Other (describe ______________)


1.4     Which of the following types of agricultural crop/livestock activities are you involved in?
(mark all)
        1. Rice
        2. Wheat
        3. Cotton
        4. Other grains (corn, maize, etc.)
        5. Tobacco
        6. Other (specify: _________________________)

1.5     How often do you receive income from these agricultural crop/livestock self employment
        activities? (mark all)
        1. At least weekly
        2. At least every two weeks
        3. At least monthly
        4. Less frequently than monthly

Personal Information
1.6    What is your age and year of birth?
               Years __________ Months ______________             Year of Birth ______________

1.7     Gender
        1. Male
        2. Female

1.8     Marital Status
        1. Single/Never Married
        2. Married
        3. Widowed
        4. Divorced
        5. Separated
1.9    What ethnic group do you belong to ?
       1. Punjabi
       2. Pashtun
       3. Tajik
       4. Hazara
       5. Baluchi
       6. Other (Specify.......................)

1.10   What religious group do you belong to?
       1. Shia
       2. Sunni
       3. Christian
       4. Hindu
       5. Sikh
       6. Other	  ( Specify…....................)

1.11    Which languages do you speak at home?
                                           1. Yes                          2. No
a. Pashto                                     1                              2
b. Persian/Dari                               1                              2
c. Balochi                                    1                              2
d. Punjabi                                    1                              2
e. Urdu                                       1                              2

1.12   What is the highest level of education that you have completed? _______

       1=Completed Grade 1,
       2=Completed Grade 2,
       3=Completed Grade 3,
       4=Completed Grade 4,
       5=Completed Grade 5,
       6=Completed Grade 6,
       7=Completed Grade 7,
       8=Completed Grade 8,
       9=Completed Grade 9,
       10=Completed Grade 10 (Matric/ O Levels),
       11=Completed Grade 11,
       12=Completed Grade 12 (FSC/A Levels),
       13=Completed some years at university,
       15=Completed university degree,
       16=Masters,
       17=Technical Training,
       18=Not gone to school


1.13   Then how many years of formal education have you had?
       Years ______
Please place the completed survey back in envelope 1.

After that, you should close and seal envelope 1, and place it in the larger envelope.

After that, you may open envelope 2.




                                                     6
Activity/Envelope 2
Thank you for completing the survey. In return for completing the survey, we can offer you a bonus
payment. Funding for the bonus payment comes from {Survey versions A-L: Lahore University
of Management Sciences; Survey versions M-X: the U.S. government}. We can pay you {Survey
versions A, B, C, G, H, I, M, N, O, S, T, U: 100 Rs.; Survey versions D, E, F, J, K, L, P, Q,
R, V, W, X: 500Rs} for completing the survey, but in order to receive the bonus payment you are
required to acknowledge receipt of the funds provided by {Survey versions A-L: Lahore University
of Management Sciences; Survey versions M-X: the U.S. government} and thank the funder. If you
choose not to accept the payment, you will forgo the bonus payment of {Survey versions A, B, C,
G, H, I, M, N, O, S, T, U: 100 Rs; Survey versions D, E, F, J, K, L, P, Q, R, V, W, X: 500 Rs},
but not the payment of 300 Rs for your participation.
   The letter of acknowledgment and thanks can be found on the next page.
   {Survey versions G-L, S-X: If you choose to accept the bonus payment, in order to receive this
additional payment, you will be asked to turn the letter in to the survey coordinator in the front of
the room, so other participants will see you turn in the letter. Once you have made your decision
on the next page, please place the letter into envelope 2, whether or not you chose to accept the
bonus payment.}
   {Survey versions A-F, M-R: If you choose to accept the bonus payment, in order to receive
this additional payment, your decision will be completely private; you will simply replace
the letter in envelope 2 and submit it with your other survey materials at the end of the study, so
no other participants will know your choice. Once you have made your decision on the next page,
please place the letter into envelope 2, whether or not you chose to accept the bonus payment.}
   After that, you should close and seal envelope 2, and place it in the larger envelope.
   After that, you may open envelope 3.

Letter of acknowledgment and thanks
                          Letter of acknowledgment and thanks

  2 I gratefully thank Lahore University of Management Sciences for its generosity and I accept the bonus
payment offer.

  2 I choose not to accept the bonus payment offer.




                                                      1
                                             Envelope	  3	  

1) [Survey versions A-X]
In the previous section, you were asked to check a box to indicate that you thanked the funder for their
generosity. There are 24 people in this room. How many people in this group, excluding yourself, do you
believe were willing to accept the additional payment by checking the box?

If your guess is one of the three closest to the true number (among participants in this group), you will
receive an extra 300 rupees.

Please indicate your belief about how many checked the box here _____


2) [Survey versions A-X]
There are 24 participants in this session. Approximately, how many people in this room are you acquainted
with?

1 – No one

2 - Between 1 and 6

3 - Between 7 and 12

4 – Between 13 and 18

5 - Between 19 and 23

6 – Everyone
                                             Envelope	  3	  
LIST EXPERIMENTS: [DO NOT TRANSLATE THIS LINE]

Control: [Survey versions A, D, G, J, M, P. S, V]
The following are four policies some government officials express support for. Please report HOW MANY
of the four you support. You do not need to indicate which ones you support, just how many.

a. Providing the poor with free electricity generators

b. Establishing an independent state in Kashmir that is not part of India and not part of Pakistan

c. Ensuring that civilians (President or Prime Minister) control the military

d. Reducing number of people eligible for the Benazir Income Support Program, but increasing payments
to those eligible

TOTAL THAT YOU SUPPORT (CIRCLE ONE)                      0       1        2        3        4



Treatment 1: [Survey versions B, E, H, K, N, Q, T, W]
The following are five policies some government officials express support for. Please report HOW MANY
of the five you support. You do not need to indicate which ones you support, just how many.

a. Providing the poor with free electricity generators

b. Establishing an independent state in Kashmir that is not part of India and not part of Pakistan

c. Ensuring that civilians (President or Prime Minister) control the military

d. Reducing number of people eligible for the Benazir Income Support Program, but increasing payments
to those eligible

e. Refusing humanitarian aid from the US government

TOTAL THAT YOU SUPPORT (CIRCLE ONE)                      0       1        2        3        4        5



Treatment 2: [Survey versions C, F, I, L, O, R, U, X]
The following are five policies some government officials express support for. Please report HOW MANY
of the five you support. You do not need to indicate which ones you support, just how many.

a. Providing the poor with free electricity generators

b. Establishing an independent state in Kashmir that is not part of India and not part of Pakistan

c. Ensuring that civilians (President or Prime Minister) control the military

d. Reducing number of people eligible for the Benazir Income Support Program, but increasing payments
to those eligible

e. Supporting the activities of Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf (PTI)

TOTAL THAT YOU SUPPORT (CIRCLE ONE)                      0       1        2        3        4        5
                                             Envelope	  3	  


[Survey versions A-X]

Please place the completed survey back in envelope 3.

After that, you should close and seal envelope 3, and place it in the larger envelope.

After that, you may open envelope 4.
Activity/Envelope 4
    SURVEY VERSIONS A-X

    This is the final section. Please complete the questions below and then place this document back in the
    envelope.

        1.   How do you view aid provided by the Japanese government to Pakistan? Very negatively (1), very
             positively (5), or something in between?

             Circle one of the following:        1        2        3        4         5

        2.   How do you view the Japanese government overall? Very negatively (1), very positively (5), or
             something in between?

             Circle one of the following:        1        2        3        4         5


        3.   How do you view aid provided by the United States government to Pakistan? Very negatively (1),
             very positively (5), or something in between?

             Circle one of the following:        1        2        3        4         5



        4.   How do you view the United States government overall? Very negatively (1), very positively (5),
             or something in between?

             Circle one of the following:        1        2        3        4         5



        5.   How willing are you to take risks? Are you very unwilling to take risks (1)? Are you very willing
             to take risks (5)? Or, something in between?

             Circle one of the following:        1        2        3        4         5



        6.   Do you know the name of the chief minister of your province? Please write the name below:



        7.   How do you think your political views on Japan compare to other individuals in the room? More
             anti-Japanese (1), more pro-Japanese (5), or something between?

             Circle one of the following:        1        2        3        4         5


        8.   How do you think your political views on receiving aid from Japan differ relative to other
             individuals in the room? Less willing to accept aid (1), more willing to accept aid (5), or
             something in between?

             Circle one of the following:        1        2        3        4         5
    9.    How do you think your political views on the United States compare to other individuals in the
          room? More anti-American (1), more pro-American (5), or something between?

          Circle one of the following:       1        2        3        4        5


    10. How do you think your political views on receiving aid differ from the United States relative to
        other individuals in the room? Less willing to accept aid (1), more willing to accept aid (5), or
        something in between?

          Circle one of the following:       1        2        3        4        5


11. Would your decision of whether to take the additional payment by checking the box have changed if the
payment amount was increased by 100 rupees?

1 – Yes

2 – No

12. Would your decision of whether to take the additional payment by checking the box have changed if the
payment amount was increased by 300 rupees?

1 – Yes

2 – No

13. Would your decision of whether to take the additional payment by checking the box have changed if the
payment amount were offered by the government of Japan?

1 – Yes

2 – No

14. Would your decision of whether to take the additional payment by checking the box have changed if the
payment amount were offered by the University of California (an American university unaffiliated with the
government).

1 – Yes

2 – No



Please place this completed survey back in envelope 4, seal the envelope, and place envelope 4 in the large
envelope. Then, raise your hand to indicate that you have completed the survey.
Experiment 2 Materials

Stage 1 Instrument
Section 1

Hello! I’m here on behalf of SEDCO Associates, which is a local survey firm. I’m here to
talk to you about the upcoming local level elections that are scheduled to occur at the end
of October in Lahore, as well as the rest of Punjab.

Have you heard about them?

This is the first time in Pakistan that these elections are being held locally on a party-
basis. The purpose of my visit today is to talk about these elections.

On a scale of 1 to 10, how important do you think these elections are for service
provision in your neighborhood?

_______

Before we move further, I would like to inform you that we are also collecting anonymous
citizen feedback regarding these elections. This envelope contains a piece of paper with a
question on it. Please write down your response to this question under it and put this
paper back in the envelope.

{Hand over the envelope. Continue once it is handed back. If respondent says that he is
illiterate, end the survey and move on to the next house.}


Section 2

Between the two parties, PTI and PML-N, which party do you perceive as being more
able to bring benefits and services to you and your local community?
A.      PTI
B.      PML-N

Between the two parties PTI and PML-N, which party do you perceive as more anti-
American?
A.    PTI
B.    PML-N


Political party members are registered with political parties. Parties usually provide
information to their members before important events like rallies, meetings etc. and keep
them updated about the general proceedings of the party. Are you presently a member of
a political party?

C.     Yes. Which Party?: ________________________ (Skip to section 4)
D.     No
As part of our goal of promoting participation in political life, we would like to provide
you an opportunity to become a member of one of two political parties. Becoming a
member of a party will allow you to stay up to date regarding important developments in
party politics. If you are interested, we can sign you up today. This is a print-out of the
official party website. We can fill the form together right now, and we will sign you up
online at our offices. Signing up should only take us about 2-3 minutes to complete.

If you are interested in signing up, which party would you like to join?
        A - PTI
        B - PML-N
(Note for enumerator: If asked about why just these 2 parties, enumerator should respond:
“Because these are the only two major parties for which it is possible to sign up online”

If the respondent was unwilling to sign up for a party, please mark an X here:

_______


Section 3

   1. Name
      ______________________________________________ (full name)

   2. Age
      ____________________ years

   3. Marital Status
      ____________________ (single / married / widower)

   4. Years of Education
      ____________________________ (number of years)

   5. Engaged in economic activity (job/business etc)
      _____________ (yes / no)

   6. Religious affiliation
      _____________________ (Muslim/Christian etc)

   7. Caste/Biradri
      ______________________ (Jatt/Rajput etc)

   8. Are you registered to vote
      _______________ (yes/no)

   9. Do you plan on voting
      __________________(yes/no)
Stage 2 Instrument
                                                                                                              06.11.2015

                                                   Stage 2 Android Survey
Probabilities for versions:
A – 50 percent
B – 50 percent

Screen 1 (if version A)

Hello,

This is a 5-10 minute survey. We have limited funds, so in addition to the Rs.100 guaranteed, we are offering an extra
payment through a lottery where you can earn up to Rs.200 more, for a total of Rs.300. The outcome of the lottery will
be determined at the end of your participation.


Screen 2 (if version A)

(Short big 5)
 No. Question                                                               Answer   Codes                Instructions
                                                                                     1 = Strongly
                                                                                     disagree

                                                                                     2 = Disagree

 1       I like to be amongst lots of people
                                                                                     3 = Indifferent

                                                                                     4 = Agree

                                                                                     5 = Strongly agree
 2       Some people think that I am selfish and egoistic                            Same as 1
 3       I am not a very organized person                                            Same as 1
 4       I often feel mentally stressed and anxious                                  Same as 1
 5       I am mistrustful and skeptical about the intentions of others               Same as 1
         I don’t pay much attention to the moods and feelings evoked
 6                                                                                   Same as 1
         my surroundings and circumstances
 7       I work very hard to achieve my goals                                        Same as 1
 8       I am a jolly and optimistic person                                          Same as 1
         I often feel helpless and wish someone else would resolve my
 9                                                                                   Same as 1
         problems
 10      I have a lot of intellectual curiosity in me                                Same as 1


Screen 3 (if version A)

(Stated preference)
    1. How do you view the United States government overall? Very negatively (1), negatively (2), neither negatively
        nor positively (3), positively (4), very positively (5)?
        Circle one of the following:        1       2         3  4  5
      2. How do you view aid provided by the United States government to Pakistan? Very negatively (1), negatively (2),
         neither negatively nor positively (3), positively (4), very positively (5)?
         Circle one of the following:     1        2         3        4       5


Screen 4 (if version A)

(Final screen displays total amount, where amount includes Rs.100 guaranteed payment, and with 33 percent probability
a lottery of Rs.0, Rs.100 or Rs.200, so that the total payment is either Rs.100, Rs.200, or Rs.300.)
Please collect your total payment of Rs. ……… From the recruiter


Screen 1 (if version B)

Hello,

This is a 5-10 minute survey. We have limited funds, so in addition to the Rs.100 guaranteed, we are offering an extra
payment through a lottery where you can earn up to Rs.100 more, for a total of Rs.200. The outcome of the lottery will
be determined at the end of your participation.


Screen 2 (if version B)

(Short big 5)
 No. Question                                                            Answer    Codes                Instructions
                                                                                   1 = Strongly
                                                                                   disagree

                                                                                   2 = Disagree

 1       I like to be amongst lots of people
                                                                                   3 = Indifferent

                                                                                   4 = Agree

                                                                                   5 = Strongly agree
 2       Some people think that I am selfish and egoistic                          Same as 1
 3       I am not a very organized person                                          Same as 1
 4       I often feel mentally stressed and anxious                                Same as 1
 5       I am mistrustful and skeptical about the intentions of others             Same as 1
         I don’t pay much attention to the moods and feelings evoked
 6                                                                                 Same as 1
         my surroundings and circumstances
 7       I work very hard to achieve my goals                                      Same as 1
 8       I am a jolly and optimistic person                                        Same as 1
         I often feel helpless and wish someone else would resolve my
 9                                                                                 Same as 1
         problems
 10      I have a lot of intellectual curiosity in me                              Same as 1


Screen 3 (if version B)
(Revealed preference)
You are one of 50 percent who are taking this survey receiving this offer to receive an additional Rs.100.

Funding for this bonus payment comes from the US government. We can pay you Rs.100 for completing the survey, but
in order to receive the bonus payment you are required to acknowledge receipt of the funds provided by the US
government and thank the funder. If you choose not to accept the payment, you will forego the bonus payment of
Rs.100, but not the payment of Rs.100 for your participation, or the lottery payment that you are awarded at the end.
Please note that the enumerator has no way of knowing whether you accepted or rejected the bonus payment.

The letter of acknowledgment and thanks can be found on the next page.


Screen 4 (if version B)

Option 1: I gratefully thank the US government for its generosity and accept the payment
Option 2: I do not accept the payment


Screen 5 (if version B)

(Final screen displays total amount, where amount includes Rs.100 guaranteed payment, Rs.100 bonus payment if offer
is accepted, and with 50 percent probability a lottery of Rs.0, Rs.100, so that the total payment is either is either Rs.100,
Rs.200, or Rs.300.)
Please collect your total payment of Rs. ……… From the recruiter
