                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   ARE AMERICANS AND INDIANS MORE ALTRUISTIC THAN THE JAPANESE
 AND CHINESE? EVIDENCE FROM A NEW INTERNATIONAL SURVEY OF BEQUEST
                               PLANS

                                         Charles Yuji Horioka

                                         Working Paper 20158
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w20158


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2014

I am indebted to Krishnendu Dastidar, Emin Gahramanov, Shoshana Grossbard, Jose Albert Molina,
Abdul Aziz Hayat Muhammad, Wataru Kureishi, Shizuka Sekita, Xueli Tang, Midori Wakabayashi,
Yoko Niimi, Oded Stark, Tien Manh Vu, Ken Yamada, three anonymous referees, and the participants
of the International Conference on Econometrics and the World Economy, Fukuoka University, Fukuoka,
Japan; the Eighth Biennial Conference of the Asian Consumer and Family Economics Association
(ACFEA), Yamaguchi University, Yamaguchi, Japan; the International Workshop on “Social Inequality
in Transferring Resources across Generations,” University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan; the Fifteenth Annual
Conference on “Dynamics, Economic Growth and International Trade (DEGIT),” Goethe University,
Frankfurt, Germany: the Annual Meeting of the Japan Society of Family Sociology, Konan University,
Kobe, Japan; ESAM12: The Econometric Society Australasian Meeting, Langham Hotel, Melbourne,
Australia; and seminars at the Asian Development Bank, Deakin University, the Federal Reserve Bank
of San Francisco, Goethe University, Hong Kong University, Hunter College, Keio University, Melbourne
University, Monash University, the National Graduate Research Institute of Policy Studies (GRIPS),
the National University of Singapore, the University of Auckland, the University of Michigan, the
University of the Philippines, Diliman, the University of Queensland, and the University of Tokyo
for their valuable comments, to Tien Manh Vu for his superb research assistance, and to the Philippine
Center for Economic Development (PCED), Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science, and Technology
of the Japanese Government for Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research Category B (topic number 22330083)
and Category S (topic number 20223004), and to the Osaka University Global Center of Excellence
(GCOE) Program “Human Behavior and Socioeconomic Dynamics,” all of which supported this research.
This research uses micro data from the Preference Parameters Study of Osaka University’s 21st Century
&2(3URJUDP³%HKDYLRUDO0DFURG\QDPLFV%DVHGRQ6XUYH\VDQG([SHULPHQWV´DQGLWV*OREDO&2(
SURMHFW³+XPDQ%HKDYLRUDQG6RFLRHFRQRPLF'\QDPLFV´7KHYLHZVH[SUHVVHGKHUHLQDUHWKRVHRI
WKHDXWKRUDQGGRQRWQHFHVVDULO\UHIOHFWWKHYLHZVRIWKH1DWLRQDO%XUHDXRI(FRQRPLF5HVHDUFK

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Charles Yuji Horioka. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Are Americans and Indians More Altruistic than the Japanese and Chinese? Evidence from
a New International Survey of Bequest Plans
Charles Yuji Horioka
NBER Working Paper No. 20158
May 20145HYLVHG0D\
JEL No. D12,D14,D64,D91,E21,H31,J14,P52,Z12

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper discusses three alternative assumptions concerning household preferences (altruism, self-
interest, and a desire for dynasty building) and shows that these assumptions have very different
implicationsfor bequest motives and bequest division. After reviewing some of the literature on
actual bequests,bequest motives, and bequest division, the paper presents data on the strength of
bequest motives,stated bequest motives, and bequest division plans from a new international survey
conducted in China,India, Japan, and the United States. It finds striking inter-country differencesin
bequest plans, withthe bequest plans of Americans and Indians appearing to be much more consistent
with altruistic preferencesthan those of the Japanese and Chinese and the bequest plans of the Japanese
and Chinese appearingto be much more consistent with selfish preferences than those of Americans
and Indians. These findingshave important implications for the efficacy and desirability of stimulative
fiscal policies, public pensions,and inheritance taxes.


Charles Yuji Horioka
Room 223, Encarnacion Hall
School of Economics
University of the Philippines
Diliman, Quezon City 1101
PHILIPPINES
and NBER
horioka@iser.osaka-u.ac.jp
1. Introduction


There are at least three competing assumptions concerning household preferences in
economics: that individuals are selfish, that they are altruistic, and that they have a
desire for dynasty building. The three assumptions have very different implications
for bequest motives and bequest division, so examining survey data on stated bequest
motives and bequest division plans is a promising way of shedding light on which
assumption holds in the real world, and comparing bequest plans in different countries
is a promising way of shedding light on whether different assumptions apply in
different countries.


In this paper, we discuss the three alternative assumptions concerning household
preferences and show that these assumptions have very different implications for
bequest motives and bequest division. After reviewing some of the literature on actual
bequests, bequest motives, and bequest division, we present data on the strength of
bequest motives, stated bequest motives, and bequest division plans from a new
international survey on bequest plans conducted in the People’s Republic of China
(hereafter China), India, Japan, and the United States.      We then speculate about
possible reasons for inter-country differences in bequest plans and consider the policy
implications of our findings.


As shown in subsection 2.1, positive bequests are consistent with all three assumptions
concerning household preferences, and thus it is not possible to draw inferences about
which assumption holds in the real world unless we have information on households’
motives for leaving bequests.      Most previous studies try to infer households’
preferences from their actual behavior because they do not have any direct information
on households’ bequest motives, but there are many econometric and other difficulties
in making such inferences.       The current paper makes a significant original
contribution to this literature not only by presenting direct information on households’
stated bequest motives and bequest division plans but also by presenting such
information on four countries (China, India, Japan, and the United States) with very
different levels of economic development, cultures, etc., allowing us to see whether or
not household preferences vary from country to country.


To summarize the main findings of this paper, it shows using data from a new
international survey on bequest plans that there are striking inter-country differences


                                           2
in bequest plans, with the bequest plans of Americans and Indians appearing to be
much more consistent with selfish preferences than those of the Japanese and Chinese
and the bequest plans of the Japanese and Chinese appearing to be much more
consistent with selfish preferences than those of Americans and Indians.           These
inter-country differences in bequest plans may partly reflect inter-country differences in
social safety nets and social norms and partly reflect inter-country differences in
household preferences.


These findings have important implications for the efficacy and desirability of
stimulative fiscal policies, public pensions, and inheritance taxes, with stimulative
fiscal policies being more effective, public pensions being more effective in raising the
living standards of the aged, and inheritance taxes being less necessary in countries
such as Japan and China in which households are selfishly motivated and conversely in
countries such as the United States and India in which households are altruistically
motivated.


The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: In section 2, we discuss alternative
assumptions concerning household preferences, show that these assumptions have very
different implications for bequest motives and bequest division, and review some of the
literature on actual bequests, bequest motives, and bequest division. In section 3, we
describe the international survey on bequest plans used in this paper, and in section 4,
we present evidence from this survey on bequest plans in China, India, Japan, and the
United States. In section 5, we explore possible reasons for inter-country differences in
bequest plans, and finally, section 6 summarizes, concludes, and explores the policy
implications of our findings.




2. Bequests: Assumptions, Models, and Empirical Evidence


2.1. Theoretical Considerations


In this subsection, we discuss three assumptions concerning household preferences that
are made in the theoretical literature and explore the implications of these assumptions
for bequest motives and bequest division (see Cremer, Kessler, and Pestieau (1992),
Masson and Pestieau (1996), and Laferrere and Wolff (2006) for more extensive
expositions and Horioka, et al. (2014) for an illustrative model).


                                            3
Three examples of assumptions concerning household preferences that underlie
theoretical models of parental consumption and saving are as follows:１


(1) The household is selfish and derives utility only from its own consumption (as
   assumed in the selfish life cycle model of Modigliani and Brumberg (1954))
(2) The household is altruistic and derives utility not only from its own consumption
   but also from the consumption of others, especially that of its children, parents, and
   other family members (as assumed in the altruism model of Barro (1974), Becker
   (1974, 1981, 1991), and Stark (1995))
(3) The household cares not about itself or its children but about the perpetuation of the
   family line and/or the family business and tries to minimize the probability of
   extinction of the family line and/or the family business (as assumed in the dynasty
   or primogeniture model of Chu (1991))２


We now explore the implications of each of these assumptions concerning household
preferences for bequest motives and bequest division. We will use the term “bequest”
throughout this paper for brevity, but the reader should bear in mind that our analysis
applies to all intergenerational transfers including inter vivos transfers and in-kind
transfers such as care, attention, and co-residence (see Molina (2013) and the papers
cited therein for more on in-kind transfers). Note, however, that the determinants of
inter vivos transfers and bequests may differ (see, for example, Dunn and Phillips
(1997), McGarry (1999), and Slavik and Wiseman; see Arrondel and Masson (2006) for a
useful survey). Most of these studies find, for example, that inter vivos transfers tend
to be divided unequally whereas bequests tend to be divided equally.


Looking first at selfish preferences, the implication of such preferences for bequest
motives is that households will leave no bequests to their children, leave only
unintended bequests arising from lifespan uncertainty (see, for example, Davies (1981)),
or leave bequests only if their children provide care, attention and/or financial support
during old age. One variant of the third case (the so-called “selfish exchange model”) is
Bernheim, Shleifer, and Summers’s (1985) “strategic bequest motive,” wherein parents
use the threat of disinheritance to induce their children to provide care and/or attention
during old age, and another variant of this case is Kotlikoff and Spivak’s (1981) “implicit
intra-family annuity contract,” wherein parents receive an annuity from their children
until death in exchange for giving their children an ex post premium in the form of a


                                            4
bequest.３ The implication of selfish preferences for bequest division is that households
will leave more or all of their bequest to the child who provides more care, attention
and/or financial support during old age. Thus, equal division is inconsistent with the
selfish life cycle model unless all children provide exactly the same amount of care,
attention and/or financial support, which is unlikely (Menchik (1988) and Bernheim
and Severinov (2003)).


Looking next at altruistic preferences, the implication of such preferences for bequest
motives is that households will leave a bequest to their children even if they do not
provide care, attention, and/or financial support during old age and do not carry on the
family line and/or the family business, and the implication of this model for bequest
division is that households will leave more or all of their bequest to the child who has
greater needs and/or less earnings capacity (that is, bequests will be compensatory)
(Becker (1981, 1991)). Thus, equal division is not consistent with the simplest version
of the altruism model unless all children have the same needs and the same earnings
capacities (which is very, very unlikely), but if it is assumed that children derive
disutility from receiving a smaller share of their parents’ inheritance than their siblings
(what Stark (1998) calls “relative deprivation”), altruistic parents may choose to divide
their bequests equally even if their children’s needs or earnings capacities differ (see
also Bernheim and Severinov (2003)). By contrast, Wilhelm (1996) argues that it is the
parents rather than the children who derive disutility from unequal division, perhaps
because unequal division necessitates financial costs such as the cost of drawing up a
will and/or psychic costs arising from the parents’ aversion to the inequality of bequests.
In a similar vein, Laitner (1997) and Lundholm and Ohlsson (2000) attribute equal
division to parents’ desire to insure post-mortem reputation, to preserve family
solidarity, and to avoid conflicts among their children.


Turning finally to dynastic preferences, the implication of such preferences for bequest
motives is that households will leave a bequest to their children only if they carry on the
family line and/or the family business, and the implication of this model for bequest
division is that households will leave more or all of their bequest to the child who carries
on the family line and/or the family business.


Thus, the various assumptions concerning household preferences have very different
implications for bequest motives and bequest division, and thus we can shed light on
which assumption concerning household preferences holds in the real world by looking


                                             5
at empirical evidence on bequest motives and bequest division.


It should be noted, however, that bequest motives and bequest division depend not only
on household preferences but also on outside influences on household bequest behavior
such as income levels, income growth, inheritance laws, tax policies, social safety nets,
social norms, and other institutions and government policies. For example, altruistic
households may not necessarily leave a bequest to their children even if they want to if
they are too poor to do so, if income growth is high (meaning that the lifetime incomes of
children exceed the lifetime incomes of parents), inheritance taxes are too high, and/or if
the social norm is for parents to invest heavily in their children’s human capital, which
renders them incapable of leaving large bequests to their children.         Alternatively,
selfish households may not need to use bequests as a way of inducing or coercing their
children to provide care and/or attention during old age if social safety nets for the
elderly (public old-age pensions, long-term care insurance, health insurance, etc.) are
adequate.      Furthermore, households may be more likely to divide their bequests
unequally if the social norm is for parents to leave everything to the eldest son in
exchange for the eldest son living with, and taking care of, the parents in old age.
Finally, selfish households may not be able to leave more to the child who took better
care of them even if they want to if inheritance laws require them to divide their
bequest equally among their children.


2.2 Empirical Evidence on Bequests


There have been many empirical studies that try to determine which assumption
concerning household preferences holds in the real world by looking at actual bequests,
bequest motives, and bequest division. In this subsection, we review some of this
literature to see how much light it can shed on the issue of which assumption
concerning household preferences holds in the real world. This review is selective due
to space limitations and the large size of the existing literature. It focuses on studies
that shed light on the issue of which assumption concerning household preferences
holds in the real world and on studies that use data for the United States and Japan.
For more comprehensive surveys, see Arrondel and Masson (2006) and Laferrere and
Wolf (2006).




                                            6
2.2.1. Empirical Evidence on Actual Bequests


We look first at empirical studies that have attempted to measure the importance of
actual bequests. In a seminal study, Kotlikoff and Summers (1981) calculate the share
of bequests and other intergenerational transfers in total household wealth in the
United States and obtain the surprising finding that this share is 46-81% depending on
the calculation method used.      Modigliani (1988) criticizes Kotlikoff and Summers’
(1981) calculations on a number of grounds and claims that the true value of this share
is 17-20%, but Kotlikoff (1988) argues that some of Modigliani’s adjustments are
excessive or unwarranted. Barthold and Ito (1992) calculate this share for both Japan
and the United States and find that it is 25-40% in both countries, that it is higher in
Japan under certain assumptions, and that it is higher in the United States under other
assumptions. Turning to studies for Japan, Hayashi (1986) finds that this share is at
least 9.6%, Dekle (1989) finds that it is 3-48.7%, Campbell (1997) finds that it is at most
23.4-28.1%, Horioka, et al. (2002) finds that it is 23.9%, and Horioka (2009) finds that it
is 15.2-17.9% (see Horioka (1993) for a review of this literature). The range of these
estimates is quite broad, but the consensus seems to be that bequests and other
intergenerational transfers are quantitatively more important in the United States
than in Japan.


2.2.2. Empirical Evidence on Bequest Motives


Turning next to the issue of what motivates bequests, since few household surveys ask
respondents directly about their attitudes towards bequests, most previous studies have
tried to infer respondents’ bequest motives from the impact of bequests on the amount of
care, attention, and/or financial assistance that aged parents receive from their children.
If bequests are altruistically motivated (and altruism is one-sided), there should not be
any correlation between bequests from parents to children and care, attention, and/or
financial assistance from children to aged parents, whereas if bequests are motivated by
selfish exchange, there should be a positive correlation between bequests from parents
to children and care, attention, and/or financial assistance from children to aged
parents.


Looking first at studies that use U.S. data, one study of this genre is Menchik, et al.
(1988), which obtains a positive correlation between the parents’ intention to bequeath
and the frequency of their children’s telephone calls and visits, a result which appears


                                            7
to support the selfish exchange model.          However, this study fails to distinguish
between single-child families and multiple-child families, as done by later studies.


The reference study on the impact of bequests on the amount of attention from one’s
children is Bernheim, Shleifer, and Summers (1985), which finds, using data from the
Longitudinal Retirement History Survey (LRHS), that bequeathable wealth has a
positive and significant impact on the frequency of phone calls and visits from one’s
children in the case of families with two or more children, even after controlling for the
parents’ age, health, and employment status, but that it has a negative and
insignificant impact on the frequency of phone calls and visits in the case of families
with only one child and that non-bequeathable wealth does not have a significant
impact on the frequency of phone calls and visits in either sample. All of these results
appear to support the selfish exchange model because only bequeathable wealth should
influence the behavior of children and because parents’ threat of disinheritance is not
credible if they have only one child.


However, Perozek (1998) replicates Bernheim, Shleifer, and Summers’ (1985) test using
a richer data set (the 1987 National Survey of Families and Households (NSFH)) and
finds that bequeathable wealth no longer has a significant impact on attention from
one’s children when additional child and family characteristics are taken into account
and/or a more comprehensive measure of attention is used.


Moreover, Altonji, Hayashi, and Kotlikoff (2000) analyze inter vivos time and money
transfers from parents to children as well as those from children to parents, using data
from the 1988 wave of the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID), and find little
evidence that parental income or wealth raises time transfers from children or that time
transfers from children to parents are exchanged for money transfers from parents to
children or conversely. Similarly, Ioannides and Kan (2000) analyze two-directional
inter vivos transfers of time and money between parents and children and find that
they are motivated by mutual altruism rather than by selfish exchange motives.


Furthermore, Horioka, et al. (2000) analyze data from the “Comparative Survey of
Savings in Japan and the United States,” conducted in 1996 by the former Ministry of
Posts and Telecommunications of the Japanese Government, and find that parent-child
co-residence rates are much higher for parents with a weak bequest motive (12.02%)
than they are for parents with a strong bequest motive (6.7 to 7.5%) and that they are, if


                                            8
anything, lower for parents with a strong bequest motive (6.7 to 7.5%) than they are for
parents with no bequest motive at all (7.7%) in the case of the United States. All of
these results are inconsistent with the selfish exchange model.


Thus, the most careful studies of the impact of bequests on the amount of care, attention,
and/or financial assistance from children that use U.S. data find little evidence in
support of the selfish exchange model, which suggests that bequests are largely
altruistically motivated in the United States. To cite a few examples on the other side
of the ledger, Cox (1987) and Cox and Rank (1992) find that the recipient’s income has a
positive impact on the amount of intra-family inter vivos transfers conditional on
transfers being made and interpret this as evidence that inter vivos transfers are
motivated by selfish exchange motives.          In a similar vein, Altonji, Hayashi, and
Kotlikoff (1997) find that inter vivos transfers are weakly compensatory but far from
fully compensatory. According to Laferrere and Wolff ’s (2006) more comprehensive
review of the literature, about two-thirds of the studies using U.S. data find support for
the altruism model or reject the selfish exchange model, but the majority of studies
using French data support the selfish exchange model or reject the altruism model.


Turning to studies that use Japanese data, Noguchi, Uemura, and Kitou (1989) analyze
data from their own survey and find that children are more likely to receive a bequest
from their parents if they live with their parents, especially if they are the eldest son,
and that their probability of receiving a bequest is higher, the higher is the amount of
financial support they give to their parents.


Turning to studies that examine the opposite direction of causality (the impact of
parents’ bequeathable wealth or bequest motives on children’s behavior), Ohtake and
Horioka (1994) analyze the determinants of financial support from children to parents
and parent-child co-residence using data from the 1986 Comprehensive Survey of
Living Conditions, conducted by the Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare of the
Japanese Government. They find that parents’ financial net worth (a component of
bequeathable wealth) has a positive and significant impact on the amount of financial
support from children to parents (given that the child provides financial support to his
or her parents) and that housing wealth (also a component of bequeathable wealth) has
a positive and significant impact on the probability of parent-child co-residence but that
non-bequeathable wealth does not have a significant impact on either (see also Ohtake
(1991)).

                                            9
Similarly, Komamura (1994) analyzes data from the Survey of Retirement Assets,
conducted in 1990 by the former Management and Coordination Agency of the Japanese
Government, and finds that housing wealth has a positive and significant impact on the
probability of parent-child co-residence.


Moreover, the aforementioned study by Horioka, et al. (2000) finds that parent-child
co-residence rates are highest for parents with a strong bequest motive (63-64%), much
lower for parents with a weak bequest motive (49%), and even lower for parents with no
bequest motive at all (25%) in the case of Japan.


Furthermore, Yamada (2006) analyzes the determinants of parent-child co-residence,
parent-child distance, and the frequency of parent-child contact using data from the
Survey on Life Planning in the Age of Long Life, conducted in 1992 by the Japan
Institute of Life Insurance, and finds that inheritance expectations have a significant
impact on all three dependent variables, at least in the case of the husband’s parents,
and that inheritance experience has a significant impact on the second and third
dependent variables in the case of all parents as well as in the case of the husband’s
parents.


Thus, studies relating the probability of leaving bequests with the amount of care,
attention, and/or financial assistance from children that use Japanese data find support
for the selfish exchange model, which suggests that bequests are selfishly motivated in
Japan, unlike in the case of the United States.


Turning finally to attitudinal data on bequest motives, Horioka, et al. (2000) and
Horioka (2002) analyze data from the aforementioned “Comparative Survey of Savings
in Japan and the United States” and find that 42.53% of Americans plan to leave a
bequest to their children no matter what, that 3.40% of Americans plan to leave a
bequest to their children only if their children take care of them, that 51.13% of
Americans do not plan to make any special efforts to leave a bequest to their children,
and that 2.93% of Americans do not feel that it is necessary to leave a bequest to their
children under any circumstances. Since the first way of thinking is consistent with
the altruism model and the second through fourth ways of thinking are consistent with
the selfish life cycle model, these results imply that 42.53% of Americans are altruistic
and that 57.47% are selfish.


                                            10
By contrast, Horioka, et al. (2000) and Horioka (2002) find, using data from the same
survey, that 19.28% of the Japanese plan to leave a bequest to their children no matter
what, that 6.39% of the Japanese plan to leave a bequest to their children only if their
children take care of them, that 69.33% of the Japanese do not plan to make any special
efforts to leave a bequest to their children, and that 5.00% of the Japanese do not feel
that it is necessary to leave a bequest to their children under any circumstances, which
implies that 19.28% of the Japanese are altruistic and that 80.72% are selfish (see
Horioka (2002, 2008, and 2009) for similar data from other surveys).


Thus, the conclusion based on attitudinal data on bequest motives is consistent with the
conclusion based on studies of the impact of bequests on the amount of care, attention,
and/or financial assistance from children, with both suggesting that Americans are
much more altruistic than the Japanese.


2.2.3. Empirical Evidence on Bequest Division


Turning next to the issue of bequest division, the available evidence suggests that the
equal division of bequests among one’s children is by far the dominant practice in the
United States. For example, Menchik (1980) finds that bequests are divided roughly
equally among one’s children and, in particular, that males or first-born or earlier-born
children do not receive larger bequests than other siblings. Similarly, Wilhelm (1996)
finds that 68.6% of multi-child decedents divided their estates exactly equally among
their children, that 76.6% of multi-child decedents divided their estates so that each
child received within plus or minus 2% of the average inheritance among children in the
family, and that 88% of multi-child decedents divided their estates approximately
equally among their children. Dunn and Phillips (1997) find that 90% of American
households bequeath at least some assets to all of their children even though inter vivos
transfers such as cash gifts and co-residence are made preferentially to poorer children.
McGarry (1999) finds that 83% of respondents in the Asset and Health Dynamics
(AHEAD) Study report that their wills treat all of their children approximately equally,
while Light and McGarry (2004) find that 92.1% of respondents in the 1999 National
Longitudinal Surveys (NLS) of Mature Women and Young Women who have children
and who have a will say that their estate will be divided equally among their children.
Finally, Horioka, et al. (2000) and Horioka (2002) analyze data from the aforementioned
“Comparative Survey of Savings in Japan and the United States” and find that 84.10%


                                           11
of Americans with two or more children plan to divide their estates equally among their
children.


By contrast, Horioka, et al. (2000) and Horioka (2002) find, using data from the same
survey, that only 44.17% of Japanese with two or more children plan to divide their
estates equally among their children (see Horioka (2002, 2008, and 2009) for similar
data from other surveys).


Thus, the tendency to divide estates equally among one’s children is much stronger
(nearly twice as strong) in the United States than it is in Japan, and moreover, at least
one study (Tomes, 1981) finds that bequest division is compensatory in the U.S., with
low-income children inheriting more (ceteris paribus) than their advantaged siblings,
and Dunn and Phillips (1997), McGarry (1999), and Slavik and Wiseman (2013) find
that inter vivos transfers are unequal and compensatory in the U.S. This suggests
that Americans are much more altruistic than the Japanese, and this conclusion based
on evidence on bequest division is fully consistent with our earlier conclusion based on
evidence on bequest motives, which is reassuring.




3.   New Survey on Bequest Plans


In this section, we describe the survey we use in this paper: the “Preference Parameters
Study of Osaka University,” a new international survey that collects detailed
information on bequest plans. This survey was conducted annually during the 2003-13
period in Japan, annually during the 2005-13 period in the United States, in 2006 and
annually during the 2009-13 period in urban China, in 2007, 2010, and 2013 in rural
China, annually during the 2009-13 period in urban India, and annually during the
2012-13 period in rural India by the Global Center of Excellence (GCOE) Program on
“Human Behavior and Socioeconomic Dynamics” (2003-08) of the Graduate School of
Economics, the Institute of Social and Economic Research (Research Center for
Behavioral Economics) of Osaka University, etc., and its predecessor, the Twenty-first
Century Center of Excellence (COE) Program on “Behavior Macrodynamics Based on
Surveys and Experiments” (2008-13) of the same institutions.


In this paper, we use data from the 2012 waves of the Chinese, Indian, Japanese, and
United States surveys except that we use data from the 2010 survey for rural China


                                           12
because this survey was not conducted in 2011 or 2012.


The survey for urban China is a panel survey and surveyed a random sample of males
and females who were aged 20 to 69 in 2009 and living in one of six major cities (Beijing,
Chengdu, Guangzhou, Shanghai, Shenyang, and Wuhan) using the interview method.


The survey for rural China is a repeated cross-section survey and surveyed a random
sample of males and females who were aged 20 to 69 and living in the rural areas of one
of four provinces (Hunan, Hubei, Sichuan, and Liaoning) using the interview method.


The survey for urban India is a panel survey and surveyed a random sample of males
and females who were aged 20 to 69 in 2009 and living in one of six major cities (Delhi,
Mumbai, Bangalore, Chennai, Kolkata, and Hyderabad) using the interview method.


The survey for rural India is a panel survey and surveyed a random sample of males
and females who were aged 20 to 69 in 2012 and living in the rural areas of one of four
cities (Delhi, Mumbai, Bangalore, and Kolkata) using the interview method.


The Japanese survey is a panel survey and surveyed a nationwide random sample of
males and females who were aged 20 to 69 in 2003 using the drop-off, pick-up method.
Fresh respondents were selected and added to the sample in the 2004, 2006 and 2009
waves.


The United States survey is a panel survey and surveyed a nationwide representative
sample of males and females who were aged 18 to 99 in 2005 from the TNS Panel using
a mailed questionnaire. Fresh respondents were selected and added to the sample in
the 2007, 2008, and 2009 waves.


The data from the urban and rural surveys for China were combined by weighting the
observations for urban and rural areas by the proportion of the population living in
urban and rural areas in 2012 (52% and 48%, respectively) and likewise in India (32%
and 68%, respectively) (data on urban and rural populations were taken from the World
Bank ( 2013)).


Finally, respondents whose reported age was not within the range noted above were
dropped from the sample. This problem arose only in the case of the United States


                                           13
survey.


Almost identical survey instruments were used in each country, making it possible to
make direct comparisons among the four countries. For more detailed information on
the survey, see http://www.iser.osaka-u.ac.jp/coe/journal/eng_panelsummary.html.




4.    Evidence from the New Survey on Bequest Plans


In this section, we discuss our findings for China, India, Japan, and the United States
based on the new international survey on bequest plans.             We discuss our findings
pertaining to the strength of bequest motives, stated bequest motives, and bequest
division plans in subsections 4.1, 4.2, and 4.3, respectively.


4.1. Evidence on the Strength of Bequest Motives


In this subsection, we present evidence on the strength of bequest motives in China,
India, Japan, and the United States from the new survey on bequest plans.               As
explained in the next subsection, this survey asks respondents about how they feel
about leaving an inheritance to their child(ren), and the responses can be grouped
according to the strength of their bequest motives.              The response implying the
strongest bequest motive is “I plan to leave an inheritance to my child(ren) no matter
what” (to be referred to as an “unconditional bequest motive”), the responses implying
the second strongest bequest motive are the three responses “I plan to leave an
inheritance to my child(ren) only if they provide care (including nursing care) during old
age,” “I plan to leave an inheritance to my child(ren) only if they provide financial
assistance during old age” and “I plan to leave an inheritance to my child(ren) only if
they carry on the family business” (to be collectively referred to as a “conditional
bequest motive”), and the response implying the third strongest bequest motive is “I
want to leave an inheritance to my child(ren) but I won't because I don't have the
financial capacity to do so” (to be referred to as a “potential bequest motive”).


By contrast, the responses implying the weakest bequest motive are “I do not plan to
leave an inheritance to my child(ren) under any circumstances because doing so may
reduce their will to work” and “I do not plan to leave an inheritance to my child(ren)
under any circumstances because I want to use my wealth myself” (to be collectively


                                             14
referred to as “no bequest motive”), and the response implying the second weakest
bequest motive is “I do not plan to make special efforts to leave an inheritance to my
child(ren) but will leave whatever is left over” (to be referred to as a “passive bequest
motive”).


The results are shown in Table 1, and as can be seen from this table, the proportion of
respondents with an unconditional bequest motive is highest in India (68.98%), second
highest in the United States (58.17%), third highest in China (34.24%), and lowest in
Japan (26.67%). Similarly, the proportion of respondents with an unconditional or
conditional bequest motive is highest in India (87.05%), second highest in the United
States (60.77%), third highest in China (56.35%), and lowest in Japan (31.44%), and
the proportion of respondents with an unconditional, conditional, or potential bequest
motive is highest in India (95.88%), second highest in the United States (73.18%), third
highest in China (59.23%), and lowest in Japan (49.56%).


By contrast, the proportion of respondents with no bequest motive at all is highest in
China (4.81%), second highest in Japan (2.48%), third highest in the United States
(1.82%), and lowest in India (0.62%), the proportion of respondents with only a passive
bequest motive is highest in Japan (47.96), second highest in China (35.96%), third
highest in the United States (25.00%), and lowest in India (3.50%), and the proportion of
respondents with either no bequest motive at all or only a passive bequest motive is
highest in Japan (50.44%), second highest in China (40.77%), third highest in the
United States (26.82%), and lowest in India (4.12%).


Thus, the strength of bequest motives varies considerably from country to country, and
according to virtually all criteria, bequest motives are strongest in India, second
strongest in the United States, third strongest in China, and weakest in Japan.
Reassuringly, these findings are consistent with the findings of the studies surveyed in
subsection 2.2.1, which find that actual bequests are quantitatively more important in
the United States than they are in Japan.


However, as explained in subsection 2.1, evidence on the strength of bequest motives
does not necessarily shed light on which assumption concerning household preferences
holds in the real world because positive bequests are consistent with all three
assumptions concerning household preferences and one needs evidence on the motives
for which households leave bequests in order to know which assumption concerning


                                            15
household preferences holds in the real world. It is to such evidence that we turn next.


4.2. Evidence on Stated Bequest Motives


The new survey on bequest plans asks respondents how they feel about leaving an
inheritance to their child(ren), with the responses (grouped by the assumption
concerning household preferences with which they are consistent) being as follows:


(Responses consistent with altruism)
(1) I plan to leave an inheritance to my child(ren) no matter what.
(2) I do not plan to leave an inheritance to my child(ren) under any circumstances
    because doing so may reduce their will to work.


 (Responses consistent with self-interest)
(3) I plan to leave an inheritance to my child(ren) only if they provide care (including
    nursing care) during old age.
(4) I plan to leave an inheritance to my child(ren) only if they provide financial
    assistance during old age.
(5) I do not plan to make special efforts to leave an inheritance to my child(ren) but will
    leave whatever is left over.
(6) I do not plan to leave an inheritance to my child(ren) under any circumstances
    because I want to use my wealth myself.


(Responses consistent with dynasty building)
(7) I plan to leave an inheritance to my child(ren) only if they carry on the family
    business.


(Response for which consistency with an assumption concerning household preferences
is not clear)
(8) I want to leave an inheritance to my child(ren) but I won’t because I don’t have the
    financial capacity to do so.


The results are shown in Table 2, with motives being grouped by the assumption
concerning household preferences with which they are consistent and with response (8)
being dropped.




                                             16
As can be seen from this table, the proportion of respondents whose attitude toward
bequests is consistent with altruism is highest in India (75.80%), second highest in the
United States (66.97%), third highest in China (37.40%), and lowest in Japan (33.98%),
while the proportion of respondents whose attitude toward bequests is consistent with
self-interest is highest in Japan (64.96%), second highest in China (55.10%), third
highest in the United States (32.76%), and lowest in India (21.82%).


Finally, the proportion of respondents whose attitude toward bequests is consistent with
dynasty building is low (no higher than 7.50%) in all four countries but is highest in
China (7.50%), followed by India (2.38%), Japan (1.06%), and the United States (0.26%).


Thus, it appears that there are considerable differences among the four countries in
stated bequest motives, with stated bequest motives being primarily altruistic in India
and the United States and primarily selfish in Japan and China and dynastic motives
not being important in any of the four countries but more important in China than
elsewhere.


Moreover, a comparison of Tables 1 and 2 shows that there is a very high correlation
between the strength of bequest motives and stated bequest motives, with the rank
ordering of the four countries being exactly the same regardless of whether they are
ranked according to the strength of bequest motives or according to the proportion of
respondents whose attitude toward bequests is consistent with altruism, with India
being first, the United States second, China third, and Japan last. Conversely, the
rank ordering of the four countries when they are ranked according to the strength of
bequest motives is just the opposite of their rank ordering when they are ranked
according to the proportion of respondents whose attitude toward bequests is consistent
with self-interest.   It thus appears that altruistic individuals have strong bequest
motives and that selfish individuals have weak bequest motives, as conventional
wisdom would predict. Moreover, our findings are broadly consistent with the findings
of the studies surveyed in subsection 2.2.2, which find that bequest motives are more
altruistic in the United States than they are in Japan.


Looking in more detail at the importance of the individual responses, the dominant
altruistic motive in all four countries is “I plan to leave an inheritance to my child(ren)
no matter what,” and the rank ordering of the four countries with respect to the
proportion of respondents selecting this response is identical to the rank ordering of the


                                            17
four countries with respect to the proportion of respondents whose attitude toward
bequests is consistent with altruism.


Similarly, the dominant selfish motive in all countries except India is “I do not plan to
make special efforts to leave an inheritance to my child(ren) but will leave whatever is
left over,” and the rank ordering of the four countries with respect to the proportion of
respondents selecting this response is identical to the rank ordering of the four
countries with respect to the proportion of respondents whose attitude toward bequests
is consistent with self-interest.


By contrast, the proportion of respondents selecting the two exchange-related selfish
motives (“I plan to leave an inheritance to my child(ren) only if they provide care
(including nursing care) during old age” and “I plan to leave an inheritance to my
child(ren) only if they provide financial assistance during old age”) is highest in India
(and second highest in China) and lowest in Japan (and second lowest in the United
States) even though the proportion of respondents whose attitude toward bequests is
consistent with self-interest is lowest in India and highest in Japan.


Finally, the proportion of respondents who do not plan to leave an inheritance for either
altruistic or selfish reasons is small (less than 3%) in all four countries, and the
proportion of respondents who plan to leave an inheritance to their child(ren) only if
they carry on the family business (the only response that is consistent with the dynasty
model) is also small (no higher than 7.50%) in all four countries.


Thus, except for the results for exchange-related selfish motives, the detailed results
are consistent with our earlier finding that bequest motives are primarily altruistic in
India and the United States and primarily selfish in Japan and China and that dynastic
motives are not important in any of the four countries but more important in China
than elsewhere. As for why exchange-related selfish motives are stronger in India and
China than in Japan and the United States, it could be because mutual assistance and
support and risk sharing within the family are necessarily stronger in countries where
social safety nets are weaker, as suggested by Esping-Andersen (1990, 1999).


4.3. Evidence on Bequest Division Plans


Evidence on bequest division plans can shed further light on which assumption


                                           18
concerning household preferences holds in the real world so, in this subsection, we
present evidence on bequest division plans in China, India, Japan, and the United
States from the new survey on bequest plans. This survey asks respondents not only
about how they feel about leaving inheritances to their child(ren) but also about how
they plan to divide their inheritances among their children. However, since bequest
division among one’s children is a moot question in the case of respondents with no
children or only one child, only respondents with two or more children are asked about
bequest division plans.     They are first asked whether they plan to divide their
inheritances equally or unequally among their children, and those who are planning to
divide their inheritances unequally are then asked how they plan to divide their
inheritances among their children, with the following responses (grouped by the
assumption concerning household preferences with which they are consistent):


(Responses consistent with altruism)
(1) I plan to leave more or all to the child (children) who has less earning capacity.
(2) I plan to leave more or all to the child (children) who has greater needs.
(3) I plan to leave more or all to the child (children) whom I like more.


(Responses consistent with self-interest)
(4) I plan to leave more or all to the child (children) who lives with me.
(5) I plan to leave more or all to the child (children) who lives near me.
(6) I plan to leave more or all to the child (children) who helps me with housework.
(7) I plan to leave more or all to the child (children) who provides nursing care.
(8) I plan to leave more or all to the child (children) who provides financial assistance.


(Responses consistent with dynasty building)
(9) I plan to leave more or all to the child (children) who carries on the family business.
(10)     I plan to leave more or all to my eldest son or daughter even if he/she does not
   live with me, does not live near me, does not help me with housework, does not
   provide nursing care, does not provide financial assistance, and does not carry on
   the family business.


As can be seen from Table 3, the proportion of respondents whose way of dividing their
bequest among their children is consistent with altruism is high (in excess of 70%) in all
four countries but highest in the United States (97.58%), second highest in India
(84.35%), third highest in Japan (80.12%), and lowest in China (78.79%).             These


                                            19
findings are broadly consistent with the findings of previous studies surveyed in
subsection 2.2.3, which find that bequest division is much more altruistic in the United
States than in Japan.


By contrast, the proportion of respondents whose way of dividing their bequest among
their children is consistent with self-interest is highest in Japan (20.46%), second
highest in China (19.28%), third highest in India (15.63%), and lowest in the United
States (2.52%). Similarly, the proportion of respondents whose way of dividing their
bequest among their children is consistent with dynasty building is highest in China
(7.85%), second highest in Japan (7.51%), third highest in the United States (0.84%),
and lowest in India (0.48%).


Thus, the results pertaining to bequest division plans are broadly consistent with the
results pertaining to stated bequest motives, with Americans and Indians being more
altruistic than the Japanese and Chinese, the Japanese and Chinese being more selfish
than Americans and Indians, and dynastic motives being unimportant in all countries
but more important in China than in the other countries.


Looking in more detail at the importance of the individual responses, equal division
among one’s children is by far the most common response in all four countries, with the
proportion of respondents who plan to divide their bequests equally exceeding 70% in all
four countries. This proportion was highest in the United States (92.55%), second
highest in India (84.17%), third highest in Japan (72.67%), and lowest in China
(70.28%), and hence the rank ordering of the four countries is exactly the same as in the
case of the proportion of respondents whose planned way of dividing their bequest
among their children is consistent with altruism.


Turning to the importance of the responses for dividing bequests unequally, most of
them are of only negligible importance, with the proportion of respondents choosing any
given response exceeding 10% in only three cases, all of which occur in Japan and
China: 14.38% of Japanese respondents selected the response “I plan to leave more or
all to the child (children) who lives with me,” while 12.82% of Japanese respondents and
11.60% of Chinese respondents selected the response “I plan to leave more or all to the
child (children) who provides nursing care.” Both of these responses are consistent
with self-interest, and thus the fact that they were found to be the most prevalent in the
two countries in which preferences are the most selfish is not at all surprising.


                                           20
The three altruistic responses excluding equal division, the three selfish responses
excluding the two aforementioned ones, and the two dynastic responses are not
important in any country, with no more than 6.5% of responses selecting any of these
responses in any of the four countries.


Thus, the results concerning bequest division plans are somewhat divergent from our
earlier results concerning stated bequest motives, with bequest division plans being
much more altruistic than stated bequest motives in all countries and bequest division
plans being more selfish in China than in Japan and more altruistic in the United
States than in India, which is the opposite of the pattern observed for stated bequest
motives.   However, the discrepancy regarding the prevalence of altruism can be
reconciled if one bears in mind that equal division is not consistent with the simplest
version of the altruism model and that it is consistent with the altruism model only if it
is extended to include the presence of relative deprivation or some other additional
assumption, as noted in subsection 2.1, meaning that regarding equal division as being
consistent with altruism will lead to an overestimate of the proportion of households
whose bequest division plans are consistent with altruism.


Our findings pertaining to stated bequest motives and those pertaining to bequest
division plans are mutually consistent in that they both indicate that the applicability
of the various assumptions concerning household preferences vary greatly from country
to country, with Americans and Indians being much more altruistic than the Japanese
and Chinese and the Japanese and Chinese being much more selfish than Americans
and Indians, and that dynastic preferences are not very prevalent in any of the four
countries but are more prevalent in China than elsewhere. Moreover, our findings are
also broadly consistent with the findings of previous studies surveyed in subsection 2.2,
which find that Americans are more altruistic than the Japanese.




5.   Possible Reasons for Inter-Country Differences in Bequest Plans


Our results suggest that there are substantial inter-country differences in the
prevalence of self-interest and altruism, with the bequest plans of Americans and
Indians being much more consistent with altruism than those of the Japanese and
Chinese and the bequest plans of the Japanese and Chinese being much more


                                           21
consistent with self-interest than those of Americans and Indians. In this section, we
speculate about the reasons for these substantial inter-country differences in bequest
plans.   One possibility is that inter-country differences in bequest plans reflect
inter-country differences in household preferences.    Alternatively, these differences
may reflect inter-country differences in outside influences on bequest plans such as
income levels, income growth, inheritance laws, tax policies, social safety nets, social
norms, and other institutions and government policies, as noted in subsection 2.1.


Looking first at the impact of income levels, households living in countries with high
income levels should have stronger bequest motives than households living in countries
with low income levels if poor households cannot afford to leave bequests and bequests
are a superior good those consumption increases with income. Thus, the fact that
bequest motives are strong in the United States where income levels are high and weak
in China where income levels are low suggests that inter-country differences in income
levels can partly explain inter-country differences in the strength of bequest motives.
However, the fact that bequest motives are weak in Japan even though income levels
are high and strong in India even though income levels are low and the fact that the
proportion of respondents who don’t plan to leave a bequest because they don’t have the
financial capacity to do so is much higher in Japan and the United States than in China
and India even though income levels are much higher in these countries (see Table 1)
point toward the opposite conclusion.


Looking next at the impact of income growth, households living in countries with high
rates of income growth should be less likely to leave bequests, ceteris paribus, than
households living in countries with low rates of income growth because high rates of
income growth imply that the lifetime incomes of children will be much higher than the
lifetime incomes of parents. Thus, the fact that bequest motives are strong in the
United States where income growth has been low and weak in China where income
growth has been high suggests that inter-country differences in income growth can
partly explain inter-country differences in the strength of bequest motives. However,
the fact that bequest motives are strong in India even though income growth has been
high and weak in Japan even though income growth has been low points toward the
opposite conclusion.


Looking next at the impact of inheritance laws, the fact that the equal division of
bequests among one’s children is less prevalent in Japan than elsewhere even though it


                                          22
is not possible to disinherit any given child completely in Japan (one is legally required
to leave at least one-half of an equal share to each child) suggests that inter-country
differences in inheritance laws are not the explanation for inter-country differences in
bequest division plans.


Looking next at the impact of social safety nets for the elderly (public old-age pensions,
long-term care insurance, health insurance, etc.), our finding that the use of bequests to
induce one’s children to provide care and/or attention during old age is much more
prevalent in China and India, where social safety nets for the elderly are less developed,
and less prevalent in Japan and the United States, where social safety nets for the
elderly are more developed, suggests that inter-country differences in social safety nets
for the elderly are a partial explanation for inter-country differences in stated bequest
motives.


Looking finally at the impact of social norms, the social norm in Japan and China has
traditionally been primogeniture, meaning that eldest sons inherit the entire estate of
their parents but are expected, in exchange, to live with their parents and care for them
during their old age. The present Civil Codes of both Japan and China provide for
equal division, but primogeniture is still surprisingly common and can be legally
enforced if the decedent leaves a will and/or if all children other than the eldest son
“voluntarily” renounce their inheritance rights (see Horioka (2002) for a more detailed
discussion). If social norms are an important influence on bequest plans, we would
expect equal division to be less prevalent and dynastic bequest division to be more
prevalent in Japan and China than in the United States and India, and this is, in fact,
exactly what we find.


It thus appears that many outside influences on household behavior (such as income
levels, income growth, and inheritance laws) are not capable of explaining inter-country
differences in bequest plans although some outside influences (such social safety nets
for the elderly and social norms) are capable of partly explaining inter-country
differences in bequest plans. This implies that inter-country differences in bequest
plans are at least partly due to inter-country differences in household preferences.


Turning finally to the question of why household preferences vary from country to
country, one possibility is that inter-country differences in household preferences reflect
inter-country differences in culture. The fact that bequest plans are similar in Japan


                                            23
and China, which have very similar cultures, suggests that inter-country differences in
culture are a partial explanation for inter-country differences in bequest plans, but the
fact that bequest plans are similar in the United States and India even though they
have very different cultures suggests that culture is not the main explanation for
inter-country differences in bequest plans.


Another possibility is that more deeply religious people have more altruistic preferences
and that inter-country differences in the degree of religiosity (which is one component of
culture) can explain inter-country differences in household preferences. The survey we
used asks respondents whether or not the statement “I am deeply religious” applies to
him/her, with 1 indicating that it is particular true for him/her and 5 indicating that it
does not hold true at all for him/her, and this question was asked in all countries except
for China. The results for this question, combined with supplementary data on all four
countries from Zuckerman (2005), suggest that the degree of religiosity is highest in
India, second highest in the United States, third highest in China, and by far the lowest
in Japan (see Table 4). This is exactly the same rank ordering as when the four
countries are ranked with respect to the extent to which their stated bequest motives
are altruistic, which suggests that inter-country differences in the degree of religiosity
may explain inter-country differences in household preferences, which in turn may
explain inter-country differences in bequest plans. The importance of religiosity is
confirmed by Gans, Silverstein, and Lowenstein (2009), who find that religious children
are more likely to provide care to their aged parents. In a different context, Lehrer
(2004) and Mukhopadhyay (2011) analyze the impact of religiosity on educational
attainment and find that religiosity has a significant impact on educational attainment,
with Lehrer (2004) finding that it has a positive impact and Mukhopadhyay (2011)
finding that it has a negative impact. This provides further corroboration that one’s
degree of religiosity may affect one’s preferences and behavior.


It thus appears that inter-country differences in household bequest plans are not due to
inter-country differences in income levels, income growth, or inheritance laws but that
they partly reflect inter-country differences in social safety nets and social norms and
partly reflect inter-country differences in household preferences, which in turn may
reflect inter-country differences in the degree of religiosity. There are other possible
reasons for inter-country differences in household preferences such as inter-country
differences in genes, the degree of financial development, and tax systems (for example,


                                              24
the level and structure of income taxes, property taxes, and estate taxes and the
availability of tax breaks for charitable contributions).       A causal analysis on the
importance of these factors is left as a topic for future research.




6.   Summary, Conclusions, and Policy Implications


In this paper, we discussed three alternative assumptions concerning household
preferences (altruism, self-interest, and a desire for dynasty-building) and showed that
these assumptions have very different implications for bequest motives and bequest
division. After reviewing some of the literature on actual bequests, bequest motives,
and bequest division, the paper presented data on the strength of bequest motives,
stated bequest motives, and bequest division plans from a new international survey
conducted in China, India, Japan, and the United States.               It found striking
inter-country differences in bequest plans, with the bequest plans of the Japanese and
Chinese appearing to be much more consistent with selfish preferences than those of
Americans and Indians and the bequest plans of Americans and Indians appearing to be
much more consistent with altruistic preferences than those of the Japanese and
Chinese.       Finally, we found that inter-country differences in bequest plans are
apparently not due to inter-country differences in income levels, income growth, or
inheritance laws but could partly reflect inter-country differences in social safety nets
for the elderly and social norms and partly reflect inter-country differences in household
preferences, which in turn may reflect inter-country differences in the degree of
religiosity.


It thus appears that when economists model household behavior, it is important to use a
model that nests selfish as well as altruistic preferences or to use a model that assumes
selfish preferences in countries where self-interest dominates and a model that assumes
altruistic preferences in countries where altruism dominates.


Turning finally to the policy implications of our findings, it is well-known that the
impact of government policies are dramatically different depending on whether
households are selfish, altruistic, or dynastic (see Barro (1974), Masson and Pestieau
(1996), and Arrondel and Masson (2006)).


For example, our finding that the Japanese and Chinese are predominantly selfish


                                             25
implies that Ricardian equivalence will not hold in Japan and China and that tax cuts
financed by the issuance of government bonds will be effective as an economic stimulus
in these countries because households in these countries will not care about the higher
taxes that future generations will have to pay in order to redeem the government bonds
and will therefore increase their consumption spending in response to the tax cuts. By
contrast, our finding that Americans and Indians are predominantly altruistic implies
that Ricardian equivalence will hold in the United States and India and that tax cuts
financed by the issuance of government bonds will not be effective as an economic
stimulus in these countries because households will save the entire tax cut in order to
increase their bequests and compensate future generations for the higher taxes they
will have to pay when it comes time for the government to redeem its bonds (see Barro
(1974)).


Similarly, our finding that the Japanese and Chinese are predominantly selfish implies
that the introduction of a pay-as-you-go public old-age pension system will reduce
household saving in Japan and China because the introduction of such a system will
alleviate the need for them to save on their own in preparation for retirement.
Moreover, the introduction of such a system will also enable them to enjoy a higher
standard of living during retirement, which is presumably the aim of such a system,
because the introduction of such a system will force them to postpone consumption until
after retirement.     By contrast, our finding that Americans and Indians are
predominantly altruistic implies that the introduction of a pay-as-you-go public old-age
pension system will not have any impact on household saving in the United States and
India because households will bequeath all of their pension benefits to their children to
compensate them for the payroll taxes they will have to pay to finance these benefits,
meaning that they will have to save just as much as before to finance their living
expenses during retirement. Moreover, the living standards of Americans and Indians
during retirement will not be raised at all by the introduction of such a system because
they will bequeath all of their pension benefits to their children.


We turn finally to the implications of our findings for inheritance taxes and other
mechanisms for alleviating the intergenerational transmission of wealth inequalities.
Our finding that the Japanese and Chinese are predominantly selfish implies that
wealth inequalities are less likely to be passed on from generation to generation in
Japan and China because selfish households will leave less bequests and because they
will leave a bequest to their children only if there is a quid pro quo from their children


                                            26
such as care, attention and/or financial support during old age, meaning that bequests
from parents to children will be at least partly offset by intergenerational transfers in
the other direction (namely, the monetary value of care, attention, and/or financial
support from children to parents).      By contrast, our finding that Americans and
Indians are predominantly altruistic implies that wealth inequalities are more likely to
be passed on from generation to generation in the United States and India because
Americans and Indians will leave more bequests and because they will leave a bequest
to their children even if there is no quid pro quo from their children, meaning that their
bequests will be less likely to be offset by intergenerational transfers in the opposite
direction.４ Furthermore, Horioka (2009) finds that, in Japan, the correlation between
bequests received and life cycle wealth is negative, meaning that individuals who
receive fewer bequests accumulate more life cycle wealth, which will alleviate the
intergenerational transmission of wealth inequalities. Thus, our findings imply that
there may be a greater need for estate taxes and other mechanisms for alleviating the
intergenerational transmission of wealth inequalities in the United States and India
than in Japan and China.


It follows that activist government policies will be successful in achieving their
objectives (for example, tax cuts financed by the issuance of government bonds will be
effective in stimulating consumption and the economy as a whole and the introduction
of a pay-as-you-go public old-age pension system will be effective in raising living
standards during retirement) in Japan, China, and other countries with selfish
denizens but not in India, the United States, and other countries with more altruistic
denizens.    By contrast, estate taxes and other policies that alleviate the
intergenerational transmission of wealth inequalities will be more necessary and
desirable in India, the United States, and other countries with altruistic denizens than
in Japan, China, and other countries with more selfish denizens.




                                           27
                                      References


Abel, Andrew B., and Warshawsky, Mark (1988), "Specification of the Joy of Giving:
Insights from Altruism," Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 70, no. 1 (February),
pp. 145-149.


Altonji, Joseph G.; Hayashi, Fumio; and Kotlikoff, Laurence J. (1997), “Parental
Altruism and Inter Vivos Transfers: Theory and Evidence,” Journal of Political Economy,
vol. 105, no. 6 (December), pp. 1121-1166.


Altonji, Joseph G.; Hayashi, Fumio; and Kotlikoff, Laurence J. (2000), “The Effects of
Income and Wealth on Time and Money Transfers between Parents and Children,” in
Andrew Mason and Georges Tapinos, eds., Sharing the Wealth: Demographic Change
and Economic Transfers between Generations (Oxford: Oxford University Press), pp.
306-357.


Arrondel, Luc, and Masson, Andre (2006), "Altruism, Exchange or Indirect Reciprocity:
What Do the Data on Family Transfers Show?" in Serge-Christophe Kolm and Jean
Mercier Ythier, eds., Handbook of the Economics of Giving, Altruism and Reciprocity,
volume 2 (Amsterdam: Elsevier B.V.), pp. 971-1053.


Barro, Robert (1974), "Are Government Bonds Net Wealth?" Journal of Political
Economy, vol. 82, no. 6 (December), pp. 1095–1117.


Barthold, Thomas A., and Ito, Takatoshi (1992), “Bequest Taxes and Accumulation of
Household Wealth: U.S.-Japan Comparison,” in Takatoshi Ito and Anne O. Krueger,
eds., Political Economy of Tax Reform (NBER East Asian Seminar on Economics, vol. 1)
(Chicago, Illinois, USA: University of Chicago Press), pp. 235-292.


Becker, Gary S. (1974), “A Theory of Social Interactions,” Journal of Political Economy,
vol. 82, no. 6 (November/December), pp.1063-1093.


Becker, Gary S. (1981), A Treatise on the Family (Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA:
Harvard University Press).


Becker, Gary S. (1991), A Treatise on the Family: Enlarged Edition (Cambridge,


                                             28
Massachusetts, USA: Harvard University Press).


Bernheim, B. Douglas, and Severinov, Sergei (2003), “Bequests as Signals: An
Explanation for the Equal Division Puzzle,” Journal of Political Economy, vol. 111, no 4
(August), pp. 733-764.


Bernheim, B Douglas; Shleifer, Andrei; and Summers, Lawrence H. (1985), "The
Strategic Bequest Motive," Journal of Political Economy, vol. 93, no. 6 (December), pp.
1045-76.


Campbell, David W. (1997), “Transfer and Life-Cycle Wealth in Japan, 1974-1984,”
Japanese Economic Review, vol. 48, no. 4 (December), pp. 410-423.


Carroll, Christopher D. (2000), “Why Do the Rich Save So Much?” in Joel B. Slemrod,
ed., Does Atlas Shrug? The Economic Consequences of Taxing the Rich (Cambridge,
Massachusetts: Harvard University Press).


Chu, C. Y. Cyrus (1991), “Primogeniture,” Journal of Political Economy, vol. 99, no. 1
(February), pp. 78–99.


Cox, Donald (1987), “Motives for Private Income Transfers,” Journal of Political
Economy, vol. 95, no. 3 (June), pp. 508-546.


Cox, Donald, and Rank, Mark R. (1992), “Inter-Vivos Transfers and Intergenerational
Exchange,” Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 74, no. 2 (May), pp. 305-314.


Cox, Donald, and Stark, Oded (1996), “Intergenerational Transfers and the
Demonstration Effect,” Boston College Working Papers in Economics no. 329,
Department of Economics, Boston College, Chestnut Hill, MA, U.S.A. (January).


Cremer, Helmuth; Kessler, Denis; and Pestieau, Pierre (1992), “Intergenerational
Transfers within the Family,” European Economic Review, vol. 36, no. 1 (January), pp.
1-16.


Davies, James B. (1981), "Uncertain Lifetime, Consumption, and Dissaving in
Retirement," Journal of Political Economy, vol. 89, no. 3 (June), pp. 561-77.


                                           29
Dekle, Robert (1989), “The Unimportance of Intergenerational Transfers in Japan,”
Japan and the World Economy, vol. 1, no. 4 (November), pp. 403-413.


Dunn, Thomas A., and Phillips, John W. (1997), “The Timing and Division of Parental
Transfers to Children, Economics Letters, vol. 54, no. 2, pp. 135-137.


Esping-Andersen, Gota (1990), The Three Worlds of Welfare Capitalism (Princeton, N.J.,
U.S.A.: Princeton University Press).


Esping-Andersen, Gota (1999), Social Foundations of Postindustrial Economics (Oxford,
U.K.: Oxford University Press).


Gans, Daphne; Silverstein, Merril; and Lowenstein, Ariela (2009), “Do Religious
Children Care More and Provide More Care for Older Parents? A Study of Filial Norms
and Behaviors across Five Nations,” Journal of Comparative Family Studies, vol. 40, no.
2 (Spring), pp. 187-201.


Hayashi, Fumio (1986), “Why Is Japan’s Saving Rate So Apparently High?” in Stanley
Fischer, ed., NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1986, vol. 1 (Cambridge, Massachusetts,
USA: MIT Press), pp. 147-210.


Horioka, Charles Yuji (1993), “Saving in Japan,” in Arnold Heertje, ed., World Savings:
An International Survey (Oxford, United Kingdom: Blackwell Publishers), pp. 238-278.


Horioka, Charles Yuji (2002) “Are the Japanese Selfish, Altruistic, or Dynastic?”
Japanese Economic Review, vol. 53, no. 1 (March), pp. 26-54.


Horioka, Charles Yuji (2008), “Nihon ni okeru Isan to Oyako-kankei: Nihonjin ha
Rikoteki ka, Ritateki kia, Ouchouteki ka?” in Charles Yuji Horioka and Institute for
Research on Household Economics, eds., Setai-nai Bunpai/Sedai-kan Iten no Keizai
Bunseki (An Economic Analysis of Intra-Household Distribution and Inter-generational
Transfers) (Tokyo, Japan: Minerva Shobou), pp. 118-135 (in Japanese).


Horioka, Charles Yuji (2009), “Do Bequests Increase or Decrease Wealth Inequalities?”
Economics Letters, vol. 103, issue 1 (April), pp. 23-25.


                                            30
Horioka, Charles Yuji; Fujisaki, Hideki; Watanabe, Wako; and Kouno, Takatsugu (2000),
“Are Americans More Altruistic than the Japanese?           A U.S.-Japan Comparison of
Saving and Bequest Motives,” International Economic Journal, vol. 14, no. 1 (Spring),
pp. 1-31.


Horioka, Charles Yuji; Gahramanov, Emin; Hayat Muhammad, Abdul Aziz; and Tang,
Xueli (2014), “The Determinants of Parent-Child Co-residence in Japan: A Test of
Altruism,” mimeo., School of Accounting, Economics and Finance, Deakin University,
Melbourne, Australia.


Horioka, Charles Yuji; Yamashita, Kouji; Nishikawa, Masashi; and Iwamoto, Shiho
(2002), “Nihonjin no Isan Douki no Juuyoudo, Seishitsu, Eikyou ni tsuite (On the
Importance, Nature, and Impact of the Bequest Motives of the Japanese),” Yuusei
Kenkyuusho Geppou (The Monthly Review of the Institute of Posts and
Telecommunications Policy), no. 163 (April), pp. 4-31 (in Japanese).


Ioannides, Yannis M., and Kan, Kamhon. (2000), “The Nature of Two-Directional
Intergenerational Transfers of Money and Time: An Empirical Analysis,” in Jean
Mercier Ythier, Serge-Christophe Kolm, and Louis-Andre Gerard-Varet, eds., The
Economics of Reciprocity, Giving and Altruism (Houndmills and London: Palgrave
Macmillan), pp. 314-331.


Komamura, Kouhei (1994), “Koureisha Kakei ni okeru Isan Koudou no Keizai Bunseki
(Economic Analysis of the Bequest Behavior of Aged Households),” Kikan Shakai
Hoshou Kenkyuu (Quarterly of Social Security Research), vol. 30, no. 1 (Summer), pp.
62-74 (in Japanese).


Kotlikoff, Laurence J. (1988), “Intergenerational Transfers and Savings,” Journal of
Economic Perspectives, vol. 2, no. 2 (Spring), pp. 41-58.


Kotlikoff, Laurence J., and Spivak, Avia (1981), "The Family as an Incomplete Annuities
Market," Journal of Political Economy, vol. 89, no. 2 (April), pp. 372-391.


Kotlikoff,   Laurence   J.,   and   Summers,     Lawrence   H.   (1981),   “The   Role   of
Intergenerational Transfers in Aggregate Capital Accumulation,” Journal of Political


                                            31
Economy, vol. 89, no. 4 (August), pp. 706-732.


Laferrere, Anne, and Wolff, Francois-Charles (2006), “Microeconomic Models of Family
Transfers,“ in Serge-Christophe Kolm and Jean Mercier Ythier, eds., Handbook of the
Economics of Giving, Altruism and Reciprocity, volume 2 (Amsterdam: Elsevier B.V.),
pp. 889-969.


Laitner, John (1997), “Intergenerational and Interhousehold Economic Links,” in Mark
R. Rosenzweig and Oded Stark, eds., Handbook of Population and Family Economics,
vol. 1A (Amsterdam: North-Holland), pp. 189-238.


Lehrer, Evelyn L. (2004), “Religiosity as a Determinant of Educational Attainment: The
Case of Conservative Protestant Women in the United States,” Review of Economics of
the Household, vol. 2, no. 2 (June), pp. 203-219.


Light, Audrey, and McGarry, Kathleen (2004), “Why Parents Play Favorites:
Explanations for Unequal Bequests," American Economic Review, vol. 94, no. 5
(December), pp. 1669-81.


Lundholm, Michael, and        Ohlsson, Henry (2000),      “Post Mortem Reputation,
Compensatory Gifts and Equal Bequests,” Economics Letters, vol. 68, no. 2 (August), pp.
165-171.


Masson, Andre, and Pestieau, Pierre (1996), “Bequest Motives and Models of
Inheritance: A Survey of the Literature,” in Guido Erreygers and Toon Vandevelde, eds.,
Is Inheritance Legitimate? Ethical and Economic Aspects of Wealth Transfers (Berlin:
Springer Verlag).


McGarry, Kathleen (1999), “Inter Vivos Transfers and Intended Bequests,” Journal of
Public Economics, vol. 73, no. 3, pp. 321-351.


Menchik, Paul L. (1980), “Primogeniture: Equal Sharing, and the U.S. Distribution of
Wealth,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 94, no. 2 (March), pp. 299-316.


Menchik, Paul L. (1988), “Unequal Estate Division: Is It Altruism, Reverse Bequests, or
Simply Noise,” in Denis Kessler and Andre Masson, eds., Modelling the Accumulation


                                            32
and Distribution of Wealth (Oxford: Clarendon Press), pp. 105-116.


Menchik, Paul L.; Irvine, Owen; and Jianakoplos, Nancy (1988), “Determinants of
Intended Bequests,” Discussion Paper Series A, no. 197, University of Bonn, Germany.


Modigliani, Franco (1988), “The Role of Intergenerational Transfers and Life Cycle
Saving in the Accumulation of Wealth,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 2, no. 2
(Spring), pp. 15-40.


Modigliani, Franco, and Brumberg, Richard (1954), “Utility Analysis and the
Consumption Function: An Interpretation of Cross-section Data,” in Kenneth K.
Kurihara, ed. Post-Keynesian Economics (New Brunswick, N.J.: Rutgers University
Press), pp. 388-436.


Molina, Jose Albert (2013), "Altruism in the Household: In-kind Transfers in
the Context of Kin Selection," Review of Economics of the Household, vol. 11, no. 3
(September), pp. 309-312.


Mukhopadhyay, Sankar (2011), “Religion, Religiosity and Educational Attainment of
Immigrants to the USA,” Review of Economics of the Household, vol. 9, no. 4
(December), pp. 539-553.


Noguchi, Yukio; Uemura, Kyoko; and Kitou, Yumiko (1989), “Souzoku ni yoru Sedai-kan
Iten no Kouzou: Shutoken ni okeru Jittai Chousa Kekka (The Structure of
Intergenerational Transfers via Bequests: Results of a Survey in the Tokyo
Metropolitan Area),” Kikan Shakai Hoshou Kenkyuu (Quarterly of Social Security
Research), vol. 25, no. 2 (Autumn), pp. 136-144 (in Japanese).


Ohtake, Fumio (1991), “Bequest Motives of Aged Households in Japan,” Ricerche
Economiche, vol. 45, no. 2-3 (September), pp. 283-306.


Ohtake, Fumio, and Horioka, Charles Yuji (1994), “Chochiku Douki (Saving Motives)“ in
Tsuneo Ishikawa, ed., Nihon no Shotoku to Tomi no Bunpai (The Distribution of Income
and Wealth in Japan) (Tokyo: University of Tokyo Press), pp. 211-244 (in Japanese).


Perozek, Maria G. (1998), “A Reexamination of the Strategic Bequest Motive,” Journal


                                          33
of Political Economy, vol. 106, no. 2 (April), pp. 423-445.


Slavik, Ctirad, and Wiseman, Kevin (2013), “Tough Love for Lazy Kids: Dynamic
Insurance and Equal Bequests,” mimeo., Goethe University Frankfurt, Frankfurt,
Germany (December).


Stark, Oded (1995), Altruism and Beyond: An Economic Analysis of Transfers and
Exchanges within Families and Groups (Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University
Press).


Stark, Oded (1998), “Equal Bequests and Parental Altruism: Compatibility or
Orthogonality,” Economics Letters, vol. 60, no. 2 (August), pp. 167-171.


Tomes, Nigel (1981), “The Family, Inheritance and the Intergenerational Transmission
of Inequality,” Journal of Political Economy, vol. 89, no. 5 (October), pp. 928-958.


World Bank (2013), World Development Indicators (Washington, D.C.: World Bank).


Wilhelm, Mark O. (1996), “Bequest Behavior and the Effect of Heirs’ Earnings: Testing
the Altruistic Model of Bequests,” American Economic Review, vol. 86, no. 4
(September) pp. 874-892.


Yamada, Ken (2006), “Intra-family Transfers in Japan: Intergenerational Co-residence,
Distance, and Contact,” Applied Economics, vol. 38, no. 16, pp. 1839-1861.


Zuckerman, Phil (2005), "Atheism: Contemporary Rates and Patterns," in Michael
Martin, ed., The Cambridge Companion to Atheism (Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge
University Press).




                                            34
                     Table 1: An International Comparison of the Strength of Bequest Motives
The proportion of respondents holding each view (%)                      China      India    Japan                    U.S.
I plan to leave an inheritance to my child(ren) no matter what                       34.24      68.98         26.67     58.17
I plan to leave an inheritance to my child(ren) under certain conditions             22.11      18.07          4.76      2.60
Those with an actual bequest motive                                                  56.35      87.05         31.44     60.77
I want to leave an inheritance to my child(ren) but I won't because I don't have
                                                                                      2.88        8.83        18.12     12.41
the financial capacity to do so
Those with an actual or potential bequest motive                                     59.23      95.88         49.56     73.18
I do not plan to make special efforts to leave an inheritance to my child(ren)
                                                                                     35.96        3.50        47.96     25.00
but will leave whatever is left over
I do not plan to leave an inheritance to my child(ren) under any circumstances        4.81        0.62       2.48        1.82
Those with only a passive bequest motive or no bequest motive at all                40.77         4.12     50.44       26.82
Total                                                                              100.00      100.00     100.00      100.00
Number of observations                                                               2264        1928       4514        3464

Notes: The figures show the proportion of respondents excluding those who did not respond to this question.


Data Source: 2012 Preference Parameter Survey of Osaka University (Kurashi to Konomi to Manzokudo ni tsuite no Anke-to
Chousa) except for rural China, for which the 2010 survey was used. The results for the urban and rural surveys for China and
India were weighted by the proportions of the urban and rural populations in each country (52/48% in China and 32/68% in
India).




                                                               35
                         Table 2: An International Comparison of Stated Bequest Motives
The proportion of respondents holding each view (%)                       China   India                  Japan      U.S.
                                                         Altruism
I plan to leave an inheritance to my child(ren) no matter what              35.25    75.66                 32.58      66.41
I do not plan to leave an inheritance to my child(ren) under any circumstances
                                                                                       2.15       0.14       1.41      0.56
because doing so may reduce their will to work
Responses consistent with altruism                                                   37.40      75.80      33.98      66.97
                                                        Self-Interest
I plan to leave an inheritance to my child(ren) only if they provide care
                                                                                     10.10       11.49       4.06      2.08
(including nursing care) during old age
I plan to leave an inheritance to my child(ren) only if they provide financial
                                                                                       5.17       5.95       0.70      0.63
assistance during old age
I do not plan to make special efforts to leave an inheritance to my child(ren)
                                                                                     37.03        3.84     58.58      28.54
but will leave whatever is left over
I do not plan to leave an inheritance to my child(ren) under any circumstances
                                                                                       2.80       0.54       1.62      1.52
because I want to use my wealth myself
Responses consistent with self-interest                                              55.10      21.82      64.96      32.76
                                                      Dynasty Building
I plan to leave an inheritance to my child(ren) only if they carry on the family
                                                                                       7.50       2.38       1.06      0.26
business
Responses consistent with dynasty building                                            7.50       2.38       1.06       0.26
Total                                                                               100.00     100.00     100.00     100.00
Number of observations                                                                2071       1866       3696       3034

Notes: The figures show the proportion of respondents excluding those who did not respond to this question and those
who replied that they want to leave a bequest to their child(ren) but won't because they don't have the financial capacity
to do so.


Data Source: 2012 Preference Parameter Survey of Osaka University (Kurashi to Konomi to Manzokudo ni tsuite no
Anke-to Chousa) except for rural China, for which the 2010 survey was used. The results for the urban and rural surveys
for China and India were weighted by the proportions of the urban and rural populations in each country (52/48% in
China and 32/68% in India).




                                                             36
                        Table 3: An International Comparison of Bequest Division Plans
The proportion of respondents holding each view (%)                    China     India             Japan      U.S.
                                                       Altruism
I plan to divide my inheritance equally among my children                 70.28    84.17             72.67     92.55
I plan to leave more or all to the child (children) who has less earning
                                                                                  6.42      0.04      4.39        1.38
capacity
I plan to leave more or all to the child (children) who has greater needs        1.95      0.13       3.90        3.06
I plan to leave more or all to the child (children) whom I like more             0.90      0.00       0.75        1.43
Responses consistent with altruism                                              78.79     84.35      80.12     97.58
                                                         Self-Interest
I plan to leave more or all to the child (children) who lives with me            4.11      6.99      14.38        0.94
I plan to leave more or all to the child (children) who lives near me            1.84      4.63       4.07        0.74
I plan to leave more or all to the child (children) who helps me with
                                                                                 2.09      1.96       4.49        0.69
housework
I plan to leave more or all to the child (children) who provides nursing care   11.60      5.63      12.82        0.54
I plan to leave more or all to the child (children) who provides financial
                                                                                 2.56      1.25       4.85        0.59
assistance
Responses consistent with self-interest                                         19.28     15.63      20.46        2.52
                                                      Dynasty Building
I plan to leave more or all to the child (children) who carries on the family
                                                                                 4.25      0.41       5.04        0.10
business
I plan to leave more or all to my eldest son or daughter even if he/she does
not live with me, does not live near me, does not help me with housework,
                                                                                 3.82      0.07       2.83        0.74
does not provide nursing care, does not provide financial assistance, and
does not carry on the family business
Responses consistent with dynasty building                                        7.85     0.48      7.51       0.84
Total                                                                           105.92   100.46    108.08     100.94
Number of observations                                                             733     1780      3118       2457

Notes: The figures show the proportion of respondents excluding those who did not answer the question about stated
bequest motives, those who replied that they would not leave a bequest, and those who have zero or one child. Those
who responded that they would divide their bequest unequally but did not answer the follow-up question about bequest
division were assumed to have the same distribution of answers for the follow-up question as those who answered the
follow-up question. The totals do not necessarily add up because mutliple responses are allowed.


Data Source: 2012 Preference Parameter Survey of Osaka University (Kurashi to Konomi to Manzokudo ni tsuite no
Anke-to Chousa) except for rural China, for which the 2010 survey was used. The results for the urban and rural
surveys for China and India were weighted by the proportions of the urban and rural populations in each country
(52/48% in China and 32/68% in India).




                                                             37
                     Table 4: An International Comparison of Religiosity
                                                 China       India       Japan           U.S.
The degree of religiosity (on a scale of 1 to 5)   na         3.66        1.66            2.99
The number of observations                                    1928        4556           3559
The proportion of believers in God                86-94      94-98       35-36           91-97

Note: "na" denotes "not available."

Data Source: First 2 rows: 2012 Preference Parameter Survey of Osaka University (Kurashi to
Konomi to Manzokudo ni tsuite no Anke-to Chousa). The results for the urban and rural surveys
for India were weighted by the proportions of the urban and rural populations (32/68%). The order
of the responses was reversed so that 5 indicates that it is particularly true for him/her and 1
indicates that it does not hold true at all for him/her. Last row: Zuckerman (2005).




                                               38
                                        Endnotes



１   Two additional assumptions concerning household preferences are (1) that the
household derives utility not only from its own consumption but also from its wealth (as
assumed in the “capitalist spirit” or “wealth-in-the-utility function” model of Carroll
(2000)), and (2) that the household derives utility not only from its own consumption but
also from the size of its bequest (as assumed in the “joy of giving,” “warm glow,” or
“bequest-as-consumption” model of Abel and Warshawsky (1988)). These assumptions
are not discussed in detail here because they do not have clear implications for bequest
motives and bequest division (except that assumption (2) implies that households will
leave bequests to their children even without any quid pro quo, as in the case of
altruistic preferences).

２   The term “dynasty model” is often used to refer to what we call the “altruism model”
but we use the term in a different sense. What we call the dynasty model is also called
the “primogeniture model” if it is the eldest son who carries on the family line and/or the
family business (Chu (1991)).


３   Another possibility is that selfish parents who want their children to take care of
them in old age will set an example by taking care of their own elderly parents in front
of their children (the so-called “demonstration effect” of Stark (1995) and Cox and Stark
(1996)). In this case, the quid pro quo for care given to one’s elderly parents will not be
bequests received from one’s elderly parents but rather care received from one’s
children.

４   Note, however, that altruistic parents will leave more bequests to less affluent
children, meaning that inter-sibling inequalities will be alleviated to a greater extent in
the case of altruistic parents. I am indebted to an anonymous referee for this point.




                                            39
