NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

AGENCY COSTS, COLLATERAL,
AND BUSINESS FLUCTUATIONS

Ben Bernanke

Mark Gertler

Working Paper No. 2015

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 1986

The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are those of the
authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

Working Paper #2015
September 1986

Agency Costs, Collateral, and Business Fluctuations

ABSTRACT

Bad economic times are typically associated with a high incidence of
financial distress, e.g., insolvency and bankruptcy. This paper studies the
role of changes in borrower solvency in the initiation and propagation of the
business cycle. We first develop a model of the process of financing real
investment projects under asymmetric information, extending work by Robert
Townsend. A major conclusion here is that when the entrepreneurs who borrow
to finance projects are more solvent (have more "collateral"), the deadweight
agency costs of investment finance are lower. This model of investment
finance is then embedded in a dynamic macroeconomic setting. We show that,
first, since reductions in collateral in bad times increase the agency costs
of borrowing, which in turn depress the demand for investment, the presence of
these financial factors will tend to amplify swings in real output. Second,
we find that autonomous factors which affect the collateral of borrowers (as
in a "debt-deflation") can actually initiate cycles in output.

Ben Bernanke
Woodrow Wilson School
Princeton University

Mark Gertler
Department of Economics
University of Wisconsin

Princeton, NJ 08544

Madison, WI 53706

—1—

1.

Introduction
Bad economic times are typically associated with a high incidence of

financial distress, as measured in increased defaults, bankruptcies, and
business failures, and in the general deterioration of firm balance sheets.

One might argue that these financial problems are merely passive reflections of
adverse developments on the real side of the economy and therefore do not

require special attention. But such a view is, in our opinion, unsupportable:
First, it ignores the central allocative role played by the financial system in

modern capitalist economies. Second, as a matter of theory, it appears
impossible to explain why we have institutions such as noncontingent debt and
bankruptcy (as opposed to Arrow-Debreu contingent contracts) without invoking
asymmetric information or similar factors; such considerations having been
admitted, however, there is a strong presumption that they will constrain the

set of equilibria attainable by the economy. Thus, financial factors should
indeed "matter," i.e., affect real outcomes.

This paper develops a theoretical model in which financial conditions are
not merely a "sideshow" to real activity but play a role in both the initiation

and propagation of economic cycles. The basic argument is as follows: Under
the usual assumption that individuals who organize physical investment projects
("insiders") have more information about their projects than do those from who

they borrow to finance these projects ("outsiders"), the best feasible
financial arrangements will typically entail some deadweight losses ("agency

costs") relative to the first-best, perfect information equilibrium. Further,
in standard models the result obtains that, the greater the quantity of
unencumbered wealth ("collateral") that insiders can bring to the project, the
lower will be the expected agency costs involved in financing the investment.

-2-

Thus, periods of financial distress, when borrowers have less unencumbered
collateral, are also times of relatively high agency costs in investment.

At the macroeconomic level, the proposition that insider collateral and

agency costs are inversely related has two significant implications. First,
since insider collateral is likely to be procyclical (borrowers are more
solvent during good times), there will be a decline in agency costs during

booms and a rise during recessions. This will affect the cyclical pattern of
investment and, therefore, the dynamics of the cycle itself. Second, shocks to
insider collateral which occur independently of aggregate output will be an

initiating source of real fluctuations. A striking example of this second
implication is the "debt-deflation," first analyzed by Irving Fisher (1933):

During a debt-deflation, because of an unanticipated fall in the price level
(or, possibly, a fall in the relative price of borrowers' collateral, e.g.,

farmland), there is a decline in the quantity of insider collateral relative to

debt obligations. This has the effect of making those individuals in the
economy with the most direct access to investment projects suddenly
uncreditworthy (i.e., the agency costs associated with lending to them are

high). The resulting fall in investment has negative effects on both aggregate
demand and aggregate supply.1 A preliminary analysis of debt-deflation is
given below as an illustration of the effects of a shock to borrower
collateral.

The plan of the paper is as follows: Section 2 below studies the process
of financing physical investment in a static, one-period model with asymmetric

information. Here we build on the "costly state verification" model of
Townsend (1979) (see also Gale and Hellwig (1985)). Townsend's approach has
the virtue of simplicity: The only agency problem in his model is that
insiders, who can directly observe the realized return to their projects, may

-3--

mis-report this return to the outside investors. To keep the insiders honest
and to make lending possible in equilibrium, the outsiders must commit
themselves to "auditing" the insiders (that is, to determining the true return,

at a fixed real cost) whenever the insiders announce an unusually unfavorable

outcome. In this framework it is easy to demonstrate the basic result, that
the expected agency costs (here, the costs of auditing) vary inversely with the

collateral brought to projects by borrowers.2 We also extend Townsend's work

in two ways important for the subsequent macroeconomic analysis: first, by
allowing for endogenous determination of the identities of insiders and
outsiders and of the ratio of inside to outside finance; second, by explicitly
considering the effects of variations in collateral.

Section 3 embeds the model of capital finance in a dynamic macroeconomic
setting, specifically, in a stochastic variant of the Diamond (1965)

overlapping generations model. We demonstrate that the counter-cyclicality of
agency costs in capital finance induces a greater volatility in investment and

output than would otherwise exist. We also show how the financial sector can
be an independent source of shocks to the real economy; in particular, we find
that a debt-deflation can be thought of as a downward movement in the IS curve.
Conclusions are offered in Section 4.

Some recent interesting work related to ours has been done by Farmer

[1984, 1985] and Williamson [1985]. Each of these papers, like ours, motivates
a link between financial factors and macroeconomic behavior by postulating
agency problems in loan markets; in particular, Williamson also uses the costly

state verification approach. Our paper differs from the earlier work, however,
in many significant details. One of these is our emphasis on changing levels
of collateral as a factor in cyclical fluctuations. Another difference is the
existence of a source of intrinsic dynamics (operating through the presence of

-4-

physical capital) in our model, which permits an explicit consideration of the
interaction of financial shocks and the propagation mechanism. Neither of
these factors is present in the earlier analyses. (Other differences from the

earlier literature are discussed below.)
It is also worth mentioning the relation of this work to our earlier

paper, Bernanke-Gertler [forthcoming]. That paper, which also studied the
macroeconomic role of financial factors, emphasized the macroeconomic
importance of the quantity of collateral held by borrowers (in that case,

borrowers were identified with banks). When borrowers in general are solvent,
the deadweight costs of debt finance are less, and more resources can be

devoted to productive investment. The present research yields a similar
message, but in this case in a setting where (unlike the earlier paper), the
collateral of borrowers is endogenous in the model.

2. A Model of Financial Structure and Investment
As a prelude to a more general macroeconomic analysis, this section
develops a partial equilibrium, one-period model of the process by which

investment projects are financed. As noted in the introduction, the analysis
here is an application of the ideas in Townsend [19791; see also Gale and

Heliwig [1985] and Williamson [1985]. We emphasize that our interest is not in
developing the richest possible analysis of the financial process, but in
obtaining a simple model suitable for subsequent analysis in a macroeconomic
setting.

We study an economy in which there are two goods, a capital good and an

output good. Both goods are homogeneous and divisible. The output good can be
transformed into the capital good by an investment technology. The investment
technology itself comes in discrete, nondivisible units, called "projects".

—5—

Each project requires as input exactly one unit of the output good, which, we
will assume, exceeds the quantity of resources available to any single

individual. In addition, there is associated with each project a (variable)
"setup cost", measured in units of the output good. The setup cost is meant to
reflect the resources devoted to locating a viable project and becoming

familiar with the details of its operation. The setup cost also plays an
important role in the informational structure of our model, and will be
discussed further momentarily.

Each individual investment project is to be thought of as a draw from an
infinite pool of potential projects. Projects look the same ex ante, but differ
in the quantity of capital they produce ex post. Denote the physical yield of
given project by the random variable k, where k is distributed continuously
over the project pooi. Let H(k) be the cumulative distribution function and

[O,K] be the support of k. Without loss of generality (this simply defines the
units in which capital is measured), normalize the average physical return over
the population of projects to equal one. That is,

IC

f

kdH =

1

(2.1)

For the purposes of conducting a preliminary static analysis, we also
temporarily impose three further assumptions:

1) The economy contains a

continuum of length one of identical, risk-neutral agents. 2) Each agent is

endowed with S units of savings, in the form of the output good. 3) Each
agent's objective is to invest his savings in such a way as to maximize the
expected quantity of the capital good that is owned after all project returns

are realized. (In the next section, output and savings will be endogenous, and

-6—

agents' portfolio objectives will be derived from a utility maximization
problem.)

In order to motivate a role for financial structure (that is, to render
the ModIgliani-fliller theorem inapplicable), we must depart in some way from

the assumptions of complete information and perfect markets. To do this in a
simple way, we adopt the assumption of Townsend [1979] that the actual (ex
post) returns to each investment project are costlessly observable only by the

entrepreneur(s) ("insiders") who operate that particular project. Other agents
in the economy ("outsiders") can learn the realized returns of a project only
through a public auditing technology, which absorbs y units of the capital good

when operated. As a number of earlier papers have shown, this ex post
informational asymmetry leads naturally to an optimal financial contract
between insiders and outsiders that looks like a standard debt contract, with
the insiders as residual claimants.

The earlier literature has generally assumed that the division of the
population into outside lenders and entrepreneurs is exogenous, and that the

resources brought to each project by insiders are fixed. Here we propose to
allow the determination of who becomes insiders and the quantity of insider

equity to be endogenous. Thus we will allow projects to be operated by insider
coalitions of arbitrary size n, where n will be a choice variable.3 A
coalition of n members that wishes to operate a given investment project must
pay (in addition to the basic input cost of one unit of output) a setup cost of

c(n) units of output. We assume the function c(.) to be twice continuously
differentiable (recall that agents are represented by a continuum), with

c(O)O, c'>O, and c">O. As mentioned above, incurring this setup cost permits
the members of the insider coalition to locate and operate the project; very
importantly, incurring this cost is also assumed to allow each insider to

—7—

observe (privately) the actual return to the project. Thus an informational
asymmetry exists (in the absence of public auditing) between insiders and
potential outside investors.

Several comments are in order on the assumptions that we have made about

the function c(n). First, note that we are here strictly more general than the

previous literature, which typically takes c(1)0, c(n)= ,

for

n>1; i.e., it

has usually been assumed that there is exactly one insider (whose identity is

exogenously determined), and that no further insiders may be added. Second,
c'(n) must reasonably be positive, since if not, then every individual in the

economy will (in equilibrium) become an insider in every project. Finally,
unless c"(n)>0, as assumed, the equilibrium will involve only corner solutions

with all lending done by insiders; see (2.10) below. Intuitively, the
assumption that c"(n)>O is the assumption that the marginal cost of insider

finance is increasing. In a more general model, this might reflect
risk-aversion or the agency costs of equity dilution. In the present model, a
possible rationale is that the costs of coalition management are proportional
to the number of bilateral relationships among insiders, which increases
geometrically with n.

Optimal financial contracting. We now examine the optimal financial
arrangements in this economy for the case where the decision to verify project
outcomes via the public auditing technology is assumed to be a non-stochastic
function of the returns announced by the insiders.4
Consider first the (traditional) case where n, the number of insiders, is

fixed. If per capita savings are small relative to the required project input,
the wealth of insiders may well be insufficient to finance the project; i.e.,
it may be that nS < 1 +
in the amount of 1 +

c(n).

c(n)

-

nS.

It is thus necessary to borrow from outsiders,
The literature has shown (see, e.g.,

-8—

Williamson [1985]) that the form of the optimal contract between the insiders

and outsiders is always representable as follows: There exists some return x,
called the "no-default payment". When the insiders realize a return k >
they are not audited and pay a return of x to outsiders. When k <

x,

x,

the

insiders are forced (by the non-negativity constraint) to "declare bankruptcy"
(that is, accept auditing) and to forfeit all of the returns to the project to

the outsiders. This arrangement is, of course, naturally interpretable as a
debt contract with a probability of default.

The intuition underlying the form of the optimal contract is

straightforward. With no stochastic auditing, all possible announcements by
the insiders induce either the outcome "audit" or the outcome "no audit". The
payment made in the no-auditing states must effectively be constant, since the
insiders never have an incentive to announce a no-auditing state which has an
associated payment higher than the minimum among no-auditing states; this
minimum payment corresponds to the no-default payment x.

The reason that outsiders must receive all of the returns when there is
auditing (which occurs when k <

x)

is as follows: With risk-neutral borrowers

and lenders, a necessary condition for optimal contracting is that (subject to
incentive compatibility constraints and the requirement that each lender

expects a competitive return), expected auditing costs be minimized. If
outside lenders receive less than the maximum possible return when there is
auditing, then they must be compensated by receiving more when there is no

auditing (i.e., the no-default payment x is higher). But raising the
no-default payment makes the probability of auditing higher than the minimum

feasible level, which cannot be optimal. Thus, outsiders receive all returns
when there is auditing.

-9—

Note that, if auditing results were private information to the auditor,
then a role would arise for zero-profit intermediaries to channel all funds

between savers and projects. These intermediaries would internalize all
auditing costs and, by holding perfectly diversified portfolios, could
eliminate the need to be monitored by depositors (see Diamond (1984) and

Williamson (1985)). For our purposes here, it suffices to assume that auditing
results are public information. We also assume that outside lenders are able
to commit in advance (say, by legal devices such as escrow accounts) to sharing

the costs of auditing when bankruptcy occurs. These assumptions eliminate some
motivations for intermediation that have become standard in the literature.

However, in our setting individual outside investors will still have an
incentive to diversify, in order to avoid the potential problem that the return
to a given project might be so low as not to cover the auditing costs; for the
economy as a whole, this constraint may be safely assumed never to bind, as
profits from successful projects may be used to fund the auditing of
unsuccessful ones.

(Again, see Diamond [1984] and Williamson [1985].)

It should also be stressed that, while we describe y as an "auditing
cost", there are simple reformulations that would allow us to think of it as a
cost of bankruptcy more generally (e.g., loss in productivity due to change in
management or to unmonitored actions taken by insiders; see Gale and Hellwig

[1985] or Farmer [19841). These additional costs may be quite important, but
since including them would not change our analysis qualitatively, we avoid
unnecessary complication by not pursuing these here.

Endogenizing the proportions of inside and outside finance. We now allow
for endogenous determination of the size of insider coalitions as a result of

profit maximization and optimal financial contracting. Imposition of a
zero—profit condition (which follows from the assumption of free entry into

-10-

"insidership") then allows us to find, for this one-period economy with
exogenous savings and valuation of capital, the following variables: the
no-default payment; the safe interest rate; the ratio of inside to outside
finance; the default probability; and the number of projects in the economy.
Let:

q =

the

value of next-period capital, relative to the output good; E(q) is

the expected value of q at the time of investment
s =

per

capita contributions by insiders to the project, in terms of the

output good
r =

the

Q(k) =

safe rate of interest, in terms of the output good

total

payments to insiders, as a function of realized return;

measured in terms of the capital good
Given the results of the previous section, we can characterize the optimal
contract with a variable number of insiders as the solution to the following
programming problem (which may be thought of as the profit maximization problem
of the "firm" that brings together investors and undertakes the project):

K

K

max E(q)[5 (k - x)d}I - 5
x
0

Q(k)dH}

(2.2)

subject to

0<s<S
max[(k -

(2.3)

x),

0] > Q(k) > 0

(2.4)

—11—

K

E(q)[f

Q(k)dH] > ms

(2.5)

0
X

E(q)[f

K

(k -

y)dH +

5 xdH]

>

r

[1 +

c(n)

-

ns}

(2.6)

o

where the maximization is with respect to s (the contribution of each insider),
n (the number of insiders), x (the promised return if there is no default), and

Q(k) (the payment schedule for insiders). The safe rate of return r will be
determined endogenously below but is assumed to be taken as parametric by the
framers of individual financial contracts.

Constraint (2.3) states that per capita insider contributions cannot

exceed per capita savings. (Contributions can be less than savings; in
principle, for example, an individual could be an insider in more than one

project). (2.4) restricts total payments to insiders, in terms of the capital
good, to be between zero and what remains after debt-holders are paid in each
state.

(2.5) and (2.6) require that each insider and outsider receives an

expected return equal to the opportunity cost of his funds, as measured by the

safe rate of return r. (Note that in taking expectations in (2.5) and (2.6) we
use the independence of the aggregate valuation of capital and the return to

individual projects.) (2.5) and (2.6) also implicitly impose the constraint
that the sum of insider and outsider contributions must equal 1 +

c(n).

We indicate the solution process for (2.2) in several steps. First, note
that, if (2.2) is maximized, constraints (2.5) and (2.6) must always bind (that

is, all agents must earn exactly their opportunity cost). We may thus use
(2.5) to substitute out the second integral in (2.2). Next, we note that, for
any n, s=S at the optimum; insiders should devote all of their savings to one

project. (Actually, it is a matter of indifference whether insiders put their
resources directly into their project or act as outside lenders on another

-12-

project, as long as all of their wealth is available as collateral to back
outsider loans to their own project; that is, in this risk-neutral world, it is
never desirable to limit liability, except as is required by the non-negativity

constraint on consumption.) The result that s=S follows from the principle
that the probability of bankruptcy should be minimized5; the higher s, the
lower the value of x (and thus the lower the bankruptcy probability, given by

H(x)) which will allow (2.6) to hold. Intuitively, it is always preferable to
use inside funds when they are available at the same opportunity cost as
outside funds, since increased outside obligations also increase the risk of
bankruptcy.

The observations of the paragraph above allow us to simplify the
optimization problem to

max E(q)[f (k - x)d}I]

subject to (2.6).

-

mS

(2.7)

(It will be clear that (2.4) and (2.5) will always hold in

equilibrium.)

The first order necessary condition for the number of inside lenders n is:

h(x)Sy

c'(n) =

(2.8)

where

h(x) =

dH(x)/[1

-

H(x)J

(2.9)

is the "hazard rate" associated with the distribution function H. We assume,
conventionally, that h'(x) >

0,

which together with c"(n) >

ensure that (2.8) defines a maximum.

0, is sufficient to

-13-

Equation (2.8) is a relation defining the quantity of inside investors per
project, given (i) the no-default payment to outsiders, x, (ii) per capita

saving S, and (iii) the auditing cost y. A rise in either S or y increases the
expected marginal benefit from adding another insider, and thus induces a rise
in n. Similarly, an increase in the no-default payment x (or, equivalently, the

bankruptcy probability) raises n. Thus, we may define the following implicit
function for n:

n =

n(x,

S, y)

with an/ax > 0 (given h' >

(2.10)

0),

an/aS >

0, a/ay > 0.

Finding the optimal coalition size effectively completes the solution of
the firm's problem, since, given n, the safe rate r, and the expected value of

capital E(q), the constraint (2.6) determines the no-default payment x. Also
determined is the ratio of outside to inside finance, which decreases in n, and
the probability of bankruptcy H(x), which increases in x.

Equilibrium with free entry into inside lending. Although the safe rate r
is exogenous to the individual firm, it is determined in market equilibrium.

To show this, we begin by imposing the condition that firms make zero profits

in the competitive equilibrium. Setting the maximized value of (2.7) equal to
zero yields

K

E(q)f

(k -

x)dH = mS

(2.11)

x

Competition ensures that the expected value of the project yield conditional on
solvency must equal the expected total earnings of inside lenders.

-14-

Alternatively, combining constraint (2.6) with (2.11), we find that the
zero-profit condition can be expressed as

E(q)p =

r

(2.12)

where

_1-yH(x)
—
1 +

c(n)

21

Equation (2.12) is an arbitrage condition which states that in the competitive
equilibrium, the expected value of the project yield net of default costs, per
unit of saving invested, must equal the' riskiess interest rate. The quantity p
is the expected amount of capital produced per unit of the output good
invested, given the probability of bankruptcy H(x), the auditing cost y, and

the number of insiders n. (It is worth noting that the competitive allocation
in this model is the same as would arise from a social planning problem in

which p is maximized subject to (2.6).) Since the expression (2.13) reflects
the influence of financial factors on the physical efficiency of the investment
process (note that p would be constant in a perfect-information world), we will

refer to p as "financial efficiency". This concept will be discussed further
below.

There are several implications of (2.12) which contrast with the previous

literature. First, increases in the riskless rate of interest are not
necessarily associated with greater bankruptcy risk, since increases in r could
reflect a greater expected return to investment (e.g., due to a rise in E(q)).
This differs from Farmer [1984, 19851, in which there is a monotonic relation

between the riskiess rate and default risk. Thus, unlike Farmer's, our

-15-

formulation allows the possibility of the combination of a procyclical (or
acyclical) real interest rate and countercyclical default risk, which

(according to our reading of the evidence) seems more plausible. Second, the
fact that the expected returns to inside and outside lending are equal in
equilibrium implies that individuals will be indifferent to what role they

play. As a result, (2.12) also implies that there will be no "credit
rationing" in our model of the sort that occurs when the identities of
borrowers and lenders are exogenously given (see, e.g., Williamson [1985]).
Given S, y, and E(q), and given that n is an implicit function of x,
equation (2.14) and the constraint that outside lenders receive the safe rate
of return in expectation (equation (2.6), holding with equality) jointly
determine x and r.

Figure 1 illustrates this outcome in (r,x) space. The (aa) and (2)
curves portray combinations of r and x which satisfy (2.12) and (2.6),

respectively. (It may be helpful to interpret x simply as a measure of
bankruptcy risk, since the probability of bankruptcy H(x) is monotone
increasing in x.)

The (aa) curve slopes downward. (The appendix gives the algebra.) A rise
in the safe rate r implies that, in the competitive equilibrium, the expected

return to an investment project must rise. Since E(q) is given, financial
efficiency p must increase. This is possible only with a decline in the total
obligation in solvent states to outsiders x. A fall in x lowers the bankruptcy
probability, which increases the expected project return both because the
expected bankruptcy cost declines, and because the firm lowers the proportion
of inside finance (refer to (2.10)), which reduces the project setup cost c(n).
The (21) curve slopes upward, assuming that

0

1

Figure 1
Equilibrium in the static model

-16-

yh(x) <

1

(2.14)

which we impose.

(A sufficient condition for (2.14) to hold is that the

auditing cost he less than the project's input cost.) An increase in r raises
the opportunity cost to outside lenders; hence, the expected return to the
firm's debt must rise in order to satisfy the constraint (2.7). A rise in x

will accomplish this; that is, an increase in the total promised payment to
outsiders conditional on solvency will raise the expected debt return, assuming
that the associated rise in the expected bankruptcy cost is not too large
(which (2.14) ensures).

Given the equilibrium value of x, it is straightforward to calculate the
economy-wide default probability 11(x), the number of insiders per project

n =

n(x,S,y),

financial efficiency p, the ratio of outside to inside finance

(given by (l+c(n)-nS)/(nS)), the risky rate of return (equal to x/(1+c(n)-nS)),

etc. We may also calculate the number of projects undertaken in equilibrium,
m, as

m =

S/(1

+

c(n))

(2.15)

(2.15) uses the assumption that the population line is of length one, so that

aggregate savings are S. We ignore the technical point that m must be an
integer, which is of vanishing importance to the economy as S and therefore m
become large.

Comparative statics. Using Figure 1, it is possible to perform some
interesting comparative statics exercises, which we now briefly consider.
Details are in the appendix.

—17—

(1) A rise in per capita saving S lowers x and raises r. Both the (aa) and
21 curves shift down, with the movement of the (21) curve dominating.

Intuitively, a rise in S increases the resources each insider investor can
bring to the project; it also increases the marginal gain from adding an inside

investor. The firm thus has the incentive to lower the ratio of outside to
inside finance which, in turn, lowers x.

The expected rate of return to each

project (and thus, in equilibrium, the safe rate of return) rises also for two

reasons: First, with lower x the bankruptcy probability falls. Second, as
each insider brings more funds to the project, the marginal setup cost per unit
of insider funds is lower.

The next section exploits the result that higher income and thus higher
savings, through their salutary effect on insider equity, can in and of
themselves raise returns and lower bankruptcy risk in the economy; this

provides a mechanism by which output shocks can persist. Note also that an
unanticipated redistribution of wealth from insiders to outsiders, which takes
place after the identities of insiders have been determined but before
financial contracts are drawn, has the same qualitative effect on x and r in

this model as a general fall in S. This is consistent with Fisher's [19331
view that an unanticipated deflation that expropriates the debtor class to the
benefit of creditors may have adverse effects on risk, return, and investment

in the economy. We provide a more extensive analysis of "debt-deflation" in
Section 3 below.

(2) An increase in the auditing cost y has an ambiguous effect on x, but

definitely lowers r. (The dominant factor is a shift of the (aa) curve to the

left; the movement of the 21 curve is ambiguous.) In the former case, the
offsetting forces are as follows: The rise in y lowers the expected return to
risky debt, ceteris paribus, which implies that outsiders must be compensated

-18-

with a higher return in solvent

states; this tends to

hand, the 'arger bankruptcy cost induces

the firm

raise x. On the

other

to lower the proport lot)

of

outside finance; this depresses x. The safe interest rale declines

unambiguously because the rise in the auditing cost lowers the expected project
return.

(3) Arise_ ()

proportionately,

the epected

value of capital, increases r

the safe rate simply responding to movements in the expected

value of the project return. The rise in E(q) has no effect on x, which is the
no-default payment measured in capital goods, though it does affect the value

of this payment measured in the output good, E(q)x. Essential to the result
that x does not change is that, in this partial equilibrium setting, the change
in r does not in turn affect other variables, such as the level of savings S.

3. Dynamic General Equilibrium with Agency Costs of Investment Finance
In this section we embed the static model of capital formation with inside
and outside finance into a generic real business cycle model, i.e. , a simple

stochastic neoclassical growth model. This framework allows us to illustrate
starkly the role of financial factors, since in standard versions of the real
business cycle model (e.g. Kydland and Prescott [1982], Long and Plosser
[1983]), the assumption of perfect markets implies that financial structure is

irrelevant. (But see King and Plosser [1984] for an early attempt to bring
financial considerations into a version of this model.) To develop intuition
about the relation of this to more traditional approaches, we also derive the
IS curve for our model and use this device to characterize the real effects of
financial factors.

For tractability, the particular neoclassical growth model that we use is
a stochastic version of Diamond's [19651 overlapping generations framework, in

-19-

which agents are assumed to live for two periods. A technical problem with
having longer-lived agents is that differential success of individual investors
over time would force us to keep track of an ever-changing wealth distribution,
which in turn would complicate the analysis of the division of the population

between inside and outside lenders. Issues of dynamic coalition formation and
reputation would also arise, which, while important, are beyond the scope of

the present paper. We believe, however, that the qualitative predictions of
our analysis would survive in alternative formalizations.

Technology. As in the previous section there are two goods, an output
good and a capital good. The output good is now taken to be produced by a
constant returns technology using capital and labor. Let y be the quantity of
the output good per Unit of labor input, k the amount of capital per unit of
labor input, and 0 a random productivity shock. We assume that production of
the output good in each period is governed by:

=

0(1/a)k

0 <

a

< 1

(3.1)

where the random variable 0 is i.i.d., is distributed continuously over a
finite and non-negative support, and has a mean equal to 0. Subscripts denote
the time period.

In each period, output is divided between consumption, C, and input for

producing new capital goods, 5kt' where both variables are in units per worker.
Thus

+

Skt

(3.2)

-20-

The economy's "savings for capital" Skt are assumed to be transformed into

the next period's capital stock k÷1 by projects financed by inside and outside
lending, as in the previous section. Assuming further that (1) capital is
revolving (i.e., it depreciates in one period) and (2) the number of workers is
normalized to one, the capital stock evolves as follows:

kt÷l =

tLk(i)

-

Z)]

(3.3)

where m, the number of projects undertaken in t,

m = 5kt11

is

given (as above) by

(3.4)

÷ c(nt))

and again we neglect the fact that m must be an integer. The notation k(i)
stands for the realized outcome of project i; y, recall, is the auditing cost;

and I(i,Z) is an indicator function that takes on the value one if k(i) c

where Z is defined as the set of outcomes that induces auditing in period
t,

and

is zero otherwise.

The expected production of capital goods can be written as

E(k+1) =

where

t5kt

(3.5)

is 'the "financial efficiency" concept defined by (2.13) above.

Consumers. There are overlapping generations of two-period lived
identical individuals. The population of each generation is a continuum with

length normalized to equal one. Let C(l) and St be consumption and saving,
respectively, by a young person at t,

C(2)

consumption by an old person,

lump-sum taxes (transfers, if negative) levied on the young, and B the

-21-

quantity of one-period discount government bonds acquired by the typical young

person. The young are assumed to acquire capital from the old at price

for

use in producing current output. Then each young person at time t faces the
following budget constraint:

q1

- Ti:.

C(1) =

-

(3.6)

St

where y obeys (3.1). Savings S can take the form either of lending to
capital-producing projects or the purchase of government discount bonds:

=

Skt

+

(l/r)B

(3.7)

where l/r is the price of a discount bond acquired at t. Finally, expected
consumption in the second period of life is6

EtC+1(2)} =

+

(3.8)

Bt

Each individual has the following utility function:

EtU(C(1), C+1(2))} a .nC(l) +

2nEtC+1(2)}

(3.9)

(3.9) imposes risk neutrality, which permits us to use the analysis of optimal

contracting from the previous section. Selden [1978] provides motivation for
this formulation of the utility function, which was also used by Farmer [1984];
alternatively, we could have followed Williamson [1985] and allowed utility to

be additively linear in second period consumption. Each individual has a fixed
endowment of one unit of labor, which is supplied inelastically during the

-22-

first period of life. At t, each young consumer chooses the vector (C(1), S,
Skt, Bt, E(C+1(2)}} to maximize (3.9), subject to (3.1), (3.6), (3.7), and

(3.8).
The first-order necessary conditions are:

(3.10)

=

=

(3.11)

1'dt

E(q1)P =

r

(3.12)

where

r =

[/(1 + )][1

—

a]

(3.13)

and

dt

-

(3.14)

Equation (3.10) defines the young consumer's demand for capital, for use
in current production. Because of the constant returns technology, it also has

the interpretation of a market demand curve. (3.11) characterizes both
individual and aggregate saving behavior; conveniently, saving is just

proportional to disposable income. (3.12) states that the expected returns
from lending to investment projects and buying government bonds must be equal;
note that this is just the equation for the (aa) curve (2.12), described in the
previous section.

-23-

Government. The government does not consume resources, but only issues

one-period discount bonds B and levies taxes t. In each period the quantity
of bonds redeemed must equal the discounted value of new bonds issued plus net
taxes:

Bt_i =

(l/r)B +

(3.15)

We make the process followed by the quantity of outstanding bonds stochastic by
assuming that taxes evolve randomly:

Btl -

1-u

z Btj

/r

(3.16)

where z is a random variable with finite support and positive mean z, and

O<u<1. (3.16) implies that the quantity of bonds follows an autonomous and
stationary first-order process:

B =

zBt11"

(3.17)

Equilibrium. To analyze the stochastic equilibrium of this model, we
begin with the momentary (within-period) equilibrium, turning subsequently to
the dynamics.

In studying the momentary equilibrium we take as given the inherited

capital stock kt, the current realization of the productivity shock O, and the
current and lagged realizations of the random quantity of government bonds,

Bt

and Btl (see equations (3.15)-(3.17)). Equilibrium is then described by the
eight equations (E.1) through (E.8), collected for convenience in Table 1. The
eight endogenous variables whose values are determined as the solution to these

Table 1. Momentary equilibrium

(E.l)

y O(l/cr)k

(E.2)

E(q1)P =

(E.3)

E(q1)[ft(k - y)dH

(E.4)

= (1

(E.5)

=

(E.6)

St =

(E.7)

Skt =

(E.8)

E(q÷1) =

-

r

(aa)

yH(x))/(1

+

1K xdH]

+

c(n))

=

r[l

S, '

- Btl

ry

-

(1

-

+

(1/r)B)

r)(1/r)B - IBti

+

c(n)

-

nS]

(2)

-24-

equations are: output

the safe rate r; the risky payoff x (equivalently,

the rate of bankruptcy H(x)); financial efficiency

the number of insiders

per project n; total savings St; savings devoted to capital projects S; and

the expected price of capital E(q1).
The equations of Table 1 are interpreted as follows:

(E.l) is the production function (3.1), given the realized value of O.
(E.2) states that, given risk-neutrality, the expected return to capital

investment must equal the safe rate r available on bonds. This is again the
(aa) curve (2.12), derived in Section 2.

(E.3) is the condition that outside lenders to capital projects must

receive the safe rate of return in expectation. This equation was called the

(2) curvein Section 2; see (2.6).
(E.4) defines "financial efficiency", as in (2.13).

(E.5) gives the optimal number of inside lenders per project (equation
2.12); equivalently we could have written out the first-order condition (2.8)
explicitly.

(E.6) and (E.7) are identities defining S and Skt. They follow from
(3.7), (3.11), (3.14), and (3.15).
(E.8) is an approximate expression for the expected price of capital

E(q÷1). It is derived in several steps. First, we take expectations of both
sides of (3.10) to obtain

E(q÷1) =

OE(kt+lal)

(3.18)

Next, since k+1 is a sum of independent random variables, it can be shown by
using the law of large numbers that

-25-

li E(k+lo l)/E(k÷l)al =

where m =

skt/(1+c(nt))

1

(3.19)

is the number of investment projects. Thus, if the

number of projects is large (i.e., aggregate savings is large relative to the
project size), then it is reasonable to use the following approximation of
(3.18):

E(q÷1) =

OE(k+1)1

(3.20)

Together with (3.5), (3.20) implies (E.8).7

Given kt and 0' the production function (E.1) alone is sufficient to

determine output y. Thus financial factors do not affect output in momentary
equilibrium, because aggregate supply is inelastic. We will show, however,
that these factors do affect the process of capital formation, thereby having

an impact on future output. Further, it is possible to characterize the
effects of financial factors on an "IS curve"; this exercise provides insight
into the implications for settings with alternative formulations of aggregate
supply.

To solve for the allocation in momentary equilibrium, the model, consider

first the determination of x and p. Note that equations (E.2) through (E.5)
form the identical model analyzed in Section 2, given E(q÷1) and S.

The

comparative statics exercises done with that model showed that x does not

depend on E(q÷1). x does however depend (negatively) on per capita savings
St; since S in turn is proportional to disposable income

x =

x(y)

we may write

(3.21)

-26-

where x' < 0.

Similarly, within the subsystem (E.2)-(E.5) it can be shown8

that financial efficiency p depends positively on S. We therefore also have

=

(3.22)

0.

where p' >

Thus increased disposable income, because it raises the quantity

of collateral that insiders can bring to projects, lowers the rate of
bankruptcy H(x) and raises the efficiency of the investment process.

Let us now obtain the "IS curvet' for this model. Substitute (E.8) and
(3.22) into (E.2) to obtain

-

r =

a

a-i
(3.23)

Skt

(3.23) gives the combinations of interest rates and output such that savings is

equal to the quantity of input used in investment projects. The production
function (E.l) and (3.23) together determine output y and the safe interest

rate r in momentary equilibrium. (See Figure 2.) Determination of the rest
of the variables in the system then follows from simple substitutions. In

particular, x,

S,

and Skt follow directly from (3.22), (3.23), (E.6), and

(E.7) respectively. n and E(q1) are then obtained from (E.5) and (E.8).
In the case with no government, the quantity of bonds and net taxes are

both always zero; we then have simply dt =

and 5kt =

= ryt.

The IS

curve then reduces to

r = öp(y)a(ry)a_l

The slope of the IS curve in this case is given by

(3.24)

r

Is

Figure 2

Momentary equilibrium

-27-

=

(a - 1

+

afl)(r/y)

(3.25)

'Is

where

q > 0 is equal to the elasticity of financial efficiency p with respect

to disposable income. Note that, if we neglect q, the IS curve slopes down
(since a <

1),

and for the conventional reason: An increase in income leads to

more saving, which can only be absorbed into investment if the interest rate

falls. However, the presence of q makes the IS curve flatter than in the usual
case, and could in principle make it upward sloping. The reason is that, at
higher levels of income, increased insider equity lowers the agency costs of
financing projects and thus increases the demand for investment funds.

(Formally, the effect is analogous to including income in the investment demand

equation in the derivation of the standard IS curve.) If the costs of finance
are very sensitive to the level of insider equity (q large) and the elasticity
of output with respect to capital is not too far below one, then increasing
output may raise the demand for investment funds faster than it raises the
supply of savings; in this case, the IS curve slopes up.

When the government sector is reinstated in the model, the slope of the IS
curve is given by the more complicated expression

[(a -

=

1)I(ydt/Skt)
(1 + v )

+

(3.26)

IS

where

v =

[(1

-

a)(1

-

r)(yd/sk)

+

afl]B/(ry)

(3.27)

-28-

and v > 0 if Bt > 0. The IS curve is now even flatter, compared to the case
without government debt. One can identify two effects. The first, captured by
the first term in brackets in the expression for v, is the conventional
Diamond [1965] effect: A fall in r increases the price of newly issued
government bonds, which diverts saving from productive investment; a higher
level of income than before is needed to generate enough savings to equate

investment and the savings devoted to investment. The second effect,
represented by the second term in brackets in (3.27) is a financial effect: A
fall in interest rates acts as a capital gain for the young, since it reduces
the taxes they must pay in order to re-finance the government debt (see 3.15).

As above, higher income for the young increases insider collateral, lowers
bankruptcy risk, and increases the demand for investment funds at any value of
the safe interest rate; thus income must increase even more to generate enough
savings to satisfy this investment demand.

Dynamics. Period-to-period dynamics in the model are created by the
presence of capital. The law of motion governing output is of the form

=

k(i),

(3.28)

0÷ ;y)

where the function y' is given by

=

Ot+j(1/a)

t[kt(i) -

yI(i,

Z)])a

(3.29)

In (3.29), recall that m is the number of projects undertaken in t, and is an
increasing function of

k(i) is the vector of realizations of the projects

undertaken in t; and I is the indicator function which takes the value one for
projects which are audited.

-29—

A useful approximation9 to (3.29) is

=

t+l(hIU)(ptskt)G

(3.30)

which in the case without government debt reduces to

=

Ot+i(1/a)(ptfyt)a

(3.31)

How does the presence of financial factors affect output dynamics

following an innovation to 0? An indicator of the sensitivity of this first
order system to a temporary productivity shock is simply the derivative of

expected output with respect to current output. From (3.30) it follows that

ay÷1/ay = a(rlyd
where yd >

+

P)Y+iIY

(3.32)

0 is the elasticity of financial efficiency p with respect to

disposable income y, and p > 0 is the elasticity of savings for capital
formation Skt with respect to output y. In the model without government debt,
p=1.

In

the conventional real business cycle model, rlyd =

0.

(3.32) thus

suggests that the financial factors we have introduced into the model magnify

the persistence of a shock to productivity. The mechanism is as follows:
Higher productivity increases income and per capita savings, which raises both
the nwnber of insiders per project and the amount of equity each insider can

bring. This lowers the risk of bankruptcy and increases the efficiency of the
investment process (p increases). Both the higher level of investment (due to

-34-

last assumption is meant to reflect the real-world fact that non-entrepreneurs
cannot be transformed into entrepreneurs without some lapse of time.

The equations describing momentary equilibrium after the redistribution

are listed as (D.l) through (D.9) (D for "debt-deflation") in Table 2. We
describe them briefly:
(D.l) is the production function.

(D.2) is the (aa) curve. Because the number of investment projects may be
decreased but not increased after the redistribution, the (aa) curve here is in
principle an inequality; the return to an investment project could be greater
than the return to bonds if the number of projects selected before the surprise

redistribution turned out to be a binding constraint. It can be shown14,
however, that for c <

1

(D.2) must hold with equality.

(D.3) is the (22) curve, which states that outside lending and holding

bonds must pay the same return. Note that, on the right hand side of (D.3),

per capita savings St has been replaced by S, where S denotes the per capita
savings of insiders after the redistribution (S <

Sr).

The replacement of St

with S implies that a greater share of each project must be financed by the
funds of outsiders.

(D.4) restates the definition of financial efficiency. According to
(D.5), for the purposes of comparative statics exercises with respect to the
redistribution parameter e, the coalition size n can be treated as fixed.

(D.6) and (D.7) re-state the definitions of per capita savings S and per
capita "savings for investment" Skt. These definitions remain valid despite
the redistribution because total gross income is unchanged and because savings

is a fixed proportion of disposable income. (Note that the savings of the

average outsider will exceed S, however.)

Table 2. Momentary equilibrium with debt-deflation

(D.1)

=

O(1/cr)k

r

(D.2)

E(q1)P =

(D.3)

E(q1)[5t(k - y)dH

+

(D.4)

Pt = (1 -

+

(D.5)

=

(D.6)

St =

(D.7)

Skt =

(D.8)

S =

''

"t+1'

(r o

r(y

yH(x))/(1

-

Bt_i

- (1

I(cy
=

(aa)'

—

+

=

c(n))

(l/rt)Bt)

V)(l/rt)B - 1Bi

l/rB

+

xdH]

't'kt

-

B1)

r[l + c(n)

-

-30-

higher savings) and the greater efficiency of investment raise the level of the
capital stock, which propagates the output shock over time.'°

Realistically, this financial effect may be interpreted as acting through

corporate liquidity and profits. In good times, when firms are flush with
inside funds, outside funds for project finance also become relatively easy to
obtain; the increased capital formation that follows from this enhances the
general prosperity, both through an aggregate supply effect (as in our formal
model) and, presumably, through an aggregate demand effect as well.

Conversely, in bad times, low levels of insider collateral and high bankruptcy
risk make lenders more wary, which reduces investment and reinforces the fall
in output.

In the model with government debt, there is an additional, slightly more
subtle effect by which the presence of financial factors increases the

sensitivity of y÷ to y. In the standard model, a rise in output lowers
interest rates, which raises the price of government debt and diverts savings

away from productive investment. The same effect occurs in our model here,
except that, because financial factors make the IS curve flatter (or possibly
positively sloped), the diversion of resources away from capital is

unambiguously smaller. That is, the parameter p in (3.32) is larger here than
in the standard case. Thus, once again, financial factors tend to act in the
direction of increasing the persistence of the response to real shocks.

Financial shocks. We have shown above that financial factors can affect
the propagation over time of real (productivity) shocks to output. We now
consider briefly the effects of shocks originating in the financial sector

(including government finance). We look at (1) innovations in government debt,
(2) shocks to the auditing cost, and (3) "debt-deflatio&'.

-31-

(1) An innovation in current government debt Bt (which is equivalent to a
change in lump-sum taxes; see (3.15)—(3.17)) is a shock to the IS curve.

Noting that (for fixed r) ayd/aB =

l/r and aSk/B = -(1

-

V)/r,

we can

write

ayt

aB

[1 -

=

'Is

[(1 -

a)I(ydtIS kt )
o)V(ydt/Skt)

oq]

+
-

(3.36)

The derivative in (3.36) is positive, so (as usual) a positive shock to bonds
(equivalently, a cut in taxes) shifts the IS curve up and to the right

(assuming that the condition for a downward sloping IS curve is met)." In the
absence of financial effects (r10), the expression in (3.36) is simply l/r,
and the macroeconomic impact of the debt shock is the same as in Diamond
[1965]; specifically, some savings are diverted away from productive investment

to bonds, so that future capital and output falls. More precisely, it can be
shown that the increase in Bt unequivocally raises net bond wealth

B/r, which

raises disposable income and current consumption, and reduces investment.
If fl >

0 (that is, financial efficiency responds strictly positively to

increased income), the effect of the debt shock on the IS curve is

unambiguously increased, so that interest rates rise more than when financial

factors are absent. Higher disposable income raises financial efficiency and
thus actual capital formation, offsetting to some degree the negative effects
of the tax cut on capital.

We stress that it is for technical reasons only (specifically, the
difficulty in calculating the dynamic stochastic equilibrium) that our present

model does not allow an IS shift to affect current output. In principle, one
could imagine replacing the inelastic labor supply of our model with an

-32-

intertemporal substitution mechanism (so that output supplied increases with
the safe interest rate), or a Keynesian LN curve and sticky nominal wages.

In

one of these more general models, we would expect to find that a tax cut raises
current output (as IS shifts up), at the same time that it crowds out future

output. In this case, while the financial factors discussed in this paper
would tend to offset the tendency of a tax cut to crowd out capital in the long
run, in the short run they would act, because financial efficiency and
therefore investment increase as income increases, to reinforce the positive
effect of the tax cut on output.
(2) An increase in the auditing cost y (which could reflect either a

deterioration in the auditing technology or perhaps institutional changes

affecting the cost of bankruptcy) shifts the IS curve down and left. The
derivative is

—
'Is

=

y[(l -

a)r(y/s)

-

(3.37)

where 6 < 0 is the elasticity of financial efficiency p with respect to y.
(3.37) is negative if the IS curve itself is downward sloping. Higher auditing
costs lower expected project returns and hence depress the safe rate of return
and the flow of investment.

(3) A "debt-deflation" is an unanticipated deflation that redistributes

wealth from borrowers to creditors. According to the logic of our approach,
such a redistribution should have real effects because it reduces the
collateral held by the "borrowing class" and thus increases the agency costs of
subsequent loans.

Our formal model does not incorporate the feature that individuals
currently borrowing in order to invest are also relatively likely to have taken

-33-

out loans previously. We thus attempt to capture the debt-deflation phenomenon
in a stylized way, as follows: We assume that in each period t, there is an
instant, after production is realized, in which potential investment projects

are selected and insider coalitions are formed; after this instant, no

additional projects can be considered until the next period. At a subsequent
instant within t, agents decide on portfolios, financial contracts are drawn

up, and resources are committed to the projects. Now let us imagine that,
between the moment of coalition formation and project selection and the time at
which resources are committed, there is a totally unanticipated and one-time
redistribution of (before-tax) income from those agents who had just joined
investment coalitions to those who had not; specifically, those who had joined

coalitions have their income reduced to a fraction , 0 < C < 1, of its
previous level. (This is supposed to capture the idea that under a
debt-deflation, those who are currently in a position to undertake investment

projects experience an unanticipated deterioration of collateral.12) After
this redistribution, agents have the following options: Those who had joined
coalitions and suffered the loss of income may continue with their projects if
they wish; however, their coalition sizes are fixed at the level initially
determined13 and the financial contracts they draw up with outsiders must,

naturally, reflect their straitened financial circumstances. Alternatively,
those who had joined coalitions may abandon their investment projects without
further penalty (i.e., they do not lose their setup cost) and become outside

lenders to other projects or holders of government bonds. (Insiders who
abandon their projects do not regain the income they lost in the

redistribution.) Individuals who did not become insiders originally may hold
bonds or become outside lenders, as before; importantly, though, they may not

start new investment projects as insiders (within the current period). This

-35-

(D.8) defines S, the average savings of individuals who initially joined

investment coalitions. The parameter ,

recall,

is the redistribution

parameter which is applied to gross income. Per capita taxes, Btl -

(l/r)Bt,

are lump-sum and are thus not affected by the redistribution.

To analyze this system, use (D.2), (D.7), and (D.9) to write an expanded
version of the (aa) curve as

(aa)'

p[fy -

(1 -

r)(1/r)B

—

1B1]' = r

(3.38)

only on x, (3.38) is

Note that, given y, Bt, Br_i, and the dependence of

a (negative) relation between r and x only. Similarly, expand the £. curve,
using (D.3), (D.7), (D.8), and (D.9), to read

-

(L.a)'

r[l +

(1

-

c(n)

r)(1/r)B
-

nV(eY

-

VB

+

l/rB B1)]

t(k - y)dH +

fKxtdH]

-

=

(3.39)

and r.
< 1) affects

which again is a relationship (here positive) between x.

Let us see how a fall in g

(say,

from c = 1 to S

the (aa)'

and (LQ.)' curves. First, c does not appear in (aa)', so this curve does not

move. However, a fall in S can be shown to shift the (La)' curve up and to the
left in (r,x) - space.

(See Figure 3.) Intuitively, a fall in c reduces

insider capital, so that more outside finance is required per project; thus, at

any given safe rate of return r, the total non-default payment to be made to

outsiders, x, must rise. Alternatively, at any given safe rate, as the amount
of insider capital declines, the risk of bankruptcy must rise.

x

/
/

/
/

/
/

/
/

LI
S

IA

S

r
Figure 3
Debt—deflation

-36-

The IS curve in this example is the solution of (3.38) and (3.39) for

r

in terms of y. From Figure 3 we see that a borrower-to-creditor

redistribution ( < 1) causes r to fall for any y, i.e., the IS curve shifts
down. We may conclude that a debt—deflation lowers safe interest rates (i.e.,
raises the price of safe assets); this may be interpreted as the result of the
"flight to quality" which is common during periods of financial crisis.
Debt-deflation also raises the rate of bankruptcy, lowers financial efficiency,

and (from (D.6) and (D.7)) raises the total savings of the young while lowering

the amount of savings devoted to capital formation. Lower savings for capital
formation plus lower financial efficiency together imply less capital and thus

less output in the future. Because of our model's assumption of inelastic
aggregate supply,

is not affected by the debt-deflation; but, as noted

above, in any model in which IS shifts affect output contemporaneously, we

would expect to see debt-deflation reduce current output as well. Thus, what
appears to be a pure redistribution, because of its effect on insider
collateral, can have a variety of real effects.

4. Conclusion
We have constructed a simple neoclassical model of intrinsic business

cycle dynamics in which financial factors play an important role. A key point
is that borrower solvency (here defined as the amrnmt of collateral available
to secure outside loans) is inversely related to the agency costs of

undertaking physical investments, Increased solvency in good times thus
expands investment demand, which in turn tends to magnify swings in output.

Further, financial disturbances (such as debt-deflations) which affect

insiders' collateral or the costs of bankruptcy may have real effects. These
general conclusions would survive, we suspect, in models with characterizations

-37-

of the agency problem and the macroeconomic setting that are richer than the
simple approaches used here.

A question that does deserve investigation, though, is the relevance of
this analysis to an economy that is dominated by large, publicly held firms.

The financial model used here probably works best as a description of smaller,
closely held entities, for which "collateral" is easily identifiable as the
personal stake of the owner/managers; how to map this model into a situation

where ownership is diffused and is divorced from management is less clear. In
particular, our conclusions would be substantially weakened if most firms in
the economy could quickly raise funds through outside equity issues.

One response to this is to note that closely-held firms are in fact a

large part of all contemporary capitalist economies. Beyond this, as has been
argued by Greenwald, Stiglitz, and Weiss (1984), it should be pointed out that
agency problems also impinge on publicly held firms, probably restricting their

ability to issue outside equity. For example, equity issuance may dilute
managerial incentives (by lowering the debt-equity ratio) or send a bad signal

to outside investors. A useful direction for further research would be to
extend this present approach to encompass an agency model of the publicly held

firm. Beyond increasing the applicability of the model, such an extension
might also deliver testable implications about differences in the cyclical
behavior of publicly and privately owned companies.

-38-

FOOTNOTE S

The debt-deflation phenomenon was probably important during the Great
Depression in the U.S., at the levels of both finanrial intermedi.ri and
ultimate borrowers; see Bernanke (1983) and Hamilton (1986).
2

We emphasize, however, that this proposition is quite general. For
example, in his analysis of the perhaps more familiar Holmstrom (1979)
principal-agent setup, in which agents' unobserved actions affect project
returns, Sappington (1983) demonstrated a similar inverse relationship
between the agent's wealth and the agency costs of the principal-agent
relationship.
The purpose of allowing a variable coalition size is to introduce a second
source of variation in the aggregate debt-equity ratio (the first source
being changes in the per capita contributions of insiders). We think this
adds an interesting dimension to the analysis, but the main qualitative
results of the paper can be obtained without it, given that intertemporal
fluctuations in insider resources provide a source of variation in
collateral. Having this feature, however, allows us to highlight the role
of collateral within the static model.
Allowing for at least some restricted forms of stochastic auditing yields
some interesting modifications of the analysis but does not change the
basic results; this is discussed in an appendix available from the
authors.
After substitution of (2.5) (holding with equality) into (2.2) and the
addition of (2.6) (also holding with equality) to (2.2), the objective
function can be written (for a given n) as simply mm H(x), subject to the
constraints.

6

(3.8) is in fact an approximation, since it is derived using

E(q÷1k÷1) = E(q÷1)E(k÷1), which is not exactly true here

and

are not independent). A formal justification for this approximation
when the number of investment projects m is large is given in footnote 7
below.

Note also that E(q1k÷1) =

Efk÷1}

is, by the LLN, approximately equal

to OEtk+1} for large m. By (3.20) this is in turn approximately equal
to

E(q1)E(k1), which justifies the assumption in (3.8).
8

A sketch of the proof is as follows: Divide (E.3) by (E.2) to eliminate
E(q1) and r from (E.3). (E.3), (E.4), and (E.5) now form a subsystem
in i, x, and n. This subsystem is identical to the set of equations
studied in Appendix B, with E(q1) set equal to one and r set equal to

-39-

Total differentiation therefore shows that dp/dS >
tiat dr/dS > 0 in the analogous system in Appendix B.
p .

0, as it showed

To see that (3.30) is a reasonable approximation, note that

m [k (1)

t

-

.

z)}/ptSkt )

i=1

yi,

lim (t[k(i) -

lim (t[k(i)Im - 11t(i,
([1
10

-

yH(x)]/[1

-

yH(x))° =

z)]/[mt(l -

z)/m]/[l

YH(xt)])°

- yH(xt)])° =

= 1

Though here movements in the capital stock generate all the variation in
output, we emphasize that the financial effects described here will
magnify the business cycle in any setting where output variability
increases with the income sensitivity of investment demand.
If the IS curve is upward-sloping, the derivative (3.36) is negative.
However, the effects of the change in bonds on interest rates and
investment are the same as in the basic case. Similar observations hold
for the cases analyzed below.

12

13

14

We do not explicitly consider the usual question of why financial
contracts are rarely indexed to the price level. For present purposes,
let us assume that there is a fixed cost of indexing, and that the ex ante
probability of debt-deflation is sufficiently small so as to make
considering this contingency not worthwhile.
This is for simplicity; it is not essential to the qualitative results.

=

Suppose not: then it must be that

Skt,

where, here and below,

starred variables indicate the equilibrium values when e1 (i.e., when

there is no redistribution). From (D.7), this implies r =

r.

From

(D.4) and (D.9), given 5kt fixed, x and E(q1) covary positively. Thus,
from (D.3), since S <

S,

r =

x,

when g1). But since x >
aa-1 *
= 0 PtSkt
<
o pt(Skt)

r

=

and
=

From (D.2) and (D.9),

U * a-i

r,

r

n,

it must be that x >

x1.

(since (D.2) holds with equality

this implies
.

r, a contradiction.

-40-

Appendix: Comparative Statics

This appendix presents some formal results for the partial equilibrium

model of Section 2. We first derive the slopes of the (aa) and (2) curves,
and then conduct some comparative static experiments. We consider the effects
on x and r of the following changes:

a rise in S, a rise in y, and a rise in

Eq}.
For convenience, we restate the equations describing the (aa) and (.Q2.)

curves ((2.12) and (2.6), respectively.)

(aa) E{q}[1 —

yH(x)}/[l

(2) E(q}[(ke - y)H(x)

—

+

c(n)} = r

x(l

-

(A.i)

H(x))]/[l

+

c(n)

-

nS] =

r

(A.2)

where

n = n Cx, S, y)

n1, n2, n3 >

0

(A.3)

x

ken 5

kdH/H(x)

(A.4)

0

The (aa) and (21) curves determine x and r, given (A.3), (A.4), S, y, and
E{q}.

Slopes of the (aa) and(21) curves. Differentiating both (A.1) and (A.2)
with respect to x and r yields:

-41-

cn

ydH

Iaa -r[1 -

yH(x)

< 0,

(1 + c(n))U

1 -

a

-1

+

H(x)

-

ydH

n1(S -

+
(ke -

r1

y)H(x)

-1

>0.

1}

H(x))

+ x(1 -

c)

1 + c(n) - nS

Thus, the (aa) curve slopes downward and the (.Qi) curve upward.

A rise in S. Totally differentiating (A.1) and (A.2) with respect to x,
r, and S yields.

a

ar
as

i

=

(s -

cn2
+ c(n)

+

+

- yH(x)

+

< 0

1 + c(n) - ns

ydH
—

c)n2

nr

cn1

> 0,

1 + c(n) 1 + c(n) - nS

where

ydH
1 -

1-H(x) -

cn1

+

yH(x)

+

n1(S -

+
(ke -

1 + c(n)

ydil

y)H(x)

H(x))

+ x(1 -

c)

>0.

1 + c(n) - nS

A rise in S therefore lowers x and increases r.

A rise in y. Totally differentiating (A.1) and (A.2) with respect to x,
r, and y yields:

nS
—

ay

—
—

ay

1 -

-r

c(n)

+

n c

H(x)
-

ns

+

1 —

( -

yH(x)

I

—

1 —

H(x)
yH(x)

n (S -

1 + c(n) - nS

1 + c(n)

r

H(x)
1 —

c')

yH(x)

(1 —

c(n)

—

nS)

< 0

-42-

Thus, a rise in y has an ambiguous effect on x, but definitely lowers r.

A rise in E[g}. Totally differentiating (A.1) and (A.2) with respect to
x, r, and E{q} yields:

ax

aE{q}

— 0

=
aE{q}

r/E{q}

>

0.

A rise in Eg} has no effect on x, but increases r.

-43-

References

Bernanke, Ben and Mark Gertler, "Banking and Macroeconomic Equilibrium",

forthcoming in William Barnett and Kenneth Singleton, eds., New Approaches to
Monetary Economics, Cambridge Press.

Diamond, Douglas, "Financial Intermediation and Delegated Monitoring", Review
of Economic Studies, July 1984, vol. 51, pp. 393-414.

Diamond, Peter, "Government Debt in a Neoclassical Growth Model", American
Economic Review, December 1965, vol. 55, pp.1126-1150

Farmer, Roger, "A New Theory of Aggregate Supply", American Economic Review,
December 1984, vol. 74, pp. 920-30.

______________

"Implicit

Contracts with Asymmetric Information and Bankruptcy:

The Effect of Interest Rates on Layoffs", Review of Economic Studies, July
1985, vol. 52,

Fisher,

pp.

427-442.

Irving, "The Debt-Deflation Theory of Great Depressions", Econometrica,

October 1933, vol. 1, pp. 337-57.

Gale, Douglas and Martin Hellwig, "Incentive-Compatible Debt Contracts I: The
One—Period Problem", Review of Economic Studies, October 1985, vol. 52, pp.
647—664.

-44-

Greenwald, Bruce, Joseph E. Stiglitz, and Andrew Weiss, "Informational
Imperfections in the Capital Market and Macroeconomic Fluctuations", American
Economic Review, May 1984, vol. 74, pp. 194-200.

Hamilton, James D., "Monetary Factors in the Great Depression", working paper,
University of Virginia, revised June 1986.

Holmstrom, Bengt, "Moral Hazard and Observability", Bell Journal of Economics,
Spring 1979, vol. 10, pp. 74-91.

King, Robert and Charles Plosser, "Money, Credit, and Prices in a Real Business
Cycle", American Economic Review, June 1984, vol. 74, pp. 360-80.

Kydland, Finn and Edward Prescott, "Time to Build and Aggregate Fluctuations",
Econometrica, November 1982, vol. 50, 1345-70.

Long, John and Charles Plosser, "Real Business Cycles", Journal of Political
Economy, February 1983, vol. 91, pp. 39-69.

Sappington, David, "Limited Liability Contracts Between Principal and Agent",
Journal of Economic Theory, February 1983, vol. 29, pp. 1-21.

Selden, Larry, "A New Representation of References Over 'Certain and Uncertain'

Consumption Pairs: The 'Certainty Equivalent' Hypothesis", Econometrica,
September 1978, vol. 46, pp. 1045-60.

-45-

Townsend, Robert, "Optimal Contracts and Competitive Markets with Costly State
Verification", Journal of Economic Theory, October 1979, pp. 265-93.

Williamson, Stephen, "Financial Intermediation, Business Failures, and Real
Business Cycles", working paper, University of Western Ontario, 1985.

