NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HIGHWAY TO HITLER
Nico Voigtlaender
Hans-Joachim Voth
Working Paper 20150
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20150

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2014, Revised January 2019

For helpful comments, we thank Sascha Becker, Eli Berman, Tim Besley, Leonardo Bursztyn,
Davide Cantoni, Bruno Caprettini, Ernesto Dal Bo, Melissa Dell, Rick Hornbeck, Torsten
Persson, James Robinson, Andrei Shleifer, Jim Snyder, and Noam Yuchtman. Seminar audiences
at Basel University, Bonn, CREI, Dartmouth, Haas-Berkeley, King’s College London, the Juan
March Institute, LSE, UC-Berkeley, UC San Diego, Warwick, Yale, Zurich, and at the Barcelona
Summer Forum offered useful suggestions. We are grateful to Hans-Christian Boy, Vicky Fouka,
Cathrin Mohr, Casey Petroff, Colin Spear and Inken Töwe for outstanding research assistance.
Maja Adena, Ruben Enikolopov, and Maria Petrova kindly shared data on radio signal strength in
Nazi Germany. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2014 by Nico Voigtlaender and Hans-Joachim Voth. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Highway to Hitler
Nico Voigtlaender and Hans-Joachim Voth
NBER Working Paper No. 20150
May 2014, Revised January 2019
JEL No. H54,N44,N94,P16
ABSTRACT
Can autocracies win electoral support by showcasing economic competence? We analyze a
famous case – the building of the Autobahn network in Nazi Germany. Using newly collected
data, we show that highway construction was effective in boosting popular support, helping to
entrench the Nazi dictatorship. Direct economic benefits such as declining unemployment near
construction sites are unlikely to explain the increase in pro-Nazi votes. In addition, Nazi
propaganda used the Autobahn as a powerful symbol of successful economic policy, putting an
effective end to austerity – so that many Germans credited the Nazi regime for the economic
recovery. In line with this interpretation, we show that support for the Nazis increased even more
where highway construction coincided with greater radio availability – a major source of
propaganda. The effect of highways was also significantly stronger in politically unstable states
of the Weimar Republic. Our results suggest that infrastructure spending can raise support for
autocracy when voters are led to associate it with visible economic progress and an end to
political instability.

Nico Voigtlaender
UCLA Anderson School of Management
110 Westwood Plaza
C513 Entrepreneurs Hall
Los Angeles, CA 90095
and NBER
nico.v@anderson.ucla.edu
Hans-Joachim Voth
Department of Economics
U of Zurich
Schoeneberggasse 1
CH-8001, Zurich
Switzerland
joachimvoth@gmail.com

An online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w20150

1

“…while a decade of Weimar parliaments had produced
only talk and sketches, a mere three years of National
Socialism had built a thousand kilometres of traversable
superhighways… Their very existence seemed to verify
the Nazi thesis that the state must be given a free hand,
if it were to restore Germany to her former glory.”
(Shand 1984, p.194).

1

Introduction

In the last 200 years, democracy has spread around the globe. In 1816, less than 1% of world
population lived in democracies. In 2015, the figure stood at 58%. However, progress has not
been a one-way street: Between 1920 and 1938, the number of democratic states in the world
fell from 20 to 13, and the share of the population living in democracies declined from 20.5%
to 14.8%.1 Nor is democratic fragility necessarily an issue of the past: Ever fewer young
Europeans and U.S. citizens consider it essential to live in a democracy. In the U.S., their
share declined from more than 70% among the 1930s birth cohort to about 30% for the 1980s
cohort.2
For democracy to fail, autocracy has to triumph. Authoritarian leaders rarely rule by force
alone, and many rely on popular support (Egorov and Sonin 2014). How do authoritarian
rulers convince voters to discard and disregard their democratic rights? The decline of
democracy is often associated with (perceived) social disorder. In these circumstances,
dictatorships may look appealing to the masses because of their capacity to restore order
(Finer 2002; Djankov et al. 2003). As Easterly and Pennings (2016) noted, the view that
economic growth is easier to engineer under strong autocratic regimes has recently gained in
prominence, with China and Singapore often cited as leading examples. 3 Similarly, thirty
percent of US respondents in the 2010 World Value Survey thought that it would be “good or
very good to have a strong leader” that does not have to “bother with parliaments and elections”
(Foa and Mounk 2016). But do shows of efficacy, indeed, buy support for budding dictators?

1

Boix et al. (2012), Vanhanen (2010). Along the same lines, Birdsall and Fukuyama (2011) observe that
“political leaders in the developing world now associate efficiency and capability with autocratic political
systems.”
2
Foa and Mounk (2016). The question asked is whether respondents feel “it is essential to live in a country that
is governed democratically,” where “feeling strongly” corresponds to a rating of 10 on a 10-point scale.
3
See also Friedman (2009). Jones and Olken (2005) show that turnover in the leadership of autocracies leads to
sharp changes in economic performance; Besley and Kudamatsu (2008) model the institutional features of
autocracies that can increase their chances of success.

2

It may instead be true that entrenched dictators are more effective, rather than effective
dictators becoming entrenched.
In this paper, we aim to identify the causal effect of effective policy implementation on
autocratic consolidation. We study a concerted effort showcasing an authoritarian state’s
ability to accomplish ambitious goals: the construction of the Autobahn in Nazi Germany, the
world’s first high-speed road network. Initially, the Nazi grip on power was far from absolute.
In an election that was neither free nor fair in November 1933, many voters opposed the Nazi
regime – in several major cities, more than a quarter of votes were cast against the Nazi Party.4
By mid-1934, the regime’s popularity was waning amongst the middle class; conservative
elites were dismayed by Nazi lawlessness, and President von Hindenburg threatened military
rule.5 And yet, by the late 1930s, the Nazi regime had become one of the most popular in
German history – a “consensual dictatorship”.6 As late as 1955, almost half of all Germans
opined that Hitler would have been “one of the greatest German statesmen had it not been for
the war” (Möbius 2013: 257).7
A key turning point in the regime’s fortunes came in August 1934, after President von
Hindenburg’s death. Hitler became both chancellor and president, concentrating singular
authority in the hands of the Führer.8 This increase in power was overwhelmingly endorsed
in a popular referendum. We argue that Autobahn construction contributed markedly to the
regime’s popularity, as reflected in major support for the referendum.9 Since the last election,
held just 10 months before, road construction had begun in earnest. Opposition against the
regime declined significantly where the new roads were being built. Figure 1 illustrates our
4

Voting results from the Nazi period cannot be taken at face value. Intimidation was massive, and there is some
(limited) evidence of fraud. Nonetheless, we argue that information about popular support can be extracted from
vote shares. Yes votes did not necessarily reflect genuine support – but no-votes were a clear sign of opposition.
No-votes varied importantly over time and space. Even large cities recorded substantial differences: In Aachen
in 1934, for example, 24% voted “no”; in Nuremberg, on the other hand, only 4.6% voted against Hitler
becoming both chancellor and president
5
Time Magazine in July 1934 quoted Adolf Hitler as saying: “Don't forget how people laughed at me 15 years
ago when I declared that one day I would govern Germany. They laugh now, just as foolishly, when I declare
that I shall remain in power!”
6
Aly (2005) and Bajohr (2005).
7
In another survey, some 10% opined that even with the war, Hitler was the greatest German statesman of all
time, whose eminence would only be accepted in the future (Noelle and Neumann 1956: 135).
8
In addition to the referendum, the wholesale murder of the SA-leadership and other prominent anti-Nazis in
the Night of the Long Knives allowed Hitler to consolidate his powers.
9
Saiz (2005) notes a close association between dictatorships and highways, but argues that this is explained by
their use as instruments of repression.

3

main finding. It shows the change in support for the Nazi regime by distance to Autobahn
construction. 10 The Nazis gained more support the closer locations were to highway
construction. Our results suggest persuasion rates of 8-17% due to the Autobahn – a high
value compared with other studies (Della Vigna and Gentzkow 2010).11
Motorway planning may have followed a political lead after 1933. To deal with potential
endogeneity, we construct least-cost paths between terminal cities connected by highways.
Building costs reflect geological characteristics such as the steepness of the terrain, the
number of rivers to be traversed, etc. We use these least-cost paths as an instrument for actual
construction, excluding the terminal cities themselves from the analysis. Our IV results
confirm the OLS estimates both in terms of magnitude and statistical significance.
What accounts for the Autobahn’s success in winning electoral support for Hitler’s regime?
We argue that highway construction worked because it convinced voters of the Nazi regime’s
“competence,” mainly by seeming to solve Germany’s key economic problem:
unemployment. Between 1933 and 1934, nationwide unemployment fell by half (Humann
2011). However, the roads’ contribution to this success was limited; their construction
employed relatively few workers, and a cyclical upswing had already begun to reduce
unemployment before road-building commenced (Ritschl 1998). Correspondingly, we find
that unemployment fell at a similar rate in cities near highway construction and those further
away. Nevertheless, Goebbels’ propaganda effectively sold the notion that Nazi roadbuilding
was reviving the German economy. 12 We also show that propaganda and highway
construction complemented each other – where radio signal strength was high and the new
roads were under construction, pro-Nazi votes increased particularly strongly. In contrast,
without radio coverage, the roads themselves had a negligible effect on voting behavior. One
interpretation of these results is that Autobahn construction in combination with radio
propaganda won “hearts and minds” of voters; another possibility is that the regime’s capacity

10

Since the election in 11/1933 and the referendum in 8/1934 are not directly comparable, we use the difference
in standardized vote shares with mean zero and standard deviation one.
11
Our results reflect local differences in voting; for the country as a whole, effects may well have been larger
because people did not only react to changes at the local level – but also because they saw progress in the country
as a whole.
12
In other words, the Nazi propaganda successfully attributed economic performance to its economic policies –
a process that is generally challenging because of economic volatility (Buera, Monge-Naranjo, and Primiceri
2011).

4

to see through a major construction project also raised the expected cost of opposition. 13
Which of these two channels dominated is not crucial for the main purpose of the referendum
in 1934 – showcasing almost uniform popular support for Hitler, thereby signaling the
regime’s popularity (Evans 2006; Egorov and Sonin 2014).
Autobahn building also showcased the ability to get things done.14 Hitler announced the plans
for new roads shortly after coming to power; within 9 months, he broke ground on the first
stretch of motorway. Demonstrations of government competence were particularly attractive
in areas where political turmoil had reigned. Weimar’s federal states with more unstable
government in 1919-33 showed systematically larger vote-winning effects of highway
construction.15 Regime propaganda also exploited the highways as powerful symbols of an
energetic government overcoming “democratic gridlock” and the widely-lamented disorder
of the Weimar Republic (Evans 2006).
The paper proceeds as follows. We review the related literature in Section 2, and then explain
the historical background and context of motorway building in Section 3. Section 4 presents
our data. In Section 5, we show the main empirical results. Section 6 presents instrumental
variable results, and Section 7 examines channels through which the Nazi regime’s road
building influenced voting. Section 8 demonstrates the robustness of our findings, and Section
9 concludes.

2

Related Literature

Our work contributes to research on the political economy of regime change (Acemoglu and
Robinson 2000), elections and the entrenchment of dictatorships (Egorov and Sonin 2014;
Simpser 2013; Jessen and Richter 2011), the role of elections in autocracies (Gandhi and Lust13

The latter explanation is less likely, given the regime’s wild popularity in later years. Raising the perceived
cost of opposition would be a form of implicit intimidation. Explicit intimidation and fraud, on the other hand,
are unlikely explanations for our finding, as we argue in Appendix A.4 (where we perform a number of “election
forensics” tests and find no evidence for a relationship between Autobahn construction and fraud). Importantly,
the Nazis were already in power during the November 1933 election. This makes it less likely that cross-sectional
differences in intimidation or fraud accounted for electoral success; only a differential increase in (explicit)
intimidation or fraud in areas with Autobahn construction could contaminate our results.
14
It also demonstrated an effective end of the austerity policies of the pre-1933 era that had been implemented
by successive Weimar governments (Shand 1984).
15
Speeches by conservative politicians – and not only the Nazis – frequently referred to an alleged lack of speed
and decisiveness in democratic decision-making. Indeed, even before Hitler’s seizure of power, plans for a new,
authoritarian constitution were being proposed by many conservative politicians (cf. Stackelberg and Winkle
2013).

5

Okar 2009) and on interactions between the military and old elites (Finer 1976; Acemoglu,
Ticchi, and Vindigni 2010). Closely linked is work on the origins of totalitarian dictatorships,
much of which emphasizes differences between normal autocracies and regimes like the Nazi
dictatorship or Communist rule in Russia. Theories of “mass society” focus on
industrialization and the associated rise of a large group of economically marginal individuals
who have lost their traditional roots (Ortega y Gasset 1993; Arendt 1973). These in turn are
said to create a fertile recruiting ground for totalitarian ideology, from both the left and the
right.16 Schmitt (1926), on the other hand, emphasized the need for an – alleged – external or
internal threat for totalitarian states to consolidate.
Our research also relates to the rich literature on the electoral benefits of income transfers and
infrastructure projects. There is evidence that politically motivated income transfers and
federal spending can affect voting behavior (Manacorda 2011; Levitt and Snyder 1997), but
aggregate patterns are often inconclusive (Stein and Bickers 1994). In a classic paper, Berman
et al. (2011) examine under what conditions an occupying force can win the ‘hearts and minds’
of the occupied, and conclude that public service provision can have a decisive effect in
reducing opposition. Also, public spending is often targeted at areas with a more informed
electorate (Strömberg 2004). 17 Recent research has also generated new insights into the
economic effects of major infrastructure projects. While an early literature had concluded that
the invention of the railways did not matter significantly for growth (Fogel 1964), there is
now ample evidence that, for example, the building of India’s national railway network
reduced transport costs, and increased trade (Donaldson forthcoming). Similarly, better access
to transport infrastructure in China and Prussia boosted GDP (Banerjee et al. 2012; Hornung
2015)18 and increased land values (Donaldson and Hornbeck 2016). There are also welldocumented effects on urban layout (Baum-Snow 2007), city growth (Duranton and Turner
2012) and skill premia in urban areas (Michaels 2008).

16

Applications of this approach to the German context include Shirer (1960) and Stern (1972).
Along the same lines, Finan and Mazzocco (2014) show that politicians with greater electoral incentives
transfer more resources to areas where they expect higher political returns. Larreguy et al. (2015) show how
central-government policy interventions boost support for the federal incumbent while reducing the influence of
local politicians.
18
In contrast, Faber (2014) finds adverse effects of highways on GDP growth in newly-connected peripheral
counties in China.
17

6

Relative to the existing literature, we make a number of contributions: First, we demonstrate
the political benefits of infrastructure spending on electoral outcomes, helping to entrench the
Nazi dictatorship. At a crucial moment, when the Hitler regime needed to showcase its
popularity, Autobahn building boosted support. We thus contribute to the literature that
studies regime change in general and the rise of the Nazis in Germany more specifically (King
et al. 2008; Bracher 1978). Second, we provide new evidence of the channels through which
infrastructure spending can make a difference. In the Nazi case, there were real economic
benefits – but they are too small to account for the overall gains in electoral support. Instead,
we show that propaganda can magnify the effects of locally successful policies, convincing
voters far and wide that the new regime is getting the country out of its slump. Third, we offer
suggestive evidence on the conditions under which elections can boost support for an
autocratic regime – a key question in the literature on voting in non-democratic settings
(Gandhi and Lust-Okar 2009). We find that road building was most effective in swaying
voters who had previously supported moderate parties, or who were skeptical of the Nazis,
such as Catholics. On the other hand, in areas with high support for the communists (such as
worker strongholds), highways were less effective in garnering votes. Lizzeri and Persico
(2001) argue that in electoral regimes where the margin of victory matters, public goods are
more likely to be provided, and pork barrel spending is lower. Our result on the Nazi regime
building highways is related, but it goes further. Goebbels’ propaganda emphasized that roads
are public goods. This generated important synergies with actual construction, enabling the
regime to show near-universal support. In this sense, the Autobahn’s success in boosting proregime votes relied more on a perceived ‘competence’ channel (Rogoff 1990) than on any
direct economic benefits. Thus, we provide evidence in support of arguments that autocracy
may be attractive to voters because of its alleged ability to ‘get things done’ (Djankov et al.
2003).

3

Historical Background

In this section, we briefly describe motivations behind the building of the Autobahn network
and its antecedents. We also discuss the nature of early Nazi elections and the growing
strength of the regime.

7

3.a

Motorway building under the Nazis

In building the motorway network, the Hitler government pursued two objectives. First, it
aimed for a propaganda success, signaling its competence as well as a symbolic break with
past economic policies, especially austerity (Ritschl 2003). This aim was pursued vigorously
and with success: Some 37% of Germans aged 60 and older feel that the Nazi regime also had
a good side, and often cite Autobahn construction as supporting evidence (Forsa 2007).
Second, the Nazi government sought to create employment.
Road building became a government priority immediately after the ‘seizure of power’ by the
Nazi Party. At the Berlin Motor Show – only 11 days after becoming Chancellor – Hitler
presented far-reaching plans for the ‘motorization’ of Germany, with provisions for tax
subsidies, road-building, and cheaper, compact cars. 19 By the summer of 1933, a new
publicly-owned company had been founded to build and operate highways Germany-wide.
Plans for the network built on work by a private think tank, the STUFA (Vahrenkamp 2010).
In some cases, the trajectory of the actual roads was decided by Hitler himself, who insisted
on scenic routes.
To maximize work creation and to demonstrate that the government was serious about road
building, construction began at many points simultaneously. Figure 2 shows the 1934 highway
network. Thick black segments were under construction; double-ruled segments were
approved for construction, but not yet begun; and light grey lines indicate planned segments
not yet approved for construction.20 In 22 locations, construction was under way less than a
year after the start of the project. Among the first segments to be built were the link from
Frankfurt to Darmstadt and on to Stuttgart, from Berlin to Hanover, the connection Bremen-

19

In the Rhineland, another – unrelated – project connected Bonn and Cologne. Konrad Adenauer, later
Chancellor of the Federal Republic of Germany, coordinated the building in a bid to reduce unemployment. This
first highway opened in 1932. At the time, Italy had already completed the first high-speed roads reserved for
car traffic.
20
We digitized the September 1934 map from Todt (1934), which is the closest available to August 1934. The
transition between highway segments “approved for construction” and “under construction” in Figure 2 is fluid,
and even the historical maps are not completely clear about the exact timing when construction began. For
example, a few smaller segments are listed as “under construction” in the May 1934 map, but as “approved for
construction” in the November 1934 map. We use “under construction” as our main ‘treatment’ variable, and
document the robustness of results to including “approved for construction” in Section 7.e. Whenever we refer
to “highways” in the following, we mean segments that were listed as “under construction.”

8

Hamburg-Lübeck, Leipzig towards Munich, and Munich-Stuttgart. None of them were
actually open for traffic by the time of the plebiscite in August 1934.
Highway construction began on a large scale only after the election in November 1933 – a
fact that we exploit in our empirical analysis. Figure A.1 in the appendix shows employment
in Autobahn construction, by month, for the period 1933-34, using data from (Humann 2011).
Employment in November 1933 was 3,000 men, 5% of the level reached by August 1934, and
earlier months saw even lower numbers of workers used for highway construction. By April
1934, construction got under way on a significant scale, with 20,000 men employed. In August,
the number had almost tripled again, to 59,000. While August did not yet constitute the high
water mark of Autobahn employment, it was higher than in any preceding month, reaching
50% of the all-time peak of highway employment (June 1936; 121,000 workers).
Together with rearmament, the Autobahn was a key part of Keynesian demand stimulus by
the Hitler government. In line with the regime’s propaganda, many observers took it for
granted that building the new highway network reduced unemployment substantially. John
Maynard Keynes himself, in the introduction to the German edition of his General Theory,
argued that Nazi spending policies after 1933 exemplified the superiority of totalitarian
regimes in implementing the “right” policies to overcome the slump.21 Quantitative research
has since established that neither military spending nor highway construction were probably
responsible for Germany’s recovery after 1933 (Ritschl 1998). Initially planned to employ up
to 600,000 workers, motorway building never came close to creating such a number of jobs.
At its peak, only 121,000 Germans were working in highway construction (Humann 2011).22
Instead, the rapid rise in output under Hitler is typically explained by the strength of a cyclical
upswing, helped by an end to deflation and declining uncertainty.
From the very beginning, Nazi propaganda exploited the motorway. The regime emphasized
highway construction as an integral part of its war on unemployment (Arbeitsschlacht).23 At
the behest of Propaganda Minister Josef Goebbels, building time tables were coordinated to
ensure that work started simultaneously at many locations all over Germany. Instead of

21

Keynes (1936). Scholars from Karl Schiller (1936) to Richard Overy (1975) argued along similar lines.
This should be compared with a decline in unemployment from 6 million in January 1933 to 2.5 million in the
summer of 1934.
23
Literally, “battle for labor.“
22

9

finishing stretches of motorway one after the other, thus maximizing use value, construction
took place all over the country (Shand 1984). Hitler turned the first sod of earth in September
1933. The weekly news reel shows him addressing a huge crowd of workers. He reminded
them that the Nazi regime had asked for four years to show what it could do. Proclaiming the
highways a “gigantic undertaking,” he argued that the roads would bear witness to “our [the
regime’s] devotion, our diligence, our ability, and our decisiveness” (Schütz and Gruber 1996).
In the first month of the newly-founded Autobahn company’s existence, the Völkischer
Beobachter – the leading Nazi Party paper – made construction progress front-page news no
fewer than four times. Radio similarly played a prominent role – the start of construction was
broadcast live to millions of listeners, including speeches by Hitler and Goebbels.
The regime celebrated the opening of each new stretch of motorway. The first segment was
finished in May 1935. Some 90,000 supporters lined the road as Hitler was driven from
Frankfurt to Darmstadt. By 1936, some 1,000 km of road (out of 9,000 planned) had been
finished; the simultaneous opening of 17 segments of motorway was used for ceremonies all
over Germany. Each event was extensively covered on the radio, with special programs and
live reporting. In addition, the press and the news reels reported extensively (Schütz 1995).24
Why was highway building prioritized at all, instead of other public works programs or the
construction of schools and hospitals? Road building as a make-work measure had been
discussed extensively during the Great Depression, but no large-scale construction had taken
place. The actual building of the highways signaled a regime change – a willingness to
overcome years of austerity (Ritschl 2003). As the introductory quote on p.1 emphasized,
party propaganda never tired of telling readers and listeners that the new highways were
incontrovertible proof that a strong state was making Germany great again. Ever since, the
Autobahn project had symbolic character: “Hitler breaking new ground … – the picture
became an icon of the year immediately after 1933, a symbol for everything Autobahn
construction seemed to stand for: energy, directness and dynamism of the national socialist
movement…” (Schütz and Gruber 1996, p.43).

24
In addition, the Autobahn was also celebrated as an aesthetic innovation. The Autobahn company
commissioned a number of artists to produce paintings of road segments, bridges, ramps, and construction work.
A book containing reproductions of these paintings sold over 50,000 copies (Vahrenkamp 2010).

10

Motorway workers themselves were typically skeptical of the Nazi regime – a fact that works
against our finding. While supporters of highway construction had expected workers to be
recruited locally, they were instead often drafted from among the unskilled and unemployed
in big cities. Workers typically lived in barracks, subjected to harsh discipline and earning a
low wage. Many sympathized with the Social Democratic Party or the Communists.
Sometimes, disaffected workers even painted anti-Nazi slogans on lorries used for motorway
construction (Evans 2006). In one incident, workers demanded extra pay and went on strike,
singing “The International” – the anthem of the workers’ movement. Work only resumed after
the ringleaders were sent to Dachau concentration camp.
Germany’s car ownership rate in 1933 was low – approximately one quarter of England’s or
France’s. Most transport of goods and people took place via rail. The new regime intended to
boost the German car industry by all means possible, and not simply via road-building. Hitler
had high hopes for the automobile industry as a future source of employment, and because its
factories could easily be converted to war production. A tax exemption for the purchase of
new automobiles from March 1933 onwards boosted car production, and accelerated the
recovery of private car purchases (which had begun to rise in the fall of 1932). Between 1932
and 1938, the total number of cars, motorcycles, and trucks on German roads doubled (Evans
2006).
There were also fewer military advantages to road-building than is commonly believed. While
the invasion of Austria used the Autobahn to move tanks, and the growth of the motorcar
industry indirectly benefitted the German armed forces, almost all troop and supply
movements before and during World War II were by rail. Since the Hitler government planned
wars of aggression that would take troops far beyond the borders of the Reich, the importance
of internal communications was limited (Evans 2006). If there was an aspect of road building
that mattered militarily, it was motor vehicle production. Boosting the mobility of army units
was an aim of most armed forces after 1920 (van Creveld 1977). Increasing car ownership
and the number of trucks in Germany was considered desirable because private vehicles could
be confiscated in wartime. Indeed, the invasion of France in 1940 used some 15,000 trucks
requisitioned from private industry (Vahrenkamp 2010).

11

3.b

1933 Elections and the 1934 Plebiscite

Figure 3 illustrates the timeline of elections and highway building. When Germans went to
the polls in March 1933, the Hitler government had already been in power for over a month.
Nonetheless, elections were still relatively fair, with intimidation at the polls limited compared
to what happened on later occasions. The Communist Party had been banned, but all other
parties that had competed during the last free election in November 1932 were still on the
ballot in March 1933. Despite a massive propaganda campaign (Adena et al. 2015), the
NSDAP failed to win an absolute majority, receiving 44 percent of the vote.
In November 1933, the regime held fresh elections. Over the summer, all parties except the
NSDAP had been banned. In addition to Nazi MPs, the NSDAP list before the voters also
contained 22 “guests” – mostly prominent members of the right-wing elite who were largely
aligned with the party’s aims, and were asked to participate to give the new parliament
marginally broader representation. On average, the Nazi Party won 92 percent of the popular
vote, more than doubling its vote share from March.25
Voting in November 1933 was not free and fair; storm troopers collected many voters at home,
and they stood guard at the voting booths. There, citizens were strongly “encouraged” to vote
publicly so that everyone could witness their support of the Nazi regime. Evans (2006),
commenting on elections under the Nazis, observes that
“Intimidation was particularly evident during the national plebiscites and elections
that Hitler held from time to time… Under the Third Reich, plebiscites and
elections became propaganda exercises in which the regime mobilized the
electorate, by all means at its disposal, to provide the appearance of popular
legitimacy for controversial measures.”
Despite these intimidation measures, opposition was not zero. On average, eight percent of
all Germans voted against the Nazi list (by spoiling their ballot papers – voting “no” was not
possible in Nov. 1933). In some areas, there was massive opposition – in the old Hanseatic
city of Lübeck, for example, 40,824 voters did not vote “yes” for the NSDAP list, out of
111,911 votes cast – a proportion of 36.5 percent. Hamburg and Berlin also registered high

25

In parallel with the parliamentary election, voters were also asked to approve Germany’s leaving the League
of Nations. This proposal was wildly popular since the League of Nations was closely associated in the minds
of Germans with the (hated) Versailles settlement that saddled Germany with a massive reparations bill (Evans
2006). This referendum received 95% support.

12

levels of dissent, with 27 and 26 percent of voters refusing to support the Nazi list, respectively.
At the opposite end of the spectrum, in Pirmasens, only 218 out of 31,371 votes were spoiled
– equivalent to 0.7%.26 While overall support was high, and despite massive pressure on the
population, the typical German town or city actually saw fewer votes in favor of the
proposition to make Hitler both Chancellor and President than there had been “yes” votes for
the party list in November 1933 – 89.9% voted with yes in August 1934.27
3.c

Crisis and Entrenchment of the Nazi Dictatorship 1933-34

After coming to office, the Nazi leadership lost no time asserting administrative and political
control. Police forces everywhere were brought under the control of Nazi politicians; violence
against opponents – suspected or real – was frequent in the first half of 1933 (Evans 2006).
As storm troopers (SA) instituted their own kind of justice all over Germany, talk of a “second
revolution” grew louder – a transformation even more radical in nature than the initial seizing
of power.28
Despite its ruthlessness, the regime was much less firmly established during its first 18 months
than later. Opposition to the regime increased: Conservatives who had hoped that the Nazis’
entry into government would increase their own mass appeal were disappointed. Middle class
voters who had supported the NSDAP before 1933 feared wider chaos (Behnken and Rinner
1980), and workers – never very supportive of the Nazis – were growing even more skeptical.
As one leading historian of the Nazi regime described the situation in the summer of 1934:
“The moment was … critical for the regime. … enthusiasm of the ‘national
revolution’ in 1933 had discernibly fallen off ... The brownshirts were not the only
section of the population to feel disappointed .... Social Democratic agents reported
to the exiled party leadership in Prague that people were apathetic, constantly
complaining, and telling endless political jokes about the Nazi leaders. Nazi
meetings were poorly attended … The educated classes feared that the disorder
caused by the stormtroopers might spill over into chaos or, worse, Bolshevism.”
(Evans 2006)
26

There are also several smaller towns where support reached 100%.
While the November 1933 election (for the Nazi Party) and the 1934 referendum (for Hitler in person) are
clearly distinct, there is no obvious downward bias – right down to the end in 1945, Hitler personally was much
more popular than the Nazi Party.
28
The SA grew out of street-fighting paramilitaries; its leaders envisioned themselves as a Nazi People’s Army,
and many pursued dreams of a far more left-wing agenda including wholesale nationalization of many industries
(“a second revolution”). Threats to Hitler’s leadership, however, were largely invented to justify the crackdown
on the SA in the summer of 1934.
27

13

As the year 1934 wore on, the Nazi leadership increasingly feared that the conservatives
around von Papen and Hindenburg could join forces with the army, and overthrow the Hitler
regime (Evans 2006). The increasingly senile Paul von Hindenburg was still President, and
one of his personal favorites, Franz von Papen (a former Chancellor) served as Vice
Chancellor. In June 1934, von Papen gave a famous speech before university students in
Marburg. He warned against a second revolution, decried violence and lawlessness by the SA,
and condemned the personality cult of Hitler. Thereafter, his public appearances were often
greeted with the shout “Heil Marburg.” Time Magazine, reporting on the incident, concluded
that “if Adolf Hitler came home with a swelled head and hot new ideas for dictatorship from
his visit to Benito Mussolini, certainly last week he was dexterously chilled and shrunk...”
and concluded that he was not a “real dictator.” In the summer of 1934, the Defence Minister,
General Werner von Blomberg, threatened Hitler with the imposition of martial law and a
government by the army if the SA was not brought to heel (Wheeler-Bennett 1964).
Eventually, Hitler had both the leadership of the SA and leading conservatives murdered,
claiming that the victims had been plotting to overthrow the government (the so-called “Röhm
Putsch,” after the head of the SA).
The conflicts and threats of the summer of 1934 show that the Nazi regime was still far from
its later, omnipotent position, and that popular support could by no means be taken for granted.
Indeed, knowledgeable observers concluded that there was “evident shakiness in high Nazi
places” and that “Adolf Hitler [got] the scare of his career” (Time July 2, 1934). It is for these
reasons that the regime cared about being able to showcase overwhelming popular support. It
was only after Hitler became both Chancellor and President, and after a large share of the
population publicly supported the Führer’s expanded powers, that the regime became fully
entrenched.
3.d

Political instability

Germany’s first attempt at democracy, the Weimar Republic, was not noted for its political
stability. Governments both at the national and state level changed with alarming frequency.
The perceived “chaos” of democratic governance was often contrasted with order under the
Emperor until 1918; instability was one key reason why support for democratic rule waned.
As the novelist Stefan Zweig (1942) observed:

14

“… inflation, unemployment, [and] the political crises had disturbed the German
people deeply; an incredible desire for order spread amongst the German people... And
whoever promised order … immediately had hundreds of thousands behind him.”
Despite great turmoil in the country as a whole, some federal states showed relative stability,
with the same prime ministers and parties in power for long consecutive stretches of time.
Prussia is one notable example (Orlow 1986).

4

Data

We use voting records for more than 3,000 towns and cities, covering the entire area of
Weimar Germany (Statistisches Reichsamt 1934), combined with demographic and socioeconomic information from the 1925 and 1933 censuses (Falter and Hänisch 1990). To this,
we add newly coded geographical information from historical maps of the (planned and built)
German motorway network, construction of which began after the summer of 1933, as well
as data on vehicle ownership, radio signal strength, and the political stability of Weimar states.
4.a

Highway Construction and Balancedness

The general plan for the Autobahn envisaged connections between the largest cities (Figure
2). Of the 3,276 towns and cities in our sample, 2,015 were within 20 km of the planned
Autobahn. A little more than a third (1,261) were further away (Table 1). Out of the 2,015
locations close to the planned network, 1,097 saw actual construction by the summer of 1934
– 54% of the planned total.
Some socio-economic characteristics differed between towns close to the highway network
and more distant ones. Table 2 gives an overview, showing the sample mean of several socioeconomic variables from the 1925 and 1933 German censuses in column 1, the average for
cities within 20 km of the highway network (planned or built) in column 2, and the means for
cities with and without actual highway construction, among those near the planned network
(columns 3 and 4). Cities near the planned highway network were more populous than the
rest; initial unemployment (in 1933), the blue-collar share, and industrial employment were
also somewhat higher, while there were fewer Catholics than in the sample overall. The share
of Jewish population was the same. Comparing columns 3 and 4 shows that construction
began in those parts of the planned network that were closer to larger, more industrial cities,
and in more Protestant areas. This gives rise to endogeneity concerns, because support for the
Nazis also varied with socio-economic factors. In our empirical analysis we address this issue

15

in a variety of ways, by adding explicit controls and city fixed effects, entropy weighting to
create a balanced sample, and the use of least-cost-paths as an instrument for actual highway
location. Importantly, pre-existing support for the Nazi regime did not affect systematically
the location of highway construction, as shown by the balanced NSDAP vote share in March
1933 in Table 2. We explore this in more detail below, showing that there were also no
differential pre-trends in Nazi support before highway construction started.
4.b

Elections and Plebiscites

Our main analysis focuses on the change in the share of voters supporting the Nazi regime
between the November 1933 election and the 1934 plebiscite. As a proxy for underlying Nazi
support, we also use the NSDAP vote share in the March 1933 election – after Hitler had been
appointed as Chancellor, but when other parties were still permitted at the polls. Figure 4 plots
the share of “pro-Nazi” votes in the three elections we focus on. Since elections after March
1933 were no longer fair and free, the officially registered support for the regime at the polls
surged until November 1933. Between November 1933 and August 1934, the share of proNazi votes declined somewhat – if we want to disregard the fact that the nature of the vote
changed, too.
To make the different elections comparable, we rescale vote shares in our empirical analysis,
transforming electoral ‘pro-Nazi’ votes for each election into a standardized variable with
zero mean and unit standard deviation. Our main outcome variable is NSbroad, which is defined
as the share of yes votes relative to all eligible voters. This variable counts nonvoters as
opposition to the Nazi regime – which in many cases is justified given the high pressure for
turnout (see Section 3). In Appendix A.6, we show that our results also hold when using a
narrow measure (NSnarr), which is defined as the share of yes-votes relative to actual voters;
it is thus unaffected by voter turnout (and by potential unobserved spatial variation in the
pressure to vote).29

29

Note that both measures count invalid votes as opposition to the Nazi regime. In fact, the November 1933
election did not allow for a “no” vote, or for votes for any other parties. Thus, conditional on voting, invalidating
the ballot was the only way for voters to express their discontent with the Nazi regime. The 1934 referendum, in
contrast, included an option to vote “no.” This is another reason why the two elections are not directly
comparable, motivating our use of standardized vote shares, rather than comparing levels.

16

4.c

Radio

From the 1920s onwards, Germany had a highly developed, government-owned system of
radio stations (Bausch 1956). By the 1930s, governments regularly used radio programs to
bolster support (Adena et al. 2015). There is detailed data on the number of radio subscribers
in various parts of Germany, and on the strength of radio signals. Since the purchase of a radio
subscription may itself be a function of political preferences, we follow Adena et al. (2015)
and focus on city-specific signal strength, as determined by the power and location of
transmitters interacting with terrain characteristics.30 We find that listenership increased with
signal strength in a flexible non-parametric estimation (see Appendix A.7 for detail).
4.d

Political Instability of Weimar States

To measure political instability at the state level, we follow Satyanath et al. (2017), who
measure political stability as the first principle component of three indicators: the percentage
of time that i) the longest-serving state government was in office, ii) the longest-serving party
was in office (possibly in different coalitions), and iii) whether a state was governed by at
least one party from the “Weimar coalition.” In combination, these three variables capture
political turmoil at the federal state level during the Weimar period.31

5

Main Empirical Results

In this section, we show that support for the Nazi regime increased significantly more where
the new motorways were being built. Before presenting econometric estimates, we first
illustrate our main finding. Figure 5 maps changes in support for the Nazi regime between
November 1933 and August 1934.32 The darker the red on the map, the greater the (residual)
electoral gains of the Nazi Party. Solid black lines are roads under construction; dashed ones,
roads approved but not yet being built. On average, areas through which the new highways
passed saw much greater gains in support for the Nazis than the rest. This is particularly true

30

We use predictions from the irregular terrain model. Ruben Enikolopov kindly provided us with city-specific
signal strength data for all locations in our dataset from the implementation of the radio diffusion model in Adena
et al. (2015).
31
Satyanath et al. (2017) end their coding period before the Prussian coup d’état in July 1932, which is often
considered the beginning of the end of the Weimar democracy. We use their original measure, but have also
extended their coding period to January 1933 as a robustness check.
32
We plot effects after accounting for log city population and unemployment in 1933, as well as regional fixed
effects corresponding to 77 administrative districts in Weimar Germany (Regierungsbezirke).

17

in East Prussia, the North of Germany, in the West around the Ruhr, and in the area around
Frankfurt. While there are areas with significant increases in support without road-building
(such as along the shoreline of the North Sea near Holland), they are relatively rare.
5.a

Baseline results: Change in Nazi support, November ’33 – August ‘34

In the following, we present our baseline specifications, estimating regressions of the form:

DNSi = α + βDi + γXi + ei

(1)

where DNSi is the change in (standardized) pro-Nazi votes between November 1933 and
August 1934 in city i, Di is its distance to the nearest highway segment under construction, Xi
is a vector of controls, α is a constant, and ei is the error term. If Di was randomly assigned, β
would reflect the causal effect of motorway building on support for the Nazi regime. We
present OLS results first, and then discuss potential challenges to identification, followed by
IV results.
In Table 3, Panel A, we first show the simplest specification without controls in column 1.
We find a negative and highly significant coefficient on distance to highways. To gauge its
magnitude, we calculate the implied vote change (in percentage points) when going from one
to 100 km distance to highway construction.33 This yields a vote gain of 2.9 p.p. In column 2,
we add our baseline controls as well as the Nazi Party vote share in the preceding November
1933 election. The coefficient on highways declines but remains highly significant, and it
rises again when we add fixed effects for 77 administrative districts in column 3. Adding the
latter means that we exploit only the distance to highway segments within each district,
differencing out any regionally-based shifts in voting patterns. Our results in column 3 thus
imply that, relative to all the other towns in the same district, those closest to the new highways
saw particularly large gains in Nazi support.
In terms of control variables, the negative coefficient on initial pro-Nazi votes in November
1933 is significant and negative, which reflects a mechanical effect – places with close-to100% support could hardly gain additional votes. The coefficient on city population size is
negative and significant – more populous places saw less of an increase in Nazi support.

33

To obtain vote differences in levels for Nov’33-Aug’34, we multiply the result for standardized vote
differences by the standard deviation of vote differences in levels.

18

Finally, the coefficient on unemployment in 1933 is ambiguous, switching signs and
becoming insignificant when we add district fixed effects.
In column 4, we add additional socio-economic controls – the share of blue-collar workers,
of Jews, of Catholics, and of industrial workers – the significance of the distance-to-highway
variable is not affected, but it declines somewhat in size. Finally, we define a dichotomous
variable that takes on value one for towns or cities that were within 20 km of highways under
construction, and zero otherwise. In columns 5 and 6, we use this alternative variable to repeat
the specifications from columns 2 and 3.34 We again find highly significant coefficients that
suggest an increase in support by 0.12 standard deviations (corresponding to an increase in
pro-Nazi votes by about one percentage point) if a town was close to the Autobahn. Appendix
A.2 shows that alternative cut-offs for distance to highways lead to very similar results.
Panel B of Table 3 presents results that account for spatial correlation. We consider cities with
less than 3 degrees distance (about 200km-330km) as ‘neighbors,’ assigning them a non-zero
spatial weight.35 The coefficients on distance to highway under construction are very similar
to our main results in Panel A of Table 3, both in terms of magnitude and significance. This
suggests that our results are not confounded by spatial correlation.
For completeness, Panel C of Table 3 presents results using unstandardized changes in proNazi votes as dependent variable. This specification relies on the (debatable) assumption that
vote shares in the November 1933 election and in the August 1934 referendum are comparable.
Nevertheless, we find very similar effects of highway construction on Nazi support.
5.b

Persuasion rates

How effective were highways in winning voters for the Nazi government? And how large
were electoral gains overall? We gauge the effectiveness of highway building by looking at
persuasion rates – the extent to which exposure to the highway was associated with voters

34

Note that these regressions essentially reflect a difference-in-difference specification, where `treatment’ is a
dummy for highway proximity. Thus, treatment effects are estimated as changes in pro-Nazi votes before vs.
after highway construction, in areas near vs. distant from highway segments. The full diff-in-diff specification
(running regressions with Nazi votes in levels for Nov’33 and Aug’34, with city and year fixed effects) yields
almost identical results (available upon request).
35
One degree difference in latitude corresponds to 111 km, and one degree difference in longitude, to 69 km
(measured at 50°N, the latitude of central Germany). When estimating the spatial correlation model with district
fixed effects, we use the 35 electoral districts (Wahlkreise) of Weimar Germany, instead of the 77
Regierungsbezirke; the latter is too restrictive for the estimation procedure to converge.

19

switching from opposition to support of the government (Della Vigna and Gentzkow 2010).
Panel C of Table 3 reports our estimates of persuasion rates – the share of voters who changed
their minds because of highway construction. To calculate these rates, we assume that, in the
log-linear specification (cols 1-4), voters in areas further than 100 km from the highway were
not affected, thus forming our ‘control’ group. With this, using the method in Della Vigna and
Gentzkow (2010), we calculate the increase in Nazi support in when going from 100 km of
distance to highway construction to 1 km, relative to the share of voters who were left to be
persuaded to support the Nazi regime. For the dummy specifications in cols 5 and 6, we
assume that treatment is zero beyond 20 km distance. We find substantial persuasion rates,
ranging from of 8 to 17% for the log-linear specification, and 6% in the dummy
specification. 36 Note that these figures are a lower bound; nationwide increases in Nazi
support due to highways are not captured by the persuasion rates.
5.c

Voting patterns before and after highway construction

Are our baseline findings in Table 3 specific to the period November 1933 to August 1934,
when road building got under way in earnest – or do they reflect pre-existing differences or
differential trends?
To examine this question, we first add the last relatively free election of March 1933 to our
analysis. We find that votes for the Nazi Party in March 1933 were not significantly correlated
with distance to highways that would be built from late 1933 onwards (see Table A.7 in the
appendix for detail). Next, we examine the change in Nazi support before and after highway
construction began on a large scale. This striking difference in effects is illustrated in Figure
6. 37 The left panel serves as a placebo, illustrating the change in pro-Nazi votes between
March and November 1933, when only very little highway construction had taken place.
There is essentially no relationship between distance to highways and change in Nazi support.
This pattern changes dramatically after November 1933, when highway building took off:
The right panel of Figure 6 shows that by August 1934, it was the areas closest to the highway
that saw the biggest relative gains in Nazi support. The difference between the coefficients in

36

For comparison – the voting studies surveyed by Della Vigna and Gentzkow (2010) show a range of
persuasion rates in elections of 2 to 20%, with an average of 11.9%.
37
Given that regular scatterplots with every data point would become too crowded for visual interpretation, we
use binscatter plots, grouping the x-axis into 25 equal-sized bins. To allow for a more immediate interpretation
of the x-axis, we use distance in km, rather than log-km. Results are very similar when we use logs instead.

20

March/November 1933 and August 1934 is crucial for our argument. It implies that distance
from the highway only becomes a predictor of Nazi support after construction began on a
large scale – after November 1933.
Next, we generalize the analysis by using panel regressions. We estimate the relationship
NSit = αi + δt + βDi×δt + γXi×δt + eit

(2)

where NSit are pro-Nazi votes in city i in election t, Di is city i’s distance from the nearest
highway segment under construction, Xi is a vector of city-level controls, αi and δt are city
and election fixed effects, and eit is the error term. Note that we interact Di and all controls
with year dummies. This allows the coefficients on distance to highways and controls to vary
in each period, thereby also effectively running placebo tests for the periods before road
construction began.
We present our panel results in Table 4. In columns 1-4, we pool election data on the success
of the Nazi Party from the early years of dictatorship (Mar. 1933- Aug. ‘34). We find a
negative and significant coefficient on distance to highway construction only for the August
1934 election; for all earlier elections, the interaction with the highway distance variable
reveals no statistically significant or economically meaningful relationship. The non-results
for March and November 1933 also imply that Autobahn construction was not used to reward
districts with strong previous support for the Nazis; in other words, `favoritism’ in the sense
of Burgess et al.’s (2015) finding for Kenya is probably not present in our data. These results
are robust and hold when we interact our baseline controls (population and unemployment)
with year dummies (col 2), when adding lagged Nazi Party votes (col 3), and when we add
interactions of additional socio-economic controls with the year dummies (col 4).
In the last two columns in Table 4, we use data from all elections with city level data during
the period 1924-34.38 We estimate both with fixed effects only (col 5), and with extended
controls and lagged Nazi votes (col 6). Again, the 1934 referendum is the only period that
shows a statistically significant relationship between Nazi support and distance to highway
construction.

38

The NSDAP was banned from the 1924 election as a result of the failed Beerhall putsch. Members of the
banned NSDAP reconstituted themselves as a party under the label NSFP, which put forward joint lists with the
DVFP. The DVFP absorbed much of the Nazi vote in the May 1924 election (Striesow 1981), and we use its
standardized vote share in the panel in 1924.

21

Overall, there is no evidence that Nazi support was either high (Table A.7, col. 1) or already
growing (Table 5) in places where highways were (later) built. Instead, the entire effect of
highway construction on electoral outcomes appears suddenly, and only for the period
November 1933–August 1934.39

6

Identification

Given the highways’ propaganda value, their trajectories may have been chosen for political
reasons. In this section, we focus on the period Nov. 1933 to Aug. 1934 and instrument the
path of actual highway construction between given city pairs with terrain characteristics that
facilitated road building.
6.a

IV-Results: Least cost paths

Our results could be affected by endogeneity bias if the Nazis targeted areas that were more
likely to increase their support for the regime even in the absence of highway construction.
The Nazis could also have planned and built highways to reward (newly) loyal districts, or
strong local Nazi officials may have been more successful at both attracting the highway and
swaying voters. On the other hand, OLS results could also be downward biased, if Nazi
highway building targeted areas where it was more difficult to win new supporters.
Endogeneity concerns cannot be dismissed out of hand – for example, Hitler himself
intervened in the planning of the road from Munich to Salzburg, although largely on aesthetic
grounds (Vahrenkamp 2010).
To address possible endogeneity concerns, we instrument for actual highway building with
least-costs paths. Road construction cost is highly sensitive to the slope of the traversed terrain.
We use the Cost Path tool in ArcGIS to calculate the cheapest way to connect city pairs that
appear in official German publications as terminal cities that were to be connected in the first
wave of highway construction.40 Figure 7 plots least-cost paths (LCPs) and actual highway

39

In Appendix A.2 we perform an additional analysis, restricting the sample to towns within 20 km of planned
highway construction. This increases the similarity of towns and cities in our sample, excluding those that were
never to be connected to the highway system. Even within this narrowly defined subsample, we find a strong
relationship between actual construction and Nazi support.
40
We compute least-cost paths for all 38 city-pair connections listed in Jahnke (1936). See Appendix A.1 for
details. Related work using geographical characteristics or earlier transport infrastructure for identification
includes Baum-Snow (2007), Donaldson and Hornbeck (2013), Banerjee et al. (2012), and Faber (2014). We do
not use the network analysis as implemented by Faber (2014), for example, who uses Kruskal’s minimum
spanning tree algorithm to pin down a cost minimizing network structure. As Figure 2 confirms, the Nazi

22

construction that began before August 1934. They overlap to a large extent. Even where the
LCP does not coincide exactly with the actual motorway trajectory, differences are typically
small. The only larger deviations are in North Germany, where the terrain is generally flat and
small differences in cost can lead to quite different paths.
Least cost paths have substantial explanatory power for actual highway construction: Out of
the 3,276 towns and cities in our sample, about one-half (1,602) lie within 20 km of a least
cost path. Of these, 1,404 (87.6%) also lie within 20 km of the actually planned highway
network, and 914 (57.1%) of them saw actual construction activity by the summer of 1934.
In contrast, of the 1,674 towns and cities that were more than 20 km away from least-cost
paths, only 183 (10.9%) saw construction.
Our instrumental variable is the distance of each city from the least cost paths (LCPs).
Crucially, all regressions exclude the 38 terminal cities, i.e., the end points between which
LCPs are computed. Before presenting our IV results, we briefly discuss their interpretation.
Importantly, least cost paths affect the planning of highways, while the electoral effects we
are interested in are due to actual construction. Planning of highways translated into highway
construction in some districts by 1934 – depending on the timing of construction. Our IV
strategy estimates the average effect of highway construction on pro-Nazi votes for those
cities whose ‘treatment status’ (proximity to highway construction) was affected by the
instrument (proximity to LCPs). Using common IV terminology, we estimate the average
treatment effect for “compliers” (cities where proximity to LCPs did results in construction).
In contrast, cities close to LCPs where no construction occurred by 1934 (“never-takers”) do
not affect our estimate.
Table 5 presents our IV results. We first show results for the reduced form, regressing change
in support for the Nazi Party on distance to LCPs. We find strong and significant negative
coefficients, both without controls (col 1) and with the full set of controls (col 2). In column
3, we perform a placebo analysis for vote gains over the period March-November 1933,
showing that distance to LCPs does not predict Nazi vote gains before highway construction
began. Next, we return to our main period of analysis and demonstrate the strength of our

building of the Autobahn did not follow a network logic, with an increasing set of cities connected to existing
roads. Instead, the regime initially connected city pairs, and it started to build in multiple disconnected locations
all over the country – delaying the opening of the first useable road, but making the project more visible.

23

instrument (cols 3 and 4). The first stage is powerful, with F-statistics above 500. Finally we
present the IV results in columns 5 and 6. We find highly significant coefficients on
instrumented distance to highways in the second stage, with comparable – albeit larger –
magnitude than our OLS estimates in Table 3.41

7

Channels

Why did the Autobahn succeed in raising electoral support for the Nazis? To gain insight into
possible mechanisms, we first look at one direct economic benefit of highway construction –
unemployment reduction. We then analyze other explanations; in particular, whether road
building ‘worked’ because it served as a signal of government competence.
7.a

Unemployment

As Hitler came to power, unemployment was by far the most prominent economic policy issue.
Goebbels’ propaganda told everyone with eyes to read and ears to hear that the country’s
recovery after January 1933 reflected successful Nazi policies – and no intervention was more
visible throughout the country (or more talked about in the propaganda) than highway
construction.
Can vote gains for the Nazis be explained by employment creation due to highway
construction? To answer this question, we collect data on unemployment for all 253 cities
where this information is available in February 1935 (for details on data construction see
Appendix A.3).42 This allows us to compute the change in the unemployment rate between
June 1933 and February 1935 – the period with available data that is closest to our main period
of interest between the November 1933 election and the referendum in August 1934. We first

41

When all controls and district fixed effects are included (col 6), the IV coefficient is almost twice as large as
its OLS counterpart in the same specification (col 4 in Table 3, Panel A). This may be due to measurement error
in the actual location of highway construction (see footnote 20). In Appendix A.2 we perform a more restrictive
IV analysis, using only connections where both terminal cities belonged to the top-20 in terms of population in
1933 – i.e., cities that most sensible road planners would have planned to connect. We find strong and highly
significant results that closely resemble those in Table 5. This makes it unlikely that the Nazi regime strategically
picked terminal cities in order to ‘treat’ the areas in between.
42
We combine data on unemployment from the June 1933 census (which is available at the municipality level).
The 253 cities for which unemployment figures are available in February 1935 are relatively large, accounting
for 23% of overall unemployment in the 1933 census. On average in this subsample, the unemployment rate fell
by 12.2 percentage points – from 23.0% in June 1933 to 10.8% in February 1935. However, caution is warranted
when comparing unemployment rates over time, since those in 1933 are from the Census, while the numbers in
1935 are derived from unemployment claims filed with the Labor Ministry (see Appendix A.3).

24

check whether changes in local unemployment were related to Nazi support.43 The left panel
of Figure 8 shows that this was the case: Gains in Nazi support were greatest where
unemployment fell the most. The corresponding coefficient implies that a one p.p. reduction
in unemployment was associated with a 0.026 std (equivalent to 0.11 p.p.) increase in Nazi
support (see Appendix A.3 for regression results). This corresponds to an increase in Nazi
support by 0.48 p.p. for a one-std drop in unemployment.
Was the decline in local unemployment, in turn, driven by highway construction? If this was
the case, (un)employment would be a likely channel through which Autobahn construction
boosted Nazi support. The right panel of Figure 8 shows that this is not the case. There is no
relationship between the change in unemployment and distance to highways (controlling for
initial unemployment). The corresponding coefficient is small, negative, and within a tight
confidence interval around zero.44 Similar results hold in alternative specifications (see Table
A.4 in the appendix). While we can only show this (non-)result in the subsample of 253 cities,
it is nevertheless suggestive: Local job-generation is unlikely to explain the effect of highways
on Nazi support. In other words, pure economic voting based on improvements in the local
labor market can probably not account for a sizeable part of the swing towards the Nazi
government.
7.b

Vehicle Ownership

Direct effects could also come through vehicle ownership and the greater use-value of
automobiles. Germany as a whole had quite low vehicle ownership, with only 674,000 cars
on the road (including buses) in 1934, plus another 984,000 motorcycles – equivalent to 10
cars and 15 motorcycles per 1,000. Any benefits from using these vehicles would have had to
be anticipated in August 1934, since new roads only opened from 1935 onwards. In Table 6,
we stratify the sample by the density of motor vehicles (including buses, motorcycles, and

43

For consistency, we account for our baseline controls in Figure 8 and in the underlying regressions presented
in Appendix A.3. The baseline controls are log city population and the initial unemployment rate in 1933, as
well as the share of pro-Nazi votes in November 1933.
44
This non-result echoes earlier arguments that doubted a role of highway construction in solving Germany’s
aggregate unemployment problem (Ritschl 2003). Construction itself was often performed by brigades that
moved along with highway segments (Evans 2006), making direct local employment effects unlikely.
Nevertheless, spending by construction workers or the placing of orders with local firms may have created
employment around highway construction. In addition, local tourism may have benefited: Construction sites
often became a popular destination for weekend trips (Eichner-Ramm 2008). Our empirical results suggest that
such indirect job generation via highway construction was probably limited.

25

cars, available at the province level from Frik 2004). There is no evidence of greater electoral
gains in areas with higher vehicle ownership; the coefficients on distance to highway are very
similar and (marginally) significant in both subsamples. Our results thus suggest that direct
economic benefits are unlikely to account for the effect of highway construction on local Nazi
support.
7.c

Radio propaganda and “competence”

Next, we examine another hypothesis – that highway building convinced people of the
regime’s competence, and of having the population’s best interests at heart. As Hitler came to
power, unemployment was by far the most burning economic issue. Goebbels’ propaganda
loudly proclaimed that the country’s recovery after January 1933 was a direct result of the
regime’s policies – and none was more visible throughout the country (or more talked about
in government propaganda) than highway construction. This suggests that places with greater
exposure to propaganda should have experienced greater vote gains for the Nazis – and
particularly so where the roads seemingly delivered ‘concrete’ proof of the Nazis’ claim that
they were responsible for the aggregate decline in unemployment. To proxy for propaganda,
we focus on Goebbels’ most potent tool, radio, using city-level data radio listenership (as
predicted by signal strength, driven by terrain characteristics, see Section 4.c).
Table 7 analyzes the relationship between radio coverage, highway construction, and Nazi
vote gains. First, we split the sample into areas with below- and above-median radio signal
strength. In the former, signal strength was too low for good radio reception, except for
enthusiasts who purchased high-quality receivers (see Appendix A.7). In these areas, we find
only a small and insignificant relationship between distance to highways and Nazi vote gains
(col 1). On the other hand, in areas with above-median signal strength (col 2), we find a strong
coefficient on highway construction, which is significantly larger (in absolute value) than the
coefficient in column 1, with a p-value of 0.01 for the difference. Next, we turn to radio
listenership and run regressions in the full sample, including interaction terms. The results in
column 3 show that (predicted) radio listenership based on signal strength is strongly
positively associated with Nazi support, while the interaction term with distance to highway

26

construction is strongly negative.45 The results are almost identical when we allow for spatial
correlation of the error terms (col 4). The interaction results suggest that Autobahn proximity
had a larger effect on electoral support when combined with radio propaganda.
Are our interaction results driven by remote areas that had neither highway construction nor
radio coverage? In column 5, we exclude all areas that were more than 20 km from any
planned, approved, or built highway segment. We again find a negative interaction term that
is – if anything – even stronger than the one in column 3. This suggests that remote areas do
not drive our results.
Figure 9 illustrates the complementarity between highways and radio: In areas with predicted
listenership below 20%, distance to the Autobahn does not predict Nazi vote gains. The
relationship becomes negative and significant for predicted listener shares of 30%, with a
coefficient on distance of about -0.1, in line with our baseline estimate. At a listenership share
of 40% (the upper decile in our data), the coefficient on log distance is -0.2. This corresponds
to persuasion rates of about 30% when going from 100 km to 1 km of highway distance, which
compares favorably with persuasion rates in contemporary studies (Della Vigna and
Gentzkow 2010).
7.d

Highways and political instability at the state level

Authoritarian regimes often garner support by promising a return to order and stability.
German voters may have valued road building not only because of (perceived) economic
benefits, but because it demonstrated government effectiveness. Since the support of middle
class Germans for the Weimar Republic was undermined by political turmoil, we hypothesize
that areas with more state-level instability saw larger gains in support for the Nazi regime –
and all the more where the new roads were close. To test this hypothesis, we use the data on
state government stability from Satyanath et al. (2017), as discussed in Section 4.d.
Table 8 shows the regression results for political stability. We first divide our sample into
three groups – above-median stability, below-median stability, and Prussia. The main reason
for not including Prussia in either group is that it would dominate the sample – it accounts for

45

Because radio transmitters tended to be located close to large cities (Adena et al. 2015), we include – in
addition to our baseline controls – a dummy variable for locations within 20 km of cities with more than 500,000
inhabitants in 1933.

27

more than half of all observations. 46 In the more stable states, we find only a small and
insignificant effect of distance on Nazi support (col 1). In the low-stability areas, however,
the coefficient on distance is more than four times larger (col 2), and the difference in
coefficient size is highly significant. Prussia shows an intermediate score (col 3), with
significant but smaller effects than in the highly unstable states. Table 8, column 4 reports a
full regression specification including interaction effects. We find a significant and positive
interaction effect, meaning that political stability curtails the (negative) effect of distance to
highways. This pattern is illustrated in Figure 10 – the more stable a federal state was before
1933, the lower the impact of road construction on Nazi support. Also, the coefficient on
Weimar state stability is negative and significant, suggesting that more stable states generally
saw smaller increases in regime support.47 The final column of Table 8 reports a robustness
check, using an updated measure of the instability indicator in Satyanath et al. (2017), where
we extend the coding from the original period 1918-June 1932 (before the central
government’s coup-d’état in Prussia) to January 1933, when the NSDAP took over the central
government. The coefficients and significance levels are almost unchanged.
It seems likely that issues relating to order and government effectiveness were more salient in
states where parliamentary ‘chaos’ had been common. There, support for the Nazis grew more
as a function of highway proximity than in stable states. This suggests that the Nazi regime
scored an important symbolic victory by road-building: showcasing the rapid and highly
effective implementation of a large-scale project may have boosted support for the Nazi
regime also because it conveyed information about the ability and willingness to “get things
done,” overcoming the perceived indecisiveness of the parliamentary system.
7.e

Highways Approved for Construction (but not yet built)

So far, we have focused on the distance to highway segments under construction. The map
shown in Figure 2 also contains segments that were approved for building, but that were not

46

In addition, Prussia’s initial role as “a bulwark” of democracy in Weimar Germany was gutted in a coup-d’état
by the central government in July 1932. Thus, when the NSDAP came to power in Berlin in January 1933,
Prussia had seen both a period of relatively stable government, followed by a period of turmoil at the end of the
Weimar Republic. Our regressions also include dummies for the three states that were already governed by the
NSDAP before January 1933: Mecklenburg-Schwerin, Oldenburg, and Thuringia.
47
This does not reflect convergence from lower initial support in Nov. 33 in low-stability states – average yesvotes for the regime were 88% in states with above-median stability, and 90% in the more unstable ones. Thus,
if anything, it was harder to generate extra support in unstable states.

28

yet listed as “under construction.” As discussed in Section 3.a, the transition between the two
is fluid – approved segments likely had engineers staking out the trajectories, and the public
knew that the highway was coming. In Table 9, we use both the distance to highways under
construction, and to approved highway segments. 48 We begin with the full sample. The
coefficients on both distance to approved roads and to constructed segments are statistically
significant and of similar magnitude (col 1). Using the minimum of both distances also yields
a negative and significant coefficient (col 2). These findings are confirmed in columns 3 and
4, where we control for distance to any (planned/approved/constructed) highway, and restrict
the sample to cities located within 20 km from any highway segment. Overall, the evidence
suggests that there are no crucial differences between highway segments under construction
and those approved for construction. This finding helps to shed light on the mechanism by
which highways affected Nazi support. Segments that were merely approved for construction
did not (yet) create any direct employment effects or other demand spillovers. Our results thus
support the interpretation that highways affected Nazi support also by signaling competence
in promoting economic progress and social order (and thus future economic gains), and not
only through immediate local economic effects.

8

Robustness

In this section, we demonstrate the robustness of our findings. We examine issues of
balancedness, present results from placebo tests and different measures of distance to
highways, and we perform matching estimations. The majority of tables reporting robustness
checks are shown in the appendix, but their results and interpretation are summarized here.
8.a

Balancing the Sample

As we discussed above, covariates are not balanced when comparing cities with and without
highway construction (see Table 2). In Table 10, we address this issue by using entropy
weighting to effectively create a balanced sample. This method follows Hainmueller (2012);
to implement it, we use the 20 km distance threshold to define the treatment and control group.
Entropy balancing reweights the control group data (cities with more than 20 km distance to
highway construction) to match the mean of covariates in the ‘treatment group’ (cities within

48

The two distances are highly correlated since approved segments typically connect to those under construction.
Thus, the results need to be interpreted with caution.

29

20 km of highway construction).49 We confirm the magnitude and significance of our main
results in the full sample (cols 1 and 2). In addition, in column 3 of Table 10, we restrict the
sample to cities within 20 km of any highway. There, entropy weighting creates a balanced
control group from all cities that saw approved or planned (but no actual) construction within
20 km. We obtain very similar results in this more restrictive specification.
8.b

Sample Splits

In Table 11, we provide additional results, stratifying the sample by the most important control
variables. Throughout, we report p-values for the null that coefficients in the respective
subsamples are the same. Table 11, Panel A, subdivides the sample by political preferences
in March 1933. Where the Nazi Party was already polling strongly, the highway made less of
a difference – the coefficient on distance to highway construction is significantly smaller in
col 2, compared to col 1. The opposite is true for areas with substantial support for parties in
the political center (SPD, Zentrum, and BVP). Here, the highway worked particularly well as
a tool to change the voting behavior of the population (as shown by the significantly larger
coefficient in col 4, as compared to col 3). In areas with massive Communist support, however,
highway had less of an effect – vote gains depended less on distance to the Autobahn (cols 5
and 6). This suggests that the highways were less effective in overcoming opposition at the
opposite ideological extreme. 50 In other words, highway construction worked best in
persuading voters in the political center – social groups that longed for a return of the order,
stability, and perceived effectiveness of the state under the Empire (Peukert 1993).
In panel B of Table 11, we stratify by religious composition and city size. Where Catholics
were more numerous than average, highway building led to particularly high gains in August
1934 (cols 1 and 2). Catholics had been much more resistant to the Nazi message than
Protestants until 1933, in part because they had their own party representing their interests,
the Zentrum (Falter 1991), but also because the Catholic Church warned about the dangers of
National Socialism (Spenkuch and Tillmann 2017). However, Catholics were not as fervently

49

Table A.8 shows that entropy balancing delivers an almost perfectly balanced control group, with the mean of
all correlates deviating by less than 0.1% from the corresponding mean in the treated group.
50
We find further support for this interpretation when stratifying our sample by socio-economic characteristics
that were associated with strong opposition to the Nazi regime: Areas with above-median blue-collar workers or
industrial workers (the main recruiting ground for the Communist Party) also show significantly smaller effects
of Autobahn construction.

30

opposed to the Nazi regime as communists. Catholics constitute an important part of the
moderate voters represented in cols 3 and 4 of panel A. Thus, the results here underline that
highways seem to have influenced voters closer to the political middle.51 Jews accounted for
only half a percent of the German population; there is no difference in changes in support for
the Nazi Party depending on their population share (cols 3 and 4 in Panel B of Table 11).
There is also no difference by city size – Nazi electoral gains close to the highway were as
big in small towns as in big cities (cols 5 and 6).
8.c

Placebo Tests

To ensure that our regressions do not pick up the effect of geographical features associated
with transport infrastructure (which may have benefited disproportionately from a general
revival of economic conditions), we also perform placebo regressions. In Table A.10 in the
appendix, we use two other forms of transport in exactly the same way as the Autobahn –
rivers, and railways.52 We find no consistent association between distance to these alternative
means of transport and support for the Nazi Party. This makes it unlikely that the highway
effects simply capture a general swing of voters towards the Nazis in locations with good
communications and access to transport infrastructure.
8.d

Matching Results

To demonstrate that our results are not driven by violations of the linearity assumption, and
to further address unobserved heterogeneity, we also perform nearest-neighbor matching. The
results are reported in Table A.11 and discussed in more detail in the appendix. We match
with two sets of variables – the baseline controls (log population, unemployment in 1933, and
Nazi Party support in 11/1933), and the extended set (which adds socioeconomic factors such
as the share of Jews, of Catholics, of industrial employment, and of blue collar workers). We
use either 3-neighbor-matching or 1-neighbor, to form comparison groups with a high degree
of similarity in control variables. In addition, we restrict the control group to cities from the
same district (77 Regierungsbezirke) as the treated observation. We also experiment with
51

In our baseline results, the share of Catholics is strongly negatively related to the Nazi vote gain between Nov
1933 and Aug 1934 (col 4 in Table 3; coefficient not reported separately but available upon request). This makes
it unlikely that our results are confounded by convergence of Nazi support in Catholic areas. The data suggest
that this convergence had already happened between March and Nov. 1933 – over this period, Nazi vote gains
are strongly positively related to the share of Catholics.
52
We take data on historical trajectories of canals and railways from HGIS – the historical information system
for Germany. For each town, we code up distance to the nearest railway line or river.

31

defining towns and cities within either 20 km or 5 km of the highway as treated, and we restrict
the range of locations from which propensity score neighbors can be drawn to cities in the
vicinity of the overall planned highway network. In all specifications, we find large,
significant effects. Matching estimation suggests that places “treated” with the highway show
0.1 to 0.18 standard deviations higher increases in support for the Nazi Party overall,
confirming the magnitude of our OLS estimates.
8.e

Additional Robustness Checks

In Appendix A.2 we perform additional robustness checks. Table A.2 shows that our results
hold when we restrict the sample to those cities that were near planned locations of highways,
i.e., towns and cities that would eventually see highway construction according to the plans.
In Figure A.2 we show that our results are stable when we use cutoffs different from 20 km
in the dichotomous specifications of `treatment’ by highway construction. Table A.3 shows
that our IV results are robust when we use only least-cost paths connecting top-20 cities in
terms of population. This makes it unlikely that our IV results are driven by Nazi planners
strategically picking end-points with the intention to `treat’ cities in the middle by highway
construction.

9

Conclusion

Democratic reversals are common and often last for a long time. Despite their grave
consequences, they are generally not well understood.53 We focus on the entrenchment of
dictatorship in a case with major implications for world history: the Hitler government’s
consolidation after 1933. The Nazi regime went from a relatively fragile dictatorship to a
firmly entrenched regime. Our results strongly suggest that the construction of the world’s
first high-speed road reduced electoral opposition to the Nazis: Where the Autobahn was
being built by the time of the 1934 plebiscite, electoral support for the dictatorship increased
significantly.54

53

The empirical literature has identified several factors that affect the chances of a democracy surviving, such
as negative economic shocks and the brevity of democratic rule (Linz and Stepan 1978, Persson and Tabellini
2009; De Bromhead, Eichengreen and O’Rourke 2013).
54
This finding is in contrast to earlier research on highway construction under dictatorships, which had
highlighted the importance of repression and military use (Saiz 2005).

32

The effects are both quantitatively important and likely to be causal. Persuasion rates indicate
that more than 10% of Germans previously opposed to the regime changed their minds as a
result of highway construction – and this is likely a lower bound because our estimates do not
reflect aggregate vote changes. We confirm our findings when we predict where road-building
should occur based on terrain features and the associated cost of construction. We also show
that distance to the 1934 Autobahn construction is unrelated to Nazi support in prior elections,
before highway construction began, and that other transport infrastructure does not have
similar predictive power.
Why did motorway building reduce opposition to the regime? The Nazis lost no time
connecting declining unemployment with the Autobahn – even if the data show no such
relationship, at least not at the local level. Accordingly, the regime scored greater electoral
successes near highway construction – and all the more so if radio coverage was good,
exposing locals to Nazi propaganda that exploited highways as a signal of regime competence.
This suggests an important complementarity between nationwide propaganda and the local
visibility of progress. Thus, while the true effect of highway building on the nationwide postdepression upturn was probably modest (Ritschl 1998), the regime succeeded in convincing
the German public (and many foreign observers, including John Maynard Keynes) that the
Autobahn played a crucial role in reviving the German economy.
Because building started quickly, and because it went hand-in-hand with a local decline in
unemployment, the Autobahn demonstrated the new government’s abilities – suggesting
government ‘competence’, along the lines of Rogoff (1990). The regime’s determination and
effectiveness was particularly successful in swaying voters in federal states with more
political instability during the Weimar Republic. In other words, road building seemed to
demonstrate Nazi Germany’s organizational effectiveness and economic competence,
underlining its determination to make Germany great again.

References
Acemoglu, Daron, and James A. Robinson. 2000. “Why Did the West Extend the Franchise?
Democracy, Inequality, and Growth in Historical Perspective.” Quarterly Journal of

33

Economics 115 (4): 1167–99.
Acemoglu, Daron, Davide Ticchi, and Andrea Vindigni. 2010. “A Theory of Military
Dictatorships.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 2 (1): 1–42.
Adena, Maja, Ruben Enikolopov, Maria Petrova, Veronica Santarosa, and Ekaterina
Zhuravskaya. 2015. “Radio and the Rise of the Nazis in Prewar Germany.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 130 (4): 1885–1939.
Aly, Götz. 2005. Hitlers Volksstaat: Raub, Rassenkrieg und nationaler Sozialismus. Fischer
Verlag
Arendt, Hannah. 1973. The Origins of Totalitarianism. New York: Harcourt Brace.
Bajohr, Frank. 2005. Die Zustimmungsdiktatur. Grundzüge nationalsozialistischer
Herrschaft in Hamburg in Josef Schmid (editor) Hamburg im Dritten Reich. Wallstein
Verlag: 69-121
Banerjee, Abhijit, Esther Duflo, and Nancy Qian. 2012. “On the Road: Access to
Transportation Infrastructure and Economic Growth in China.” NBER Working Paper
17897.
Baum-Snow, Nathaniel. 2007. “Did Highways Cause Suburbanization?” Quarterly Journal
of Economics 122 (2): 775–805.
Bausch, Hans. 1956. Der Rundfunk im politischen Kräftespiel der Weimarer Republik 1923–
1933. Tübingen: Mohr.
Beber, Bernd and Alexandra Scacco. 2012. “What the Numbers Say: A Digit-Based Test for
Election Fraud.” Political Analysis 20 (2): 211-234.
Behnken, Klaus, and Erich Rinner. 1980. Deutschland-Berichte der Sozialdemokratischen
Partei Deutschlands (Sopade): 1934-1940. Jg. 6. Salzhausen: Nettelbeck.
Berman, Eli, Jacob N. Shapiro, and Joseph H. Felter. 2011. “Can Hearts and Minds Be
Bought? The Economics of Counterinsurgency in Iraq.” Journal of Political Economy
119 (4): 766–819.
Besley, Timothy, and Masayuki Kudamatsu. 2008. “Making Autocracy Work” Institutions
and Economic Performance: 452-510
Birdsall, Nancy, and Francis Fukuyama. 2011. "The Post-Washington ConsensusDevelopment after the Crisis." Foreign Affairs 90: 45.
Boberach, Heinz. 1984. Meldungen aus dem Reich 1938–1945. Die geheimen Lageberichte
des Sicherheitsdienstes der SS, Herrsching: DTV.
Boix, Carles, Michael Miller, and Sebastian Rosato. 2012. “A Complete Data Set of Political
Regimes, 1800–2007.” Comparative Political Studies 46(12): 1523-54.
Bracher, Karl Dietrich. 1978. Die Auflösung der Weimarer Republik. Königstein/Ts.:
Athenäum-Verlag.
Brender, Adi, and Allan Drazen. 2008. “How Do Budget Deficits and Economic Growth
Affect Reelection Prospects? Evidence from a Large Panel of Countries.” American
Economic Review 98 (5): 2203–2220.
Burgess, Robin, Remi Jedwab, Edward Miguel, Ameet Morjaria, and Gerard Padró i Miquel,
2015. “The Value of Democracy: Evidence from Road Building in Kenya.” American
Economic Review 105 (6): 1817–1851.
De Bromhead, Alan, Eichengreen, Barry, and Kevin H. O’Rourke. 2013. “Political Extremism
in the 1920s and 1930s: Do German Lessons Generalize?” The Journal of Economic
History 73(2): 371-406.
Deckert, Joseph, Mikhail Myagkov, and Peter C. Ordeshook. 2011. “Benford’s Law and the
Detection of Election Fraud.” Political Analysis 19 (3): 245–268.

34

Djankov, Simeon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer. 2003.
"The New Comparative Economics." Journal of Comparative Economics 31 (4): 595619.
DellaVigna, Stefano, and Gentzkow, Matthew. 2010. “Persuasion: Empirical Evidence”
Anuual Review of Economics 2: 643-669.
Donaldson, Dave (forthcoming). “Railroads of the Raj: Estimating the Impact of
Transportation Infrastructure.” American Economic Review.
Donaldson, Dave, and Richard Hornbeck. 2016. “Railroads and American Economic Growth:
A “Market Access” Approach.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 131(2): 799–858
Duranton, Gilles, and Matthew A. Turner. 2012. “Urban Growth and Transportation” Review
of Economic Studies 79(4): 1407-1440.
Easterly, William, and Steven Pennings. 2016. “Shrinking Dictators: How Much Economic
Growth Can we Attribute to National Leaders?” Development Research Institute
Working Paper
Egorov, Georgy, and Konstantin Sonin. 2014. “Incumbency Advantage in Non-Democracies.”
NBER Working Paper 20519.
Eichner-Ramm, Britta. 2008. 70 Jahre Autobahn Göttingen - Kassel: Zeitzeugen berichten.
Göttingen: Göttinger Tageblatt-Verlag.
Evans, Richard J. 2006. The Third Reich in Power. London: Penguin.
Faber, Benjamin. 2014. “Trade Integration, Market Size, and Industrialization: Evidence from
China’s National Trunk Highway System.” Review of Economic Studies 81 (3): 1046–
1070.
Falter, Jürgen W. 1991. Hitlers Wähler. München: Verlag C. H. Beck.
Falter, Jürgen W., and Dirk Hänisch. 1990. Wahl- und Sozialdaten der Kreise und Gemeinden
des Deutschen Reiches von 1920 bis 1933. ZA8013 Datafile. Cologne: GESIS
Datenarchiv.
Ferguson, Thomas and Hans-Joachim Voth. “Betting on Hitler.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 123(1): 101-137.
Finer, Samuel E. 1976. The Man on Horseback: The Role of the Military in Politics.
Piscataway, NJ: Transaction Publishers.
Foa, Roberto Stefan, and Yascha Mounk. 2016. "The Democratic Disconnect." Journal of
Democracy 27 (3): 5-17.
Fogel, R.W. 1964. Railroads and American Economic Growth: Essays in Econometric
History. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.
Friedman, Thomas. 2009. “Our One-Party Democracy.” New York Times, Sept. 8.
Frik, Rainer. 2004. Nutzung von Kraftwagen in Deutschland bis 1939. Study No. 8425.
Cologne: GESIS Data Archive.
Fukuyama, Francis. 1992. The End of History and the Last Man. New York: Simon and
Schuster.
Gandhi, Jennifer, and Ellen Lust-Okar. 2009. "Elections under Authoritarianism." Annual
Review of Political Science 12: 403-422.
Hainmueller, Jens. 2012. “Entropy Balancing for Causal Effects: A Multivariate
Reweighting Method to Produce Balanced Samples in Observational Studies.”
Political Analysis 20 (1): 25–46.
Hicken, Allen and Walter Mebane. 2015. “A Guide to Election Forensics”, U Michigan wp.
Hodler, Roland, and Paul A. Raschky. 2014. “Regional Favoritism.” The Quarterly Journal
of Economics 129 (2): 995–1033.

35

Hornung, Erik. 2015. “Railroads and Growth in Prussia.” Journal of the European
Economic Association 13 (4): 699–736.
Humann, Detlev. 2011. “Arbeitsschlacht”: Arbeitsbeschaffung und Propaganda in der NSZeit 1933-1939. Göttingen: Wallstein Verlag.
Jessen, Ralph, and Hedwig Richter. 2011. Voting for Hitler and Stalin: Elections Under 20th
Century Dictatorships. Berlin: Campus Verlag.
Jones, Benjamin F., and Benjamin A. Olken. 2005. “Do Leaders Matter? National Leadership
and Growth since World War II.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 120 (3): 835-864.
Jahnke, Dieter. 1936. “1000 km Reichsautobahnen. Ein Rückblick und Ausblick.”
Reichsbahn 12 (46): 971–981.
Keynes, John M. 1936. Allgemeine Theorie der Beschäftigung, des Zinses und des Geldes.
Berlin: Duncker & Humbolt.
King, Gary, Ori Rosen, Martin Tanner, and Alexander F. Wagner. 2008. “Ordinary Economic
Voting Behavior in the Extraordinary Election of Adolf Hitler.” The Journal of
Economic History 68 (4): 951–996.
Larreguy, Horacio, John Marshall, and Laura Trucco. 2015. “Breaking Clientilism or
Rewarding Incumbents?”. Harvard wp.
Levitt, Steven D., and James M. Snyder. 1997. “The Impact of Federal Spending on House
Election Outcomes.” The Journal of Political Economy 105 (1): 30–53.
Linz, Juan J., and Alfred Stepan. 1978. The Breakdown of Democratic Regimes. The John’s
Hopkins University Press.
Lizzeri, Alessandro, and Nicola Persico. 2001. “The Provision of Public Goods under
Alternative Electoral Incentives.” American Economic Review 91 (1): 225–239.
Mebane, Walter R. 2006. “Election Forensics: The Second-Digit Benford’s Law Test and
Recent American Presidential Elections.” Election Fraud: Detecting and Deterring
Electoral Manipulation. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution.
Manacorda, Marco, Edward A. Miguel, and Andrea Vigorito. 2011. “Government Transfers
and Political Support.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 3 (3): 1–28.
Michaels, Guy. 2008. “The Effect of Trade on the Demand for Skill: Evidence from the
Interstate Highway System.” The Review of Economics and Statistics 90 (4): 683-701.
Möbius, Ben, 2013. Die liberale Nation: Deutschland zwischen nationaler Identität und
multikultureller Gesellschaft. Springer Verlag.
Noelle, Elisabeth, and Erich Peter Neumann (Hg.), 1956, Jahrbuch der öffentlichen Meinung
1947-1955. Allensbach.
Orlow, Dietrich. 1986. Weimar Prussia, 1918–1925: The Unlikely Rock of Democracy.
University of Pittsburg Press: Pittsburg.
Ortega y Gasset, José. 1993. The Revolt of the Masses. Norton: New York.
Overy, Richard J. 1975. “Cars, Roads, and Economic Recovery in Germany, 1932-8.”
Economic History Review 28 (3): 466–483
Pericchi, Luis, and David Torres. 2011. “Quick Anomaly Detection by the Newcomb–
Benford Law, with Applications to Electoral Processes Data from the USA, Puerto
Rico and Venezuela.” Statistical Science 26 (4): 502–516.
Persson, Torsten, and Guido Tabellini. 2009. “Democratic Capital: The Nexus of Political and
Economic Change”. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 1(2): 88-126
Peukert, Detlev. 1993. Inside Nazi Germany: Conformity, Opposition and Racism in Everyday
Life. Penguin.
Ritschl, Albrecht. 1998. “Reparation Transfers, the Borchardt Hypothesis and the Great

36

Depression in Germany, 1929–32: A Guided Tour for Hard-Headed Keynesians.”
European Review of Economic History 2 (1): 49–72.
____. 2003. “Hat das Dritte Reich wirklich eine ordentliche Beschäftigungspolitik betrieben?”
Jahrbuch für Wirtschaftsgeschichte II: 125–142.
Rogoff, Kenneth. 1990. “Equilibrium Political Budget Cycles.” American Economic Review
80 (1): 21–36.
Saiz, Alberto. 2005. “Dictatorships and Highways.” Regional Science and Urban Economics
36(2): 187-206.
Satyanath, Shanker, Voigtländer Nico, and Hans-Joachim Voth. 2017. “Bowling for Facism:
Social Capital and the Rise of the Nazi Party in Weimar Germany, 1919-33.” The
Journal of Political Economy 125(2): 478-526.
Schiller, Karl. 1936. Arbeitsbeschaffung und Finanzordnung in Deutschland. Berlin: Junker
und Dünnhaupt Verlag.
Shirer, William L. 1960. The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich: A History of Nazi Germany.
New York: Simon & Schuster.
Schmitt, Carl. 1926. “Der Begriff des Politischen” in: Archiv für Sozialwissenschaften und
Sozialpolitik 58/1927, 1 ff.
Schütz, Erhard, and Eckhard Gruber. 1996. Mythos Reichsautobahn. Bau und Inszenierung
der „Straßen des Führers‟ 1933-1941. Berlin: Ch. Links Verlag.
Schütz, Erhard. 1995. “Das „Dritte Reich“ als Mediendiktatur. Medienpolitik und
Modernisierung in Deutschland 1933 bis 1945.” Monatshefte 87 (2): 129–150.
Shand, James D. 1984. “The Reichsautobahn: Symbol for the Third Reich.” Journal of
Contemporary History 19 (2): 189–200.
Simpser, Alberto. 2013. More than Winning: Why Parties and Governments Manipulate
Elections. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Spenkuch, Jörg, and Philipp Tillmann. 2017. “Elite Influence? Religion and the Electoral
Success of the Nazis.“ Working Paper.
Stackelberg, Roderick and Sally Winkle. 2013. The Nazi Germany Sourcebook. Houndsmills:
Routledge.
Stern, Fritz. 1972. Das Scheitern Illiberaler Politik. Propyläen: Frankfurt.
Statistisches Reichsamt. 1934. Die Wahlen zum Reichstag und die Volksabstimmung am 12.
November 1933 sowie die Volksabstimmung am 19. August 1934. Statistik des
Deutschen Reiches. Vol. 449. Berlin: Verlag für Sozialpolitik, Wirtschaft und Statistik.
Stein, Robert M., and Kenneth N. Bickers. 1994. “Congressional Elections and the Pork
Barrel.” Journal of Politics 56 (2): 377–399.
Strömberg, David. 2004. “Radio’s Impact on Public Spending.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 119 (1): 189–221.
Striesow, Jan. 1981. Die Deutschnationale Volkspartei und die Völkisch-Radikalen 19181922. Volume 1 & 2. Frankfurt a. M.: Haag & Herchen.
Time Magazine. 1934. “Germany: A Second Revolution?” July 2nd.. Archived from the
original
https://web.archive.org/web/20080417000456/http://www.time.com/time/magazine/
article/0,9171,754321-2,00.html on 17 April 2008. Retrieved 2 May 2017.
Todt, Friedrich. 1934. “Ein Jahr Bauarbeit an der Reichsautobahn.” Die Straße 1 (II.3): 93.
Ullrich, Volker. 2016. Hitler: Ascent, 1889-1939. New York: Knopf.
Van Creveld, Martin. 1977. Supplying War: Logistics from Wallenstein to Patton. Cambridge:
CUP.

37

Vanhanen, Tatu. 2000. “A New Dataset for Measuring Democracy, 1810-1998”, Journal of
Peace Research 37(2): 251-65.
Vahrenkamp, Richard. 2010. The German Autobahn 1920-1945: Hafraba Visions and Mega
Projects. Lohmar: Eul.
Wheeler-Bennett, Sir John. 1964. The Nemesis of Power: The German Army in Politics, 19181945. London: Macmillan.

38

FIGURES

Figure 1: Change in Nazi support, Nov. 33 and Aug. 34, by distance to highway
Note: The figure shows the difference in standardized pro-Nazi votes between the November 1933 election and
the August 1934 referendum, for different distance brackets to highway segments under construction
(approximately corresponding to distance quintiles). Bars indicate the average change in (standardized) Nazi
support; the black lines, the 95% confidence interval.

Figure 2: German Highway Network by 1934
Note: Location of highway segments from Todt (1934). Map geo-coded by authors.

39

Last semifree
elections

5 Mar.1933

Highway planning. Election with
Breaking ground NSDAP as the
only party.

Sept. 1933

Large-scale
highway
construction begins

12 Nov.1933

Plebiscite
granting vast
powers to Hitler

19 Aug.1934

Figure 3: Timeline of events

Figure 4: Support for the Nazi Regime, 1933-34
Note: The figure shows the distribution of pro-Nazi votes across cities in Germany in the March 1933
election, the November 1933 election, and in the August 1934 referendum.

40

Figure 5: Shift in favor of the Nazi Regime between Nov. 33 and Aug. 34
Note: The figure shows the difference in standardized pro-Nazi votes between the November 1933 election
(before highway construction had begun in earnest) and the August 1934 referendum (when large-scale highway
construction had started). The figure shows residual variation, after controlling for city population,
unemployment, and fixed effects for 77 administrative districts (Regierungsbezirke). Small white dots in the
figure indicate towns and cities in our dataset.

41

Figure 6: Change in pro-Nazi votes, before and after highway construction began
Note: The figure shows the difference in standardized pro-Nazi votes between the March and Nov. 1933
elections (left panel), and between the Nov. 1933 election and the August 1934 referendum (right panel), as a
function of distance from highway segments that where under construction by 1934 (construction began in the
autumn of 1933). The underlying regressions include the baseline and additional controls listed in Table 2, as
well as fixed effects for 77 administrative districts (Regierungsbezirke). For ease of exposition, the binscatter
plot groups the x-axis into 25 equal-sized bins.

42

Figure 7: Least Costs Paths and Actual Highway Construction
Note: Location of highway segments from Todt (1934). Least-cost paths between terminal cities
computed by authors.

43

Figure 8: Change in pro-Nazi votes, unemployment and highways
Note: The figures show residual bin scatter plots (with 25 equal-sized bins), after controlling for the baseline
controls (log city population and the unemployment rate in 1933, as well as the share of pro-Nazi votes in the
November 1933 election). The left panel shows that Nazi support increased particularly strongly between Nov.
1933 and Aug. 1934 where local unemployment fell the most. The right panel shows that there is no relationship
between unemployment and highway construction. The change in unemployment is computed over the period
June 1933-February 1935. The underlying data are for a subsample of 253 towns and cities for which
unemployment data in February 1935 are available.

44

Figure 9: Effect of distance to highways on Nazi vote gain, by radio listener share
Note: The figure visualizes the estimate from Table 7, column 5, showing that the effect of
distance to highways on pro-Nazi votes is particularly pronounced in areas with high radio
listenership (as predicted by radio signal strength).

Figure 10: Effect of distance to highways, by political stability of Weimar state
Note: The figure visualizes the estimate from Table 8, column 4, showing that the effect of
distance to highways on pro-Nazi votes was strongest in Weimar states with low political stability.
The range of the x-axis corresponds to the 1st-99th percentile of the political stability measure
from Satyanath, Voigtländer and Voth (2017).

45

TABLES
Table 1: Number of Towns and Cities in the Sample, Conditional on Highway Construction

Part of National Highway
plan? (<20 km)

Yes
No
Total

Highway under construction in 1934
(< 20 km)
Yes
No
Total
1,097
918
2,015
0
1,261
1,261
1,097
2,179
3,276

Note: A map with the location of highways is shown in Figure 2.

Table 2: Cities Characteristics, By Highway Plans and Construction
Full
Highway planned
Variable
sample
All
built
not built
Baseline controls
Population size 1933
12,294
15,906
21,687
8,992
Unemployment rate 1933
0.152
0.164
0.182
0.142
Additional controls
Blue collar share 1933
0.336
0.347
0.364
0.328
Share Industrial Employment
0.297
0.315
0.340
0.285
Share Catholic
0.364
0.339
0.283
0.404
Share Jewish
0.005
0.005
0.004
0.005
Initial Nazi support
NSDAP vote share in March 1933
0.425
0.412
0.415
0.410
Number of towns and cities
3,276
2,015
1,097
918
Note: Under “Highway planned”, “All” comprise all cities within 20 km of planned, approved, or built
highways in 1934, according to the highway network in Figure 2; “not built” are those segments that were
planned but not yet under construction by August 1934.

46

Table 3: Distance to Highways and Change in Nazi Support
Dependent variable: change in standardized pro-Nazi votes, Nov 1933- Aug 1934
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
***

log(distance
HW)
HW within 20km

-0.0962
(0.0132)

Vote change 1-100km#

-2.9%

-1.8%
***

Pro-NSDAP votes
in Nov 1933
ln(population)
in 1933
unemployment rate
in 1933
Additional Controls
District FE
3,245
0.014

Observations
Adjusted R2

Panel A: OLS Results
-0.0591*** -0.0775*** -0.0380***
(0.0121)
(0.0135)
(0.0125)

-2.3%
***

-0.360
(0.0157)
-0.0525***
(0.0146)
0.547**
(0.225)

-0.427
(0.0167)
-0.0358***
(0.0131)
-0.0590
(0.213)

3,230
0.185

ü
3,230
0.469

-1.1%
***

0.127***
(0.0274)

0.124***
(0.0263)

0.8%

0.8%

***

-0.442
-0.359
(0.0158)
(0.0158)
***
-0.0450
-0.0537***
(0.0135)
(0.0146)
-0.135
0.615***
(0.221)
(0.221)
ü
ü
3,212
3,230
0.554
0.185

-0.428***
(0.0168)
-0.0360***
(0.0131)
0.0325
(0.213)
ü
3,230
0.467

Panel B: Accounting for spatial correlation, same controls as above§
log(distance
HW)
Vote change 1-100km#

-0.0962***
(0.0141)
-2.9%

-0.0591***
(0.0136)
-1.8%

-0.0830***
(0.0127)
-2.5%

-0.0299**
(0.0118)
-0.9%

0.127***
(0.0301)
0.8%

0.135***
(0.0274)
0.9%

Panel C: Change in % (non-standardized) pro-Nazi votes, Nov 1933- Aug 1934. Persuasion Rates
log(distance
-0.500***
-0.421***
-0.552***
-0.271***
HW)
(0.0830)
(0.0864)
(0.0959)
(0.0893)
HW within 20km
0.904***
0.885***
(0.195)
(0.187)
Vote change 1-100km#
-2.3%
-1.9%
-2.5%
-1.2%
0.9%
0.9%
Persuasion Rate‡
15.8%
13.3%
17.4%
8.5%
6.2%
6.1%
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. “Distance HW” is the distance of a
city to the nearest highway segment that was under construction by August 1934; “HW within 20km” is a dummy
that takes on value one if “Distance HW” is below 20 km, and zero otherwise. “Additional controls” include the
share of blue collar workers and the share of industrial employment in 1933, as well as the share of Catholics and of
Jews in 1925. District FE correspond to 77 Regierungsbezirke in Weimar Germany.
#
In columns 1-4: change in pro-Nazi votes (in percent) when going from one to 100km distance to nearest highway
segment under construction. In columns 5-6: Gain in Nazi support in cities within 20km of highways, relative to all
other cities farther than 20km.
‡
Persuasion rates are computed following Della Vigna and Gentzkow (2010), assuming that exposure to highways
was zero beyond 100km (cols 1-4) / beyond 20km (cols 5-6).
§
Panel B accounts for spatial correlation. The model is estimated by maximum likelihood, using each city’s
geographic location to derive the weighting matrix. All cities with distance less than 3 degrees (~200km-330km)
are considered spatially contiguous and are assigned a nonzero spatial weight. All controls are the same as in the
OLS regression above. However, district fixed effects are now for 35 electoral districts (Wahlkreise) in Weimar
Germany, since the 77 Regierungsbezirke are too restrictive for the estimation procedure to converge.

47

Table 4: Panel Estimation
Dependent variable: Standardized votes for the Nazi Party
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Elections included:
March 1933, Nov 1933, Aug 1934
1924-1934
log(distance HW) × -0.0790*** -0.0647*** -0.0645*** -0.0497** -0.0671*** -0.0876***
Aug 1934
(0.0204)
(0.0210)
(0.0204) (0.0225) (0.0230)
(0.0236)
log(distance HW) ×
0.0174
0.00259
0.00255
0.0159
0.0291
0.0281
Nov 1933
(0.0238)
(0.0247)
(0.0248) (0.0240) (0.0258)
(0.0247)
log(distance HW) ×
0.0117
-0.0221
March 1933
(0.0201)
(0.0209)
log(distance HW) ×
0.00410
-0.00194
Sep 1930
(0.0197)
(0.0186)
log(distance HW) ×
May 1928
Lagged Nazi Party
votes
ü
City FE
ü
Year FE
Baseline controls × Year
Additional Controls × Year
District FE × Year
Observations
9,775
Adjusted R2
0.459

-0.0190
(0.0176)

ü
ü
ü

0.0367**
(0.0154)
ü
ü
ü

9,712
0.462

9,681
0.464

0.0508***
(0.0156)
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü
9,654
0.672

ü
ü

19,457
0.351

0.113***
(0.0141)
ü
ü
ü
ü
ü
16,095
0.564

Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the city level * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.
“Distance HW” is the distance of a city to the nearest highway segment that was under construction by August
1934. “Baseline controls” include log population and unemployment rate in 1933. “Additional controls”
include the share of blue collar workers and the share of industrial employment in 1933, as well as the share of
Catholics and of Jews in 1925. District FE correspond to 77 Regierungsbezirke in Weimar Germany. The
election in May 1924 uses the (standardized) vote share for the DVFP, which presented a joint list with Nazi
candidates while the NSDAP was banned (see footnote 38).

48

Table 5: Instrumental Variable Regressions with Least Cost Paths
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Reduced Form
Placebo
First Stage
Dependent Var:

Change in votes for the Nazi Party:
Nov'33-Aug'34
Mar-Nov'33

log(distance to
Least Cost Path)
log(distance HW)

-0.0400***
(0.0101)

-0.0218**
(0.00891)

0.0000359
(0.000604)

log(distance to
highway)
0.375***
(0.0158)

ü

3,204
0.185

ü
ü
ü

3,186
0.555

ü
ü
ü

3,183
0.913

Change in votes for
the Nazi Party:
Nov'33-Aug'34

0.304***
(0.0159)

Weak-IV robust p-value

Baseline controls
Additional controls
District FE
First Stage F-Statistic
Instrument partial R2
Observations
Adjusted R2

(6)
(7)
Second Stage

ü

ü
ü
ü

565.0
0.222
3,204
0.305

364.8
0.168
3,186
0.511

-0.107***
(0.0267)
[0.0009]

-0.0719**
(0.0293)
[0.0025]

ü

ü
ü
ü

3,204

3,184

Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. “Distance HW” is the distance of a city to the
nearest highway segment that was under construction by August 1934. “Baseline controls” include log city population and
the unemployment rate in 1933, as well as the (standardized) share of pro-Nazi votes in the November 1933 election (in col
3, in the March 1933 election). “Additional controls” include the share of blue collar workers and the share of industrial
employment in 1933, as well as the share of Catholics and of Jews in 1925. District FE correspond to 77 Regierungsbezirke
in Weimar Germany.

Table 6: Car Ownership
Dependent variable: Change in votes for the Nazi Party, Nov'33-Aug’34

(1)

(2)

Vehicle ownership
relative to median
below
above

log(distance HW)

-0.0323*
(0.0193)

Test that coeff are equal:

Baseline Controls
Observations
Adjusted R2

-0.0366***
(0.0128)

col (1) = col (2)
p-value: 0.853

ü

ü

1,618
0.129

1,472
0.412

Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.
“Baseline controls” include log city population and the unemployment rate in 1933,
as well as the (standardized) share of pro-Nazi votes in the November 1933 election.

49

Table 7: Radio Reception and Highway Building
Dep. var.: Change in (standardized) votes for the Nazi Party, Nov'33-Aug’34
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Radio reception‡
low
high

Cities in sample:
log(distance
HW)

-0.0254
(0.0202)

Test that coeff are
equal:

-0.0933***
(0.0175)

log distance HW × Radio Listeners

Observations
Adjusted R2

All cities
Spatial corr.¶

Cities <20km
from any HW§

0.161
(0.0989)

0.161
(0.110)

0.189
(0.120)

4.220***
(1.178)
-0.791**
(0.354)
ü
2,256
0.234

4.220***
(1.396)
-0.791**
(0.396)
ü
2,256
0.234

5.110***
(1.282)
-0.972**
(0.419)
ü
1,435
0.215

col (1) = col (2)
p-value: 0.011

Radio Listeners (predicted)#

Baseline controls

OLS

ü
1,676
0.204

ü
1,554
0.171

Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. “Distance HW” is the distance
of a city to the nearest highway segment that was under construction by August 1934. “Baseline controls”
include log city population and the unemployment rate in 1933, as well as the (standardized) share of pro-Nazi
votes in the November 1933 election. In columns 3 and 4, we also include a dummy that equals one for
locations within 20km of a large city (more than 500,000 inhabitants).
#
Nonlinear prediction of radio listeners at the city level, as described in Appendix A.7.
‡
Corresponds to radio signal strength below vs. above median.
¶
Standard errors adjusted for spatial correlation within 3 degrees latitude and longitude.
§
Distance to any highway is the distance to the nearest planned, approved, or built highway segment.

50

Table 8: Political Stability of Weimar States and Highway Building
Dep. var.: Change in (standardized) votes for the Nazi Party, Nov'33-Aug’34
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Notes:
Political Stability‡
Prussia
All cities
high
low
only
Stability1#
Stability2#
log(distance
HW)

-0.0482***
(0.0116)

-0.0610***
(0.0152)

Weimar State Stability#

-0.0993**
(0.0431)

-0.105**
(0.0451)

log distance HW × State
Stability

0.0196**

0.0207**

(0.00767)
ü
3,080
0.243

(0.00924)
ü
3,078
0.243

-0.0276
(0.0259)

Test that coeff are
equal:

Baseline controls
Observations
Adjusted R2

-0.111***
(0.0197)

-0.0334*
(0.0178)

col (1) = col (2)
p-value: 0.0100

ü
683
0.272

ü
692
0.443

ü
1,705
0.146

Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01, in cols 4 and 5, clustered at the
Weimar state level. “Distance HW” is the distance of a city to the nearest highway segment that was under
construction by August 1934. “Baseline controls” include log city population and the unemployment rate in
1933, as well as the (standardized) share of pro-Nazi votes in the November 1933 election. Regressions also
include dummies for the three states that were already governed by the NSDAP before January 1933:
Mecklenburg-Schwerin, Oldenburg, and Thuringia.
#
Stability1 is the measure for Weimar States’ political stability between Nov 1918 and June 1932 from
Satyanath, Voigtländer and Voth (2017). Stability2 extends this measure to January 1933.
‡
Weimar State’s political stability above median (high stability) vs. below median (low stability), based on the
Stability1 measure. Prussia is excluded in cols 1 and 2 (see footnote 46).

51

Table 9: Using Highway under Construction and those Approved for Construction
Dependent variable: Change in standardized pro-Nazi votes, Nov'33-Aug'34
Sample includes:
log(distance HW under construction)
log(distance approved HW)

(1)
(2)
All cities
-0.0260*
(0.0134)
-0.0389**
(0.0151)

ü
ü
3,220
0.016

(4)

Cities located <20km
from any HW#
-0.0448***
(0.0167)
-0.0391**
(0.0173)

-0.044***
(0.0114)

log(distance HW approved or
under construction)
log(distance to any HW)#
All controls
District FE
Observations
Adjusted R2

(3)

ü
ü
3,186
0.368

-0.0617***
(0.0162)
0.0171
(0.0132)
ü
ü
1,799
0.023

0.0202
(0.0137)
ü
ü
1,788
0.568

Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. All controls include log city
population, the unemployment rate in 1933, the (standardized) share of pro-Nazi votes in the November 1933
election, the share of blue collar workers and the share of industrial employment in 1933, as well as the share of
Catholics and of Jews in 1925. District FE correspond to 77 Regierungsbezirke in Weimar Germany.
#
Distance to any highway is the distance to the nearest planned, approved, or built highway segment.

52

Table 10: Entropy Balancing
Dependent variable: Change in standardized pro-Nazi votes, Nov'33-Aug'34
(1)

(2)

(3)

0.116***
(0.0316)

0.0837***
(0.0316)

Cities located <20km
from any HW#
0.0875**
(0.0393)

3,234
0.005

3,216
0.242

1,979
0.257

All cities

Sample includes:
HW within 20km
Baseline controls
Additional controls
District FE
Observations
Adjusted R2

ü

ü
ü
ü

ü
ü
ü

Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Regressions
are estimated using entropy weighting, which creates balanced samples by reweighting the
control group data (farther than 20 km from highway construction) to match the mean of
covariates in the treatment group (less than 20 km from highway construction). See
Hainmueller and Xu (2013) for details; Table A.8 in the appendix shows the means for
covariates before and after rebalancing. “Baseline controls” include log city population and
the unemployment rate in 1933, as well as the (standardized) share of pro-Nazi votes in the
November 1933 election. “Additional controls” include all other variables listed in Table 2.
District FE correspond to 77 Regierungsbezirke in Weimar Germany.
#
Distance to any highway is the distance to the nearest planned, approved, or built highway
segment.

53

Table 11: Sample Splits
Dependent variable: Change in votes for the Nazi Party, Nov'33-Aug'34
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)

(6)

PANEL A: Sample split by vote shares in March 1933 election
NSDAP
relative to median
below
above

log(distance
HW)

-0.141***
(0.0238)

-0.0696***
(0.0220)

Moderate parties
relative to median
below
above
-0.0599***
(0.0206)

-0.155***
(0.0264)

Communist Party
relative to median
below
above
-0.144***
(0.0292)

Test that coeff are
equal:

col (1) = col (2)

Baseline controls
District FE

ü
ü

ü
ü

ü
ü

ü
ü

ü
ü

ü
ü

1,609
0.393

1,609
0.133

1,599
0.153

1,619
0.370

1,619
0.343

1,599
0.197

p-value: 0.024

Observations
Adjusted R2

col (3) = col (4)

-0.0516***
(0.0182)

col (5) = col (6)

p-value: 0.004

p-value: 0.006

PANEL B: Sample split by religion and population size
Share of Catholics
relative to 50%
below
above

log(distance
HW)

-0.0521***
(0.0168)

-0.194***
(0.0338)

Share of Jews
relative to median
below
above

-0.104***
(0.0211)

-0.115***
(0.0240)

City population
relative to median
below
above

-0.108***
(0.0248)

-0.107***
(0.0210)

Test that coeff are
equal:

col (1) = col (2)
p-value: 0.0001

col (3) = col (4)
p-value: 0.725

col (5) = col (6)
p-value: 0.970

Baseline controls
District FE

ü
ü

ü
ü

ü
ü

ü
ü

ü
ü

ü
ü

2,103
0.136

1,131
0.340

1,598
0.351

1,618
0.262

1,592
0.313

1,642
0.287

Observations
Adjusted R2

Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. “Distance HW” is the distance
of a city to the nearest highway segment that was under construction by August 1934. Baseline controls
include log population and unemployment rate in 1933. District FE correspond to 77 Regierungsbezirke in
Weimar Germany.

