                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     WHO DO UNIONS TARGET? UNIONIZATION OVER THE LIFE-CYCLE OF U.S.
                             BUSINESSES

                                         Emin Dinlersoz
                                       Jeremy Greenwood
                                           Henry Hyatt

                                       Working Paper 20151
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w20151


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2014




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research or the U.S. Census Bureau. All results derived from U.S.
Census Bureau microdata have been reviewed to ensure that no confidential data are disclosed.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Emin Dinlersoz, Jeremy Greenwood, and Henry Hyatt. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Who do Unions Target? Unionization over the Life-Cycle of U.S. Businesses
Emin Dinlersoz, Jeremy Greenwood, and Henry Hyatt
NBER Working Paper No. 20151
May 2014
JEL No. D24,E23,J5,J50,J51,L23,L25

                                              ABSTRACT

What type of businesses do unions target for organizing? A dynamic model of the union organizing
process is constructed to answer this question. A union monitors establishments in an industry to learn
about their productivity, and decides which ones to organize and when. An establishment becomes
unionized if the union targets it for organizing and wins the union certification election. The model
predicts two main selection effects: unions organizing occurs in larger and more productive establishments
early in their life-cycles, and among the establishments targeted for organizing, unions are more likely
to win elections in smaller and less productive ones. These predictions find support in union certification
election data for 1977-2007 matched with data on establishment characteristics.


Emin Dinlersoz                                       Henry Hyatt
Center for Economic Studies                          Center for Economic Studies
U.S. Census Bureau                                   U.S. Census Bureau
4600 Silver Hill Road                                4600 Silver Hill Road
Washington, DC 20233                                 Washington, DC 20233
emin.m.dinlersoz@census.gov                          henry.r.hyatt@census.gov

Jeremy Greenwood
Department of Economics
University of Pennsylvania
3718 Locust Walk
McNeil Building, Rm 160
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6297
and NBER
1         Introduction
         Unions have been influential in the U.S. economy and politics for much of the 20th cen-
tury. They continue to be so even though private sector unionization has declined persistently
over the last four decades.1 Despite the long tradition of union activity in the U.S., there is
still little information about the timing and nature of union formation in a business and the
diﬀusion of unionization in an industry. In particular, the union selection process is relatively
unexplored. What type of businesses do unions target for organizing? Do they typically target
big and profitable business establishments that can provide larger employment and benefits to
the union? Such establishments may be harder for unions to organize, because they in general
have higher wages, as well as greater resources and better management to resist unionization.
Alternatively, unions may focus on smaller establishments that are easier to organize because of
poor labor conditions and weak management, which may be correlated with lower profitability.
These type of establishments also oﬀer lower wages in general, potentially implying a higher
demand for unionization. Furthermore, not much is known about the timing of union activ-
ity in an establishment. When in an establishment’s life-cycle does a union try to organize
it? Do unions organize young businesses or wait until a business is more established? A lack
of comprehensive panel data on establishment-level union activity in the U.S. has precluded
definitive answers to these questions. The few empirical studies on aspects of the unioniza-
tion process usually focus on newly certified establishments in datasets that include unions
alone, with little detail on establishment characteristics and life-cycles.2 As a consequence, the
establishment-level dynamics of union activity have remained largely undocumented.
        This paper examines unionization at the establishment level for the period 1977-2007 by
combining the entire National Labor Relations Board (NLRB) union election data with data
on all private-sector establishments from the U.S. Census Bureau. This newly constructed
establishment-level panel makes it possible to relate establishment characteristics, such as size,
age, and productivity, to union activity over the life-cycle of an establishment in the form of
certification and decertification elections, and to the outcomes of these elections. The data is
    1
        In 2012, only 66% of private sector workers in the U.S. were union members, compared to 242% in 1973 —
see the Union Membership and Coverage Database at www.unionstats.com and the associated documentation
in Hirsch and MacPherson (2003).
   2
     See, e.g., Holmes (2006), Farber and Western (2001), Farber (2013), and Ferguson (2008).


                                                         2
analyzed from the perspective of a dynamic model of union organizing. The model highlights
union learning about an establishment’s underlying productivity as a potential mechanism in
determining the type of establishments that are targeted by unions and the timing of such
targeting. The unionization process is formulated in a variant of Jovanovic’s (1982) model
of industry dynamics. An establishment enters the industry with a prior about its unknown
underlying productivity. After entry, each establishment experiences random shocks to its
productivity over time. More productive establishments tend to be larger, and generate higher
profits. There is also a union in the industry, whose aim is to maximize the expected life-time
benefits from organizing labor. It monitors establishments to learn about their productivity in
a Bayesian fashion over time. Unionization is a costly and uncertain process. The cost and
uncertainty of unionization limit the number and type of establishments the union can organize.
Which establishments in the industry should the union organize and when?
       The model predicts that unions target large and productive establishments early on in their
life-cycles. Among establishments of a given age, larger and more productive ones are more
likely to be targeted. For any given size or productivity, younger establishments are more likely
to experience a certification election, and the likelihood of an establishment being targeted
for the first time by a union declines with age. Similar predictions apply to the likelihood
of the event that an establishment is organized by a union successfully for the first time —
successful organizing occurs when a union targets an establishment for organizing and wins the
certification election. Furthermore, the probability of a union win in an election, conditional
on an establishment being targeted for organizing, is lower for larger and more productive
establishments. The model also suggests that, in a cross section of establishments, the unionized
ones (those that have experienced in their life-time at least one certification election won by a
union) are on average larger, older, and more productive than the rest.
       The predictions of the model are taken to the data on union activity in the entire set
of U.S. private-sector establishments born between 1977 and 2007.3 During this period, the
number of union certification elections in a year declined from around 9 000 in 1977 to about
   3
       In the U.S., union certification elections occur mainly in occupational groups at the establishment level.
The empirical work focuses on establishments as the unit of analysis, as the theoretical model considers the first
time a union targets an establishment and wins an election, regardless of the occupational group that is the
subject of the organizing.



                                                         3
2 000 in 2007. Only about 003% of all establishments born during the sample period were
targeted for the first time by a union for potential organizing. Unions tended to win around
47% of certification elections in a year, on average, throughout this period, though the win rate
increased from about 50% to nearly 60% between 2000 and 2007. The likelihood of a union
successfully organizing an establishment for the first time was around 0015% As of 2007,
around 02% of all surviving establishments born between 1977 and 2007 were still unionized in
the sense that they experienced in their life-time at least one certification election that resulted
in union victory, and no subsequent decertification election.4
       The empirical analysis proceeds in a flexible way without imposing the exact form and as-
sumptions of the model on the data. Based on the predictions of the model, four probabilities
of interest are explored: the probability of an establishment being targeted for the first time
by a union for potential organizing, the probability of a union win in the first ever certifica-
tion election held in an establishment, the probability that a union successfully organizes an
establishment the first time, and the probability that an establishment is unionized. Each of
these probabilities is formulated using a logistic distribution, where the probability is related
to establishment size, productivity, age and other controls following the model’s implications.
The data supports the model’s predictions that unions target large and productive establish-
ments for organizing. For the entire private sector, the likelihood of an establishment with more
than 500 employees being targeted by a union is about 10 times larger than an establishment
with less than 10 employees, holding all else constant. This relative likelihood is as high as 23
when only the manufacturing sector is considered. Furthermore, unions do not wait too long
to target a large and productive establishment after it is born. Conditional on size and other
observables, the likelihood of an establishment being targeted by a union for the first time is
highest around the time of its birth, and declines steadily until about 10 to 12 years after entry,
remaining relatively flat thereafter. The youngest group of establishments (0-3 years old) are
approximately twice as likely to be targeted as the oldest group (25+ years old).
   4
       The union status of an establishment is not observed directly, only the outcomes of certification and de-
certification elections. Throughout the empirical analysis, an establishment is labelled as "unionized" if it has
experienced at least one certification election won by a union and no subsequent decertification of that union.
There can be instances where a certification election occurs but the establishment is not unionized or where
there is a union without a prior certification election.



                                                           4
      Within the set of establishments that are targeted, unions are less likely to win certification
elections in larger and more productive ones, as the model suggests. The probability of a
union win in a certification election declines as establishment size increases: all else equal, the
probability of win is about 30% for the largest employment category (500+ employees), and
about 60% for the smallest category (1-9 employees). Overall, successful union organizing (union
targeting and union win) is more likely to occur in larger and more productive establishments.
Establishments in the largest employment category are 12 times more likely to be successfully
organized by a union compared with the smallest category. Moreover, at any point in time,
union establishments tend to be more productive, larger, and older compared with non-union
ones, as predicted by the model. Establishments in the largest employment class are about 11
times more likely to be unionized, compared with the ones in the smallest one. In general, size
eﬀects tend to be much higher in magnitude and statistically more significant than productivity
eﬀects. All eﬀects appear to be more pronounced in the manufacturing sector than for the
private sector as a whole.
      Certain other characteristics of establishments that are observable by unions are also signif-
icantly associated with the likelihood of being targeted. For instance, being part of a multi-unit
firm and having at least one sister establishment that is already unionized increase the likeli-
hood than a union targets an establishment. These eﬀects also give support to the hypothesized
learning process behind unionization, as unions can use all of these additional signals to learn
more about the eligibility of an establishment for successful organizing. In practice, unions in-
deed seem to rely on such signals. For instance, Figure 1 shows the information solicited by the
United Automobile Workers (UAW) union in online petitions for union organizing by workers
in an establishment. In addition to requesting a “best estimate” of the establishment’s total
employment, the UAW is interested in obtaining information on the identity of the parent firm,
whether the firm has multiple establishments, and the union status of other establishments
within the same firm.
      The findings are relevant for a large body of literature on the eﬀects of unionization on
firm-level outcomes including employment, wages, productivity, exit, and stock market value.5
Many of these studies do not consider the process by which establishments are selected for
  5
      See, e.g., Freeman and Medoﬀ (1984) for a comprehensive discussion of such studies.




                                                       5
union organizing.6 Most studies are based on relatively small samples of large or publicly
traded firms that stay in business over a narrow window of time before and after unionization.
With some exceptions, these studies are therefore subject to a combination of survival, union
selection, size, and public-status bias. This study avoids such biases by focusing on the entire
set of private sector establishments in the U.S., and by following the establishments from their
birth onwards, not just over a period before and after unionization. The establishments that
are targeted and successfully organized by unions diﬀer systematically from the non-targeted.
Two distinct selection eﬀects emerge. The first is the selection of larger and more productive
establishments by unions as targets for potential organizing. The second pertains to the result
of a certification election. In establishments that experience a certification election for the
first time in their life-cycle, unions are more likely to win the election among smaller and
less productive ones.7 There may be many reasons for this eﬀect. The model suggests that
the payoﬀ from organizing a large, productive establishment is higher. Thus, a union targets
such an establishment even when the likelihood of a win in the certification election is lower.
Furthermore, a large or productive establishment may be inherently less prone to losing an
election due to better management and organizational practices, which may be correlated with
high productivity or large size. However, the negative eﬀect of size and productivity on union
win likelihood does not in general overwhelm the positive relation between union targeting
activity and establishment size or productivity. As a result, unions are more likely to successfully
organize establishments that are on average larger and more productive. These selection biases
need to be taken into account in assessing the eﬀects of unionization on business outcomes.
To the extent that post-unionization outcomes depend on establishment characteristics at the
time of unionization that persist into future, the selection based on these characteristics (e.g.
size, productivity and age) is important.
       The age eﬀects found in this study also oﬀer further insight to the unionization process.
Conditional on observable characteristics, establishments are most likely to experience their first
   6
       Addison and Hirsch (1989) point to the selection issues involved in union studies and state (p. 83) that no
comprehesive study has been done on these issues.
  7
    Dinardo and Lee (2004) also discuss these two potential selection eﬀects in union organizing. They do
not study the unionization process, but rather the eﬀects of unionization on outcomes such as wages and exit
likelihood. Their approach is to look at cases where unions barely won certifications elections versus cases where
they barely lost. Lee and Mas (2012) and Frandsen (2013) follow a similar approach.


                                                         6
certification election and a union victory within the first couple of years after their entry. The
likelihood of an establishment being targeted by a union and a subsequent union victory taper
oﬀ as new establishments age. While this pattern is consistent with the learning model proposed
here, there may be alternative explanations, such as lack of managerial experience with union
organizing tactics in young businesses. The age eﬀects also suggest a cautionary note for future
eﬀorts in using NLRB union certification election data in conjunction with establishment-
level data. The sample selection techniques used in many prior studies often de-emphasize or
exclude from the analysis establishments that did not exist prior to the election, or those young
establishments that existed only a few years before the election. Such establishments appear
to be precisely the ones that are most likely to experience a certification election.
       The selection eﬀect in union organizing documented in this study have important implica-
tions for research on the eﬀects of unions. Even if unions are able to extract some rents from
businesses, the selection eﬀect implies that unions may not have a discernible eﬀect on certain
outcomes, such as survival, in large and productive establishments. For example, Dinardo and
Lee (2004) find little eﬀect of unions on wages, employment, and survival in relatively large
manufacturing establishments, a result that may be driven by the selection eﬀects documented
here. These large establishments may be able to better withstand any potential adverse eﬀects
of unions on profits and survival. Smaller or less productive establishments, however, may ex-
perience more significant eﬀects. Future work can assess this potentially heterogeneous eﬀect of
unionization on establishment-level outcomes. In general, unions may influence the type of tech-
nologies and work practices that are implemented in establishments, as well as the flexibility of
hiring and wage setting.8 These eﬀects may take time to materialize and may not always show
up in available measures of productivity. Because unions target more productive and larger
establishments, the welfare costs of unions may be higher than the ones traditionally estimated
by Rees (1963), which arise solely from high union wages.9 Recent work also argues that unions
played an important role in the decline of manufacturing in the U.S. Rust Belt.10 This role is
potentially amplified when unions are concentrated in larger and more productive manufactur-
   8
       See, e.g., Schmitz (2005).
   9
       Additionally, just the threat of unionization may eﬀect a firm’s behavior. To prevent unionization, firms
may have to oﬀer high wages and more benefits than in a world without the threat of unionization. See
Taschereau-Dumouchel (2012) for an analysis of the threat eﬀect at the macro level.
  10
     See Alder, Lagakos, and Ohanian (2013).


                                                        7
ing plants. If there are indeed adverse eﬀects of unions on businesses, unions’ concentration in
large and productive plants may have accelerated the decline of manufacturing in U.S. under
increased competition and foreign trade. Conversely, as documented by Holmes (2011), the
decline of manufacturing due to competitive pressure, trade, and technological change led to
the gradual disappearance of large manufacturing plants. These plants are what unions tend
to target, as the findings here indicate. Their decline may have therefore reinforced the decline
of unions by depriving them of lucrative organizing opportunities.
       The findings also provide guidance on the modeling of the unionization process and on the
diﬀusion of unionization in a population of heterogeneous firms. Models that recognize the
selection of unions into larger and more productive businesses are rare.11 Studies that aim
to model unions as integral parts of the economy can benefit from the empirical regularities
pertaining to the unionization process provided in this paper.12 The union learning process
analyzed in the model can be also generalized to include union’s learning from organizing other
establishments within an industry or within the same geographic area. For instance, Holmes
(2006) finds that unionism exhibits geographic spillover, consistent with a process by which
workers in a non-union business learn from the experience of unionized businesses located
nearby.
       The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The next section presents the model and
derives its testable implications. Section 3 describes the empirical methodology, followed by
the description of the data in Section 4. Section 5 presents the findings. Section 6 makes
concluding remarks. Appendix A contains all proofs, and Appendix B provides additional
material for the model. Appendix C describes the data. Robustness analysis and additional
results are collected in Appendix D.
  11
       For example, Dinlersoz and Greenwood (2013) posit a framework where unions organize the most productive
(and largest) firms because such firms are able to aﬀord both higher employment and higher wages for union
members.
 12
    Such studies include Acikgoz and Kaymak (2012), Acemoglu, Aghion and Violante (2001), and Krusell and
Rudanko (2013).




                                                       8
2        A Model of Union Learning and Organizing
        Consider an infinitely-lived industry inhabited by establishments that diﬀer in total factor
productivity. Profits and measures of size (e.g. employment, output, or revenue) for an es-
tablishment are increasing functions of productivity, as is the case under standard production
functions. There is a single industry-wide union whose aim is to organize establishments, each
one separately.13 The union’s per-period benefit from organizing an establishment is taken
to be a time-invariant function of the establishment’s productivity. Establishments draw their
productivity from a stationary distribution, implying that the union targeting decision does not
depend on calendar time. Each establishment is born non-unionized, but can become union-
ized as early as its first period. For simplicity, unionization is an irreversible event, and each
establishment can become unionized only once.14
       Neither the union nor an establishment knows the establishment’s underlying productivity,
but both have prior beliefs on its distribution. Both parties update their priors over time as
they obtain more information about the productivity. For simplicity, they observe the same
information every period. Their learning processes are therefore identical.15 Based on the
learning process, the union decides whether and when to target an establishment for organizing.
There is, however, a cost of organizing, and the outcome of a certification election is random.16
The organizing cost and the uncertainty about the election result limit the number and type of
establishments that the union targets, and hence, the diﬀusion of unionization in the industry.
       The timing of events and decisions for the union within a period is shown in Figure 2.
Time is discrete. The union enters a period with prior beliefs about the productivity of each
  13
       Alternatively, workers in an establishment may decide to get organized independently of other establish-
ments, with or without the help of an industry-wide union. The predictions of the model are similar under such
an interpretation.
  14
     Once it is certified in an establishment, the decertification of a union is very rare. Only about 1% of
unionized establishments experience a decertification election. The most common way for a union to dissolve at
an establishment is through establishment exit. Furthermore, multiple certification elections in an establishment
are rare (less than 5% of establishments experience multiple elections).
  15
     It is possible to let the union and establishment observe diﬀerent signals of profitability and have diﬀerent
learning processes. Such asymmetry is not the focus of the paper.
  16
     Union organizing costs may include costs associated with monitoring an establishment’s performance, pene-
trating and educating its labor force (e.g. planting union agents in labor force), campaigning to collect signatures
for a certification election, and countering an employer’s campaign against unionization.


                                                         9
establishment and with knowledge about the cost of organizing the establishment and the
likelihood of winning the certification election. At the beginning of the period, the union decides
which establishments to target before establishments realize their current period productivity.
Certification elections are then held. Unionization occurs when the union wins the election.
The current period productivity of each establishment is then observed, and production takes
place. At this time, the union realizes the benefits. At the end of the period, the union and each
establishment update their beliefs about the latter’s long-run productivity, and next period’s
cost of organizing for each non-unionized establishment is revealed.


2.1     The Productivity Process

      Let  denote (the logarithm of) total factor productivity for an age- establishment. For
 ≥ 1 the variable  follows the process [see Jovanovic (1982)]

                                            =  +                                         (1)

where  ∼ (0  2 ) is white noise. Both  and  are unknown by the union and establishment.
The distribution for  is known.
   Just after an establishment’s entry,  and 1 are drawn. The parameter  comes from the
distribution ( 2 ), and it is fixed for the rest of the establishment’s life. While the estab-
lishment does not know , it knows its distribution. Upon drawing 1 and , the establishment
learns 1 . It can start first-period production then. Thereafter, the establishment’s  fluc-
tuates around its average, . Both the establishment and the union learn about  over time
based on the information in the realized values of the  ’s. This information is contaminated
by random shocks, the  ’s.


2.2     The Learning Process

      Suppose the union is monitoring an age- establishment at the beginning of some period
for potential organizing. The union has a prior belief about the establishment’s . This prior
is normally distributed, with mean and variance denoted by  −1 and  2 −1 , respectively. The
establishment draws a new value,  , observed by both the union and the establishment. Using



                                                10
Bayes’ Rule, the union then obtains a posterior distribution for  with mean

                                            =   −1 + (1 −  )                                  (2)

and variance
                                                                1
                                              2  =                                                   (3)
                                                         −2
                                                              +  −2
                                                                    −1

where
                                                                2
                                                ≡                      
                                                         2      +  2
                                                           −1

for  ≥ 1 and
                                             0 =  and 2 0 = 2 

       Now, consider the prior beliefs of the union about  . Because  and  are both normally
distributed, (1) implies that the prior distribution of  is normal with a mean denoted by −1
and variance represented by  2−1 . Taking the expectation of (1) yields

                                                  −1 =  −1                                          (4)

The variance 2−1 is given by
                                              2−1 = 2 −1 +  2                                    (5)

Using (2) and (4), one can write the law of motion for  as

                                   =  −1 + (1 −  )                                             (6)

                                      = (1 −  ) +  −1 + (1 −  ) 

where the initial prior, 0 = , is the same for all new establishments.17
       Let Φ( ; −1   2−1 ) be the (normal) cumulative distribution function (c.d.f.) of  . Note,
from (3) and (5), that  2−1 changes over time only because  changes, since  2 is known.
Therefore, Φ can be summarized by the pair (−1  ).
  17
       Note that  follows an AR(1) process. Equation (6) can also be written as

                                    = −1 + (1 −  )( − −1 ) for  ≥ 1

Because 1 −   0, values of  higher (lower) than −1 lead to an upward (downward) revision of the prior.




                                                          11
2.3        The Union’s Problem

        The payoﬀ to the union from organizing an establishment is represented by a union ben-
efit function, ( )  0 which gives the period surplus the union obtains from a unionized
establishment with current productivity  . The benefit function ( ) satisfies the following
assumption.

Assumption 1 ( ) is bounded, strictly increasing, and strictly convex.

       Assumption 1 states that the union obtains an increasingly larger surplus as the produc-
tivity of a unionized establishment increases. A higher level of  would generally imply a
larger, more profitable establishment.18 Assumption 1 is not arbitrary, and has its foundations
in the literature on union-establishment conduct. A union benefit function ( ) satisfying
Assumption 1 can be obtained in a variety of models governing the relationship between the
union and an establishment, including monopoly union, right-to-manage, and eﬃcient bargain-
ing models.19 The exact mode of the post-unionization behavior of the establishment and the
union is therefore not specified. Appendix B gives the derivation of ( ) under the above
three models.
       There is a cost   0 of organizing an establishment. This cost is known by the union and is
incurred regardless of the outcome of the certification election.20 The union wins a certification
election with probability   in an age- establishment. The probability  is an independently
  18
       For example, imagine an establishment whose production function is given by exp( ) , where  is em-
ployment and exp( ) is total factor productivity. The production function is a standard one that is frequently
used. The form used for total factor productivity is typical when shocks are normal. If the establishment is in
a competitive industry and could freely hire labor at the wage rate, , then its employment would be given by
( ) = [exp( )]1(1−) , which is strictly convex in  . Output and profits are also strictly convex in  .
  19
     See, e.g., Manning (1987, 1994) for a discussion of these diﬀerent models. In the case of a monopoly union,
the union picks the wage while the establishment chooses employment given the union wage. In the right-to-
manage model, the union and the establishment bargain over the wage, but the latter chooses employment.
In the eﬃcient bargaining model, both the wage and employment are chosen simultaneously as a result of
bargaining. In the U.S., unionization process is mainly decentralized. In some countries, centralized bargaining
prevails, where a union may negotiate a common contract with several employers simultaneously.
  20
     Estimates of union organizing costs are hard to come by. Voos (1984) presents some early estimates and
finds that total real organizing expenditures per organizable worker remained relatively constant over the years
she studied.


                                                        12
and identically distributed continuous random variable drawn, across establishments and over
time, from a cumulative distribution function Γ( ) with support [0 1]. This probability is
observed during the previous period before the targeting decision is made in the current period.
   Let   ( ) represent the value that a union obtains from an age- unionized establishment,
given the state,  ≡ (      +1 ). The function   is defined by

                                    ( ) = ( ) + [  (+1 )]                              (7)

where the +1 component of +1 is governed by the law of motion specified in (6). The
expectation on the right hand side of (7) depends on the prior  . This prior is used to forecast
both +1 and +1 .
   The union’s value from a non-unionized establishment,   ( ) arises solely from the option
to organize this establishment at some future date. This value can be written as

           ( ) =  max{ +1 [  (+1 )] + (1 − +1 )[  (+1 )] −  [  (+1 )]}    (8)

The current benefit to the union from a non-unionized establishment is zero. At the beginning
of the next period, the union makes a decision about whether or not to target the establishment.
It makes this decision before it observes +1 . Therefore, it compares the expected benefit from
targeting,  +1 [  (+1 )] + (1 − +1 )[  (+1 )] − , with the expected benefit from not
targeting, [  (+1 )].


2.4      Union Targeting and Unionization

      A certification election occurs in an age- establishment if and only if the expected net
gain from targeting,  {[  ( ) −   ( )]}, exceeds the cost of organizing, 

                                      {[  ( ) −   ( )]}                                (9)

Now, let ( ) ≡   ( ) −   ( ). The targeting decision depends on the properties of ( ).
Using (7) and (8) one can write

( )                                                                                              (10)

= ( ) + [  (+1 )] −  max{+1 [  (+1 )] + (1 −  +1 )[  (+1 )] −  [  (+1 )]}

= ( ) +  min{(1 −  +1 ) ([  (+1 )] − [  (+1 )]) −  [  (+1 )] − [  (+1 )]}

                                                    13
By using the definition for ( ), the right hand side of (10) reduces to

                  ( ) = ( ) +  min{(1 −  +1 )[(+1 )] −  [(+1 )]}            (11)

                            = ( ) + {(1 − +1 )[(+1 )] − }

where +1 in +1 is governed by the law of motion (6). The second equality in (11) holds
because 1 − +1  1,   0, and ( ) ≥ 0.21 The function  has the following properties.

Lemma 1 (Properties of ) There exists a unique, continuous and bounded function ( ) that
satisfies (11). ( ) is increasing and strictly convex in  , increasing in  , and decreasing in
 and . Furthermore, [( )|−1  ] is increasing in −1 and decreasing in 

      From the targeting rule (9) and Lemma 1, for any given  there exists a unique threshold
                                                              e (−1  ) defined by
for the probability of union win in a certification election, 

                                                                 
                                         e (−1  ) =
                                                                                              (12)
                                                          [( )|−1  ]

                                                           e (−1  ). The probability of the
such that the union targets an establishment whenever   
union targeting a non-unionized establishment of age  and with prior −1 is then given by

                                         (−1  ) = 1 − Γ(e
                                                              (−1  ))                     (13)

      The main results can now be presented. What type of establishments do unions target for
organizing? Proposition 1 answers this question.

Proposition 1 (Unions target productive, young firms.) The probability of the union targeting
an establishment,  (−1  ), is increasing in −1 and decreasing in .

      By Proposition 1, the probability of the union successfully organizing an establishment

                                           (−1  ) =   (−1  )                       (14)

is also increasing in −1 and decreasing in . A higher value for −1 implies that the union
believes that the establishment will yield a greater stream of benefits. Hence, the probability of
union targeting and successful organizing rises. As an establishment ages, the variance around
 21
      The non-negativity of ( ) follows because   ( ) cannot exceed   ( )


                                                          14
the prior declines, in line with (3) and (5). This reduces the probability that a high value for
 will be drawn. The decline in the variance around the prior means a lower expected value
for the union, given the strict convexity of , and hence, a lower likelihood of targeting and
successfully organizing an establishment.
   Next, consider the expected probability of a union win in a certification election conditional
on the union targeting an age- establishment. Using (9), this probability can be written as

                                              £ ¯                    ¤
                               (−1  ) =   ¯   
                                                         e (−1  )                          (15)

Note that  (−1  ) depends on −1 and , even though the unconditional probability of win,
   is assumed to be an  random variable independent of −1 and .  (−1  ) satisfies
the following properties.

Proposition 2 (Unions win elections in less productive, older firms) The expected probability
of a union win, conditional on the establishment being targeted,  (−1  ), is decreasing in
−1 and increasing in .

The expected gain from organizing an establishment is higher for young establishments with a
high prior. Therefore, the union is willing to target such establishments even for low levels of
the probability of winning a certification election.
   The probability that an age- establishment, with a history of priors (−1  −2  · · ·  0 ),
is unionized is given by
                                                 X
                                                 
                                                    Q
               (−1  −2  · · ·  0  ) =   { −1
                                                     =1 [1 − (−1  )]}(−1  )          (16)
                                                =1
                                                      Q
                                            = 1−        =1 [1   − (−1  )]

where (−1  ) is defined by (14). Observe that  is the probability that unionization occurs
by the -th trial, where the probability of success in trial  is (−1  ) The following can be
stated about unionized establishments.

Proposition 3 (Unionization is prevalent in productive, old firms.) The probability of an
establishment being unionized,  (−1  −2  · · ·  0  ), is increasing in −1 and .

A rise in −1 increases the probability that the union is targeted in the current period, if
it hasn’t been organized in the past. Clearly, the chances that an establishment is unionized

                                                   15
in the current period are then higher. An increase in age, , raises the likelihood that the
establishment is organized, since it increases the time interval over which the union could have
potentially engaged in targeting activity.


2.5        Testable Implications

        Consider now an outside observer (an econometrician) who sees a plant’s current produc-
tivity,   and its age, , but not the union’s prior, −1 . The observer knows the distribution of
−1 given  and , the distribution of   and the union’s probability of targeting,  (−1  )
Given  and  the observer has beliefs on −1 , represented by the c.d.f. Ω(−1 |  ). Based
on these beliefs, the observer’s assessment of the probability that the union targets an age-
establishment with current productivity  is
                                       Z
                            
                            (  ) =  (−1  )Ω(−1 |  )                                             (17)

This probability is positively associated with the observed  , as outlined in the following
proposition.

Proposition 4 (The probability of targeting from the observer’s perspective) The probability of
targeting from the observer’s perspective,   (  ), is increasing in  .

       Proposition 4 implies the likelihood of targeting is higher for higher values of  . How
  (  ) changes as  increases, however, depends on the magnitudes of two opposing eﬀects.
For any given 
                                             Z                                     Z
                                
              (  + 1) −  ( ) =            (  + 1)Ω(|  + 1) −           ( )Ω(| )        (18)

By Proposition 1,  (  + 1) ≤  ( ) This eﬀect implies that   (  + 1) is no larger than
  ( ) ceteris paribus. However,  has a lower variance when  is higher. Depending on the
curvature of  the eﬀect on   of a lower variance for  can be positive or negative.22 Thus,
the sign of (18) depends on the nature of  . Which eﬀect dominates in practice is an empirical
question. For instance, if the first eﬀect dominates,   is decreasing in 
    For the observer, the probability of the union successfully organizing an establishment is
                      R
given by  (  ) =     (  )Γ(  ). The probability  shares the properties of   in
  22
       If  is stricly concave (strictly convex) in  a reduction in the variance of  implies a higher (lower)   

                                                           16
Proposition 4. Furthermore, the observer’s assessment of the expected probability of a union win
                                                                               R
conditional on targeting,   (  ) = [[  |   
                                                        e (−1  )]|  ] =  (−1  )Ω(−1 |  )
satisfies the following.

Proposition 5 (The probability of a union win from the observer’s perspective) The expected
probability of a union win (conditional on targeting) from the observer’s perspective,   (  ),
is decreasing in  

As in the case of   (  ) how   (  ) depends on  is dictated by the shape of  (−1  ).
   Consider next the probability   (  ) that an age- establishment with productivity  is
a union establishment from the observer’s perspective. Let Ψ(−1  −2  · · ·  0 |  ) denote
the joint c.d.f. associated with the history of priors for an age- establishment, conditional on
  Then,
                 Z
    
   (  ) =       (−1  −2  · · ·  0  )Ψ(−1  −2  · · ·  0 |  )Γ( −1 ) · · · Γ(0 ) (19)

The properties of   are presented below.

Proposition 6 (The probability of unionization from the observer’s perspective) The probability
of being a union establishment from the observer’s perspective,   (  ), is increasing in 
and .

   Now, consider any proxy for  (any increasing function of   such as profit, output or
size). Because the c.d.f.’s Ω and Ψ in (17) and (19) remain the same if the conditioning is
done on the proxy, the probabilities   and   don’t change if  is replaced by the proxy.
Therefore, Propositions 4-6 continue to hold. In relating the probabilities         and  
to  in empirical analysis, one can thus use variables such as establishment size or measures
of productivity as proxies of  .
   A few remarks about the model and its implications are in order. The cost of organizing, 
has been assumed to be constant for simplicity. This cost can depend on the pair (−1  ) For
instance, unions may have a lower cost of organizing in younger and less productive establish-
ments, where managerial inexperience may underlie both lower productivity and an inability
to counter union activity. In that case, as −1 or  increases, the targeting decision depends
on how fast the cost  changes relative to the net benefit from targeting, [( )|−1  ]. A

                                                         17
similar argument applies to the probability of a win,    which can be a function of −1 and
. Unions may be less likely to win elections in larger and older establishments because such
establishments can have better resources to fend oﬀ unionization. Consider, for example, the
case where the organizing cost  increases, or the union win likelihood  decreases, as −1
increases. The probabilities of the union targeting and successfully organizing an establishment
can then be decreasing or non-monotonic functions of −1  The empirical analysis, however,
does not impose any restrictions on  or    and tests the implications of the model without
using the specific structure of the model. If potentially higher organizing costs or the lower
likelihood of a win in larger, more productive establishments indeed overwhelm the otherwise
greater benefits to the union from such establishments, unions should be less likely to orga-
nize larger, more productive establishments. The empirical analysis will therefore examine the
monotonicity of the union targeting and win likelihoods.
       The model also ignores the likelihood of union decertification, which is a rare event.23 For
simplicity, it also abstracts from establishment exit. The model implies that unions tend not
to target less productive, smaller establishments, which are also generally more likely to fail,
as prior empirical evidence suggests.24 Furthermore, because larger, more productive estab-
lishments oﬀer a larger surplus to the union, a union can target such establishments even if
the union’s surplus extraction may increase the exit likelihood of such establishments after
unionization. Moreover, unions in general value the survival of organized establishments, as
longer-lived establishments provide a longer stream of benefits to the union. Unions will there-
fore tend to internalize the exit likelihood to some extent. For instance, when an establishment
experiences a negative shock to its productivity, the union may engage in less surplus extrac-
tion to ensure that the establishment survives. It is therefore not obvious that a potentially
higher exit likelihood for a unionized establishment can overturn the prediction that unions
target large, more productive establishments. Note also that in the data the observed likeli-
hood of unionization,   (  ) depends on both the union decertification rate and the exit
rate of unionized establishments. It is an empirical question whether these rates alter any of
the predictions in Propositions 4-6.
  23
       The data indicate that decertification elections occur at an annual rate of less than 1% in unionized estab-
lishments — see Appendix C.
   24
      See, e.g., Dunne, Roberts and Samuelson (1989).



                                                         18
       Establishments may also take costly actions to lower the likelihood of unionization. For
instance, establishments that are more likely to be targeted by a union may raise their wages.
They may also counter the union threat by investing into reorganization, anti-union campaigns,
or management consulting services. All of these actions may reduce the union targeting likeli-
hood in larger, more productive establishments, which are more likely to be targeted. In general,
a union and an establishment can engage in a game of unionization where both take costly ac-
tions to achieve their goals. Whether the outcome of a such a game changes the monotonic
relationship between union targeting and establishment size or productivity predicted by the
model would depend on the specific environment of the game. If large, productive establish-
ments are indeed successful in avoiding being targeted by a union, the data should reveal a
negative or potentially non-monotonic relationship between union targeting activity and estab-
lishment size or productivity. The empirical analysis allows for these possibilities.



3        Empirical Methodology
        The model has predictions regarding four main events associated with unionization over the
life-cycle of an establishment. These events are: an establishment is targeted by a union for the
first time (the first certification election), a union win in the first certification election conditional
on the establishment being targeted, the first successful organization (the first certification
election and union win), and the union status of an establishment at any point in time as
defined by whether the establishment has ever experienced a successful certification election.
The probabilities associated with these events are explored using the model’s predictions.
       It is important to note the sequence of events leading to union certification in an establish-
ment for understanding what the theoretical events described above exactly correspond to in
the data.25 A collection of workers in a non-unionized establishment decide, for the first time,
to organize and form a union. These workers typically contact a union to seek assistance with
organizing. With the help of the union, workers carry out a “card drive”, during which they
try to obtain support from at least 30 percent of the workers in order to be legally granted
an election by the NLRB. The NLRB then makes a determination on what constitutes the
bargaining unit for the workers trying to organize. A certification election is then held among
  25
       See Dinardo and Lee (2004, section II) for more details on these events.


                                                         19
workers eligible to vote. This event is referred to as “union targeting” here, corresponding to
the first certification election registered for an establishment in the data. A simple majority is
required for a union win in the election. Within 7 days after the ballot tally, objections can be
made by both parties, and a re-election can be granted by NLRB if there is suﬃcient evidence
of an improperly carried-out election. If the union has a simple majority in the end, the union
is certified as the exclusive bargaining agent for the bargaining unit, and the employer is obliged
to negotiate in good faith with the union. The event of this exclusive right being granted to the
union is labelled here as “successful organizing”. Therefore, in the data this event corresponds
to the first certification election that results in a union win. The exclusive right to negotiate is
lost if the establishment exits the business, or the union loses a subsequent decertification elec-
tion, which is either petitioned by the employer (e.g., in the event of a business restructuring)
or by a suﬃcient number of workers whose jobs are represented by the union. An establishment
is labelled here as “unionized” until such an event occurs.
   A union may try to organize an establishment with no resulting election (e.g., a failed card
drive). Such cases are not observed in the data. The first-ever targeting of an establishment
by a union is thus defined as the first-ever union organizing drive that leads to a certification
election. The observation of a certification election at an establishment may itself be subject
to selection. Unions may target establishments where they are more likely to reach the election
stage. It is plausible that unions are less likely to secure an election when they target estab-
lishments that are able to resist unionization successfully. Such establishments may be larger
and more productive, and may oﬀer higher wages. If this is the case, unobserved targetings
with no resulting election may be disproportionately concentrated in larger or productive es-
tablishments. An implication is that any positive association found between union targeting
and establishment productivity or size would be stronger if targetings with no resulting election
were also observed.
   An establishment may experience more than one certification election along its life-cycle.
Only a small fraction of establishments ( 5%) in the data have two or more certification
elections over their life-cycles. Subsequent targetings and successful organizations likely depend
on the outcome of the first targeting, and hence, cannot be treated as independent events.
They are therefore excluded from the analysis of targeting and successful organization. The
union status of an establishment, however, takes into account the outcome of all certification

                                                20
elections that the establishment experiences. That is, if an establishment experiences more
than one certification election, a union win in any of these elections results in unionization, and
the establishment then stays unionized until either it exits or a union decertification election
takes place.
       Let  be the indicator that event  occurs in a establishment  in year , where  ∈
{   } denotes the event of first-ever targeting by a union ( ) union win in the first-ever
certification election conditional on the establishment being targeted by a union ( ) the first
successful organizing by a union () or the event that an establishment is a union establishment
(). Because all of these events have binary outcomes and successes are highly rare (except
for event  ), the observer’s assessed probability,   (   ) that an establishment experiences
event  is modelled using the inverse logit transformation26

                                                                   exp( (     ; b))
                                     (     ; b) =                                                                      (20)
                                                                 1 + exp( (     ; b))

where
                                                 X
                                                                           X
                                                                            
                 (     ; b) = 0 +            ( )   +            ( ) + 0  +  +  +            (21)
                                                 =1                        =1

In (21),  is classified into one of  bins, where   ( ) is the indicator that  falls in bin 
Similarly,  is classified into one of  bins, with the corresponding indicator   ( ). These
specifications oﬀer a flexible way of accounting for the eﬀects of productivity and age, which
are not necessarily linear according to the theoretical model. The variable  is a vector of
controls,  is an industry fixed eﬀect,  is a state (geography) fixed eﬀect, and   is a year
                                       © ª
fixed eﬀect, and b ≡ {0  { }=1   =1   } is the set of parameters.
       The parameters b in (21) can be estimated for each event  ∈ {   } separately
by maximizing a weighted log-likelihood function that pools all sample years and all relevant
observations

                   X
                    X
                     
         L(b) =                 ln   (     ; b) + (1 −   ) ln(1 −   (     ; b))               (22)
                   =0 =1


where  = 0  0 + 1   denotes a year and  is the total number of establishments at risk for
  26
                                                                                                        R
       For example, for the observer’s probability of union targeting,   (   ) =                    (−1  )Ω(−1 |  ) is
modeled by an inverse logit transformation. Other probabilities are modeled similarly.




                                                                    21
event  in year 27 Weights,   are assigned to establishments to account for the uncertainty
with which they match to certification elections. The matching and weighting procedure is
explained in more detail in the next section. For an establishment that matches with a given
certification election, the weight  takes on a value in (0 1] equal to the inverse of the fre-
quency of matches for that certification election. The weight 1 −  is then assigned to the
establishment’s non-matched version. If an establishment is not matched at all to any certifica-
tion election, the weight is  = 0.28 The calculation of the standard errors for the estimated
parameters take into account the clustering of error terms by establishment.
                                                                                     © ª
       For all events, the focus is on the estimates of the parameters { }=1 and  =1  These
estimates are used to test the model’s predictions in Propositions 4-6 Two strategies are fol-
lowed. First, two measures of establishment size (employment and the value of shipments) are
used separately as a proxy for  .29 Second, some measures of productivity are used to proxy
for   These are the value of shipments per worker, value added per worker, and a measure
of total factor productivity. Establishment age, measured by the number of years elapsed from
the first observation of an establishment, is included in all estimations in accordance with (21).
       In the control variables,   a multi-unit firm indicator is included to assess the eﬀect of
being part of a multi-unit firm. A multi-unit firm association may signal to the union that
the establishment belongs to a successful firm that has expanded. A firm-level unionization
indicator is also included. This indicator equals one if the establishment is part of a firm
that already has at least one unionized establishment. This variable accounts for potential
spillover of unionization within a firm. Firm union presence may signal to the union that the
establishment is more prone to unionization. Hence, both the multi-unit and firm union status
are expected to contribute to the union’s learning about an establishment’s eligibility for being
  27
       For the event of first-ever certification election, the establishments at risk are those that have never ex-
perienced a certification election before year ; for the event of a union win in a certification election, the
establishments at risk are the ones that experience their first certification election in year ; for the event of a
successful organization, the establishments at risk are those that are targeted for the first time and experience a
certification election in year ; finally, for the event of being a union establishment, the relevant establishments
are all establishments in year .
  28
     In estimations using the Economic Census sample, the establishment’s weights in the Economic Census are
also used to arrive at population estimates.
  29
     This approach is similar to those adopted in some other studies of firm learning (e.g. Dunne, Roberts, and
Samuelson (1989)).


                                                         22
organized. Figure 1 suggests that unions indeed seek information on these characteristics for
potential organizing.
       Another indicator variable in  takes on a value of one if the establishment is located in
a right-to-work state. During the sample period three states adopted a right-to-work law or
amended it, so this indicator varies over time for these states, allowing for the identification of
the corresponding coeﬃcient in the presence of state fixed eﬀects.30 Right-to-work states gen-
erally have laws and regulations less favorable for union activity. Additionally, establishments
may favor location in these states because such states tend also to foster other policies friendly
to businesses.31 Union organizing activity may therefore be less intense in such states. In the
estimation of the probability    the ratio of the workers eligible to vote in the certification
election to the establishment’s total employment is also included in  . The higher this ratio,
the higher the stakes for the union and the establishment in the election. Therefore, both
the union and the management in the establishment may devote more resources to influence
the outcome of the certification election. As a result, the eﬀect of this ratio can go in either
direction.
       For each event of interest, the estimation is carried out for all private sector establishments,
and also separately for the manufacturing sector, where unionization has traditionally been more
concentrated. For specifications using an establishment’s employment as a measure of size, the
sample period for estimation is 1977-2007, as employment data are available annually. For
specifications where value of shipments or measures of productivity are used, the sample period
includes only the Economic Census years (every five years between 1977 and 2007 inclusive),
as these variables are available only in the Economic Census, as discussed in the next section
(except in the case of total factor productivity, which can be calculated for 1977-2007 using
the Census of Manufactures). In all estimations, the sample excludes those establishments that
  30
       Idaho and Oklahoma adopted a right-to-work law in 1986 and 2002, respectively. In 1993, Texas amended
its original right-to-work law passed in 1947. Whether Texas is included in this group of three states does
not alter the estimates materially. For a chronology of the adoption of right-to-work laws by states, see
http://www.dol.gov/whd/state/righttowork.htm.
  31
     Holmes (1998) documents the sharp increase in manufacturing activity when one crosses the border from
a non-right-to-work law state to one with a right-to-work law. As Holmes notes, the law itself may not be the
cause of this increase. The presence of the law in a state may serve as a proxy for other business-friendly policies
and regulations of the state.



                                                        23
entered before 1977, because for such establishments there is no information on prior union
activity before 1977, as discussed in the next section.



4        Data
        National Labor Relations Board (NLRB) certification election data for the years 1977-2007
is linked with the corresponding years from the U.S. Census Bureau’s Longitudinal Business
Database (LBD), quinquennial revenue data from the Economic Census (EC), and data on total
factor productivity from the Census of Manufactures.32 The NLRB data contain information
on union certification and decertification elections that took place between 1977-2007. NLRB
elections in the year 1977 are only partially observed, see Appendix C. For each election, the
data contains the employer’s name, address, and industry. It also contains the number of
workers eligible to participate in the election, how many ballots were cast, and how many were
cast in favor of the union.
       Over the sample period, the NLRB data contain information on a total of 103 064 certifi-
cation elections.33 In most years there are roughly 3 000 certification elections. The frequency
of these elections in general declines over the sample period. In particular, the number of certi-
fication elections drops sharply from about 9 000 in 1977 to about 3 500 in 1983, and continues
to drift lower for the rest of the period, with about 1 600 elections in 2007. For an analysis of
the trends in NLRB elections, see Appendix C.
       The LBD, with which the NLRB elections data is matched, contains the universe of private
sector employers in the U.S. at the establishment level. Key variables are the number of
employees, industry aﬃliation, location, the year the establishment enters and exits, and the
identifier of the firm that has operational control over the establishment. The LBD is also
matched at the establishment level with the EC, which is conducted every five years. This
match is done for each quinquennial census between 1977 and 2007, inclusive. The time series
  32
       The NLRB certification election data come from two sources: the 1977-1999 data was kindly provided by
Thomas J. Holmes; data from 1999-2007 is available from data.gov.
 33
    The 497 of elections that are labelled “Union Shop Clause” are omitted from all empirical specifications,
as these only appear in the data obtained from data.gov. The 3,418 “Employer Requested” elections are also
omitted, as these tend to be elections that are sought when some fraction of the workforce was previously
unionized.


                                                      24
coverage by the EC varies by industry.34 The data collected permit the construction of a
revenue-based labor productivity measure, that is, the value of shipments per employee, for
all industries. Another measure of labor productivity, value added per worker, is available for
manufacturing, and is used as an alternative to the value of shipments-based one. A total factor
productivity measure is also used for manufacturing.
       NLRB data is consistently available by the employer’s name and the employer’s city and
state. The LBD is linked to the NLRB data via a multi-stage matching process. Each stage
involves considering establishments in both the LBD and the NLRB data at some level of
geography — city and state, fuzzed city name and state, or county and state. Having so “blocked”
the data at a particular level of geography, the similarity of business names and industry are
considered between the two data sets. Inspection of individual records is used to validate the
name and industry agreement rules, along with inspection of the address and zip code that are
available consistently for the LBD data, and also for a subset of the years of the NLRB data.
The NLRB data contains the number of employees eligible to vote in the certification election.
This information is used to reject potential matches, while allowing for the somewhat uncommon
event of multiple establishments being included in the same certification election (for example,
an election might cover all cashiers in a particular geographic region of a retail chain). If the size
of the firm that has operational control over the establishment is less than 80% of the number
of employees eligible to vote in the election matched to the establishment, then the match is
rejected, and another match is sought. For establishments that have less employees than the
number eligible, a progressive search is performed within the firm at increasingly higher levels
of aggregation (the address, city, county, state, and national level) until the total number of
LBD employees is at least 80% of the number eligible to vote in the election.35 About 73% of
certification elections match reliably with the LBD for the sample period.
  34
       The Census of Construction Industries, the Census of Manufactures, the Census of Retail Trade, the Census
of Services, and the Census of Wholesale Trade are available every five years from 1977-2007. Other parts of
the economy are only available for more recent years. The Census of Finance, Insurance, and Real Estate is
available for 1992-2007, the Census of Mining and the Census of Transportation, Communications, and Utilities
are available for 1987-2007, and the Census of Finance, Insurance, and Real Estate are available for 1992-2007.
  35
     This rule was established using the records downloaded from www.data.gov as training data. This data
contains a free-form text description field that often includes the phrase “at all” when describing elections that
cover multiple establishments.



                                                        25
       Weights are calculated to account for the uncertainty of matching an election to an estab-
lishment. If there are multiple matches to a given certification or decertification election in
a year, each establishment receives a weight,   equal to the inverse of the total number of
such matches. For simplicity, and for longitudinal consistency in the case of the relatively few
establishments that link to more than one election (certification or decertification), the largest
weight that an establishment receives among all such elections is given as its weight over time.
Each establishment involved in a multiple match was also given an additional weight, equal
to 1 −   to represent the non-unionized version of this establishment. The weights in the
EC were also retained to be used in the analysis to make inference about the population of
establishments in the estimations using EC data for size and productivity measures.
       Both the NLRB data and the LBD are left-censored. The NLRB data available for this
study begins in 1977, and an establishment’s union status is unknown if it entered prior to 1977.
Therefore, there is no way of identifying whether a certification election that occurs during the
1977-2007 period at such an establishment is, in fact, that establishment’s first certification
election. Furthermore, the LBD coverage starts in 1976, so there is no exact entry year, hence,
no age information for establishments that first appear in 1976. To identify age and union
status accurately, the analysis is therefore restricted to all establishments that first appear in
LBD in or after 1977.
       The constructed dataset contains a weighted sum of nearly 30 million establishments. About
89 400 establishments match to certification elections. Of those that match to an election,
about 95% match to exactly one election, and about 4% match to exactly two elections. Most
of the remainder match to exactly three elections. Thus, the cases where multiple certification
elections occur at a given establishment are rare. Less than half of the elections occur in
establishments that are left-censored, and the remainder are among those establishments that
entered during or after the year 1977. This skewness reflects the fact that between 1981 and
1982 the number of certification elections dropped from 6 000 − 7 000 to around 3 000 per year
and never recovered to its previous level.36
  36
       This sharp drop in early 1980’s is also documented by other researchers, see, e.g. Farber and Western
(2001).




                                                      26
5        Results

5.1        Size and Age Eﬀects

        How are the probabilities of interest related to establishment age and size, as measured by
employment or the value of shipments?37 Tables 1, 2, and 3 present the estimated odds ratios
based on the estimation of the logit model in (20) for all private sector and manufacturing,
respectively. For easy interpretation, Figures 3 and 4 contain the predicted eﬀects of size and
age, and also, of year, to explore the trends.38 In what follows, the predicted eﬀects for all
remaining control variables are discussed based on the specification that uses employment as
the measure of size, rather than the value of shipments. The specification with employment is
estimated using all years of data, whereas the value of shipments is available only every five
years, eﬀectively reducing the sample size by 80%. Therefore, the eﬀects of all other variables
are more precisely estimated in the specification with employment as the size measure, and the
year eﬀects are obtained for all years, rather than every five years.
       Consider first the predicted probabilities of union targeting in Figures 3 and 4. The prob-
ability of targeting increases with both measures of size, although in the manufacturing sector
the size eﬀect tapers oﬀ and declines slightly, only at very large employment classes.39 When
the entire private sector is considered, an establishment in the largest employment (value of
shipments) class has almost 10 (4) times the probability of being targeted compared with an es-
tablishment in the smallest size class. In manufacturing, this relative likelihood is much higher,
23 (49).40 Age eﬀects for the manufacturing sector suggest that union targeting activity is at
its peak within the first couple of years after an establishment’s entry and flattens out after 10
  37
       The variables in nominal values used in constructing the value of shipments/receipts categories and produc-
tivity categories in the next section are not deflated. Because the empirical methodology relies on the ranking
of these measures, instead of the absolute values, and because year fixed eﬀects are included, there is no need for
deflating. Similarly, time dummies also capture any change in the likelihood of an event over time due to secular
changes in the average sales or productivity of establishments. Results are generally qualitatively similar when
size and productivity measures in nominal terms are alternatively measured as deviations from their annual
means.
 38
    The predicted average marginal eﬀect for a given size or age category is calculated by averaging the predicted
probability for that category over all values of the remaining variables across all observations.
  39
     This decline may result from large firms’ ability to better counter the threat of union organizing.
  40
     These ratios, and others that follow, come directly from the estimated odds ratios in Tables 1 and 2.


                                                         27
to 12 years. The age eﬀects indicate a similar decline in the likelihood of targeting over time
in the case of the entire private sector. For the entire private sector, the youngest group of
establishments are about 176 times as likely to be targeted compared with the oldest group.
In manufacturing, this relative likelihood is around 172. These patterns are consistent with a
learning process and support Propositions 1 and 4. The predicted eﬀects for year in Figures
3 and 4 also point to a decline in the probability of targeting over the sample period. This
secular decline in union organizing activity is one reason behind the decline in private sector
union membership rate in the U.S.41
       Next, turn to the predicted probability of a union win in a certification election, conditional
on an establishment being targeted by a union. In general, the predicted probability of a win
declines as establishment size increases, consistent with Propositions 2 and 5. For the case
of manufacturing, in the largest employment (value of shipments) category the probability of
win is about 22% (30%), and about 60% (50%) in the smallest category. The likelihood of
win does not appear to change substantially with establishment age. When the entire private
sector is considered, the union win likelihood also declines as establishment size increases,
regardless of the size measure. Overall, there is evidence that unions are less successful in
winning certification elections in larger establishments.42 The year eﬀects indicate that, for
much of the sample period, the probability of a union win has had little or no trend, with
one exception: there is some rise in the union win likelihood starting in the early 2000’s when
the entire private sector is considered.43 The relatively stable average union win likelihood in
certification elections, combined with the declining union targeting activity, implies a declining
rate of unionized business formation over the years.
       Consider now the predicted probability that a union organizes an establishment successfully
for the first time. These are also presented in Figures 3 and 4. In manufacturing, the probability
  41
       While the model considers a stationary environment, such a secular decline in union targeting activity can
be obtained from the model, for instance, when the cost of union organizing is rising over time, reflecting an
increasingly unfavorable environment for the unions.
  42
     While the model does not posit a specific connection between union win probability and establishment
characteristics, larger establishments may also be better in campaigning against unions in certification elections,
perhaps due to better management, organizational capabilities, and better labor conditions and compensation.
  43
     See Farber (2013) for an exploration of the trends in voter turnout in union elections and the implications
of declining union organizing on union win likelihood in elections.



                                                        28
of a union successfully organizing an establishment increases as both measures of establishment
size increase. Therefore, the decline in the likelihood of a union win as size increases is not
enough to overcome the steep increase in the likelihood of targeting. For the largest employment
(value of shipments) class, the probability of the union successfully organizing an establishment
is nearly 15 (30) times the probability in the smallest class. The likelihood of successfully
organizing an establishment in the manufacturing sector declines with age, as a consequence of
the fact that the likelihood of targeting declines with age, whereas the likelihood of a union win
in an election is not significantly diﬀerent across age categories. For the entire private sector,
the likelihood of a union successfully organizing an establishment in the largest employment
(value of shipments) category is about 12 (5) times that in the smallest category. Note also that
likelihood of a union successfully organizing an establishment has declined persistently over the
sample period, as indicated by the year eﬀects.
       Next, observe that the eﬀects of size and age on the probability of being a union establish-
ment are highly pronounced. Larger and older establishments are more likely to be unionized.
Considering the entire private sector, establishments in the largest employment (value of ship-
ments) size class are about 11 (4) times more likely to be unionized, compared with the ones
in the smallest class. In manufacturing, this relative likelihood is about 7 (12). The age eﬀects
indicate that the oldest group of establishments are about 10 times more likely to be unionized
compared with the youngest group when all sectors are considered, and 21 times more likely
in manufacturing. The relationship between unionization likelihood, on the one hand, and the
establishment size and age, on the other, provide support for Propositions 3 and 6. The year
eﬀects indicate that the probability of being unionized has declined substantially since late
1970’s. As mentioned before, this decline is in part driven by the decline in the rate of certifi-
cation elections shown in Figures 3 and 4, as the probability of a union win in a certification
remained relatively stable over. The exit of union establishments and union decertification also
contribute to deunionization. The former eﬀect is a much bigger source of union dissolution
compared with the latter, which is a rare event.44 While these two modes of union dissolution
are not the focus of this study, their eﬀects across size and age categories do not appear to be
large enough to overturn the monotonic size and age eﬀects predicted by Propositions 3 and 6.
  44
       Less than 1% of establishments that previously had a certification election experience a subsequent decer-
tification election over the sample period — see Appendix C.


                                                        29
5.2       The Eﬀects of Other Controls

       Other controls included in the model (20) have eﬀects that are generally consistent with
what was expected a priori, as can be seen in Tables 1 and 2. Establishments that are part
of a multi-unit firm and have at least one unionized sister establishment have higher odds of
experiencing union certification elections. In manufacturing, multi-unit status and having a
sister establishment that is unionized each double the odds of being targeted by a union. When
all sectors are considered, the relative odds are higher: about 55 and 35 respectively, for multi-
unit status and firm-union status. Unions win certification elections with higher probability in
cases where there is already at least one unionized establishment in a firm (37% versus 56% win
rate in manufacturing). Multi-unit status has the opposite eﬀect on the probability of union
win (44% versus 38% win rate in manufacturing), consistent with unions winning elections with
lower likelihood in larger establishments. Establishments that are part of a multi-unit firm, and
establishments that have unionized sister establishments, have higher odds of being unionized.
All sectors taken together, the predicted probability of being a union establishment is about 3
times larger if an establishment is part of a multi-unit firm. This predicted probability is also
nearly 5 times larger, if there is at least one sister establishment that is already unionized. In
manufacturing, these relative likelihoods are about 28 each.
      When state fixed eﬀects are present (as in Tables 1 and 2), the right-to-work status of a
state usually does not have a highly significant eﬀect on targeting, union win in certification
elections, or union status. With state eﬀects included, the coeﬃcient for the right-to-work law
status is identified only through a small number of states that changed their status during the
sample period. The eﬀect of the law does not seem to be estimated with precision. When state
fixed eﬀects are not included in the estimations, establishments located in states with a right-to-
work law have significantly lower odds of being targeted.45 For example, in manufacturing the
predicted marginal eﬀect of being located in a non-right-to-work law state on union targeting is
about 15 times that of being located in a right-to-work law state. Unionization odds are also
lower in right-to-work law states. In manufacturing, the predicted likelihood of being a union
establishment in a right-to-work law state is about half that in a non-right-to-work law state.
      Finally, the share of employees in an establishment eligible to vote in a certification elec-
 45
      These estimates are available upon request.



                                                    30
tion consistently tends to be negatively associated with the odds of a union win. One possible
explanation for this eﬀect is that when a large fraction of the employees are at risk of becom-
ing organized, the management in the establishment may choose to devote more resources to
thwarting the union campaign, resulting in a lower likelihood of a win for the union. In general,
the estimated eﬀects of the control variables support the view that unions use favorable signals
such as multi-unit aﬃliation, union presence in the firm, and location in a non-right-to-work-
law state to determine an establishment’s eligibility for organizing, in addition to size and age
signals.


5.3        The Eﬀects of Productivity

        Three measures of productivity are considered in turn. The first one is an establishment’s
total value of shipments per employee. The appeal of this measure is that it can be calculated
for all sectors in the private economy. The second measure is the value added per employee,
and it is available only for certain sectors. This measure is used for the manufacturing sector
for comparison with the other measures. A third measure, total factor productivity, is also
available for manufacturing.46 Total factor productivity is the ideal measure from the model’s
perspective. From an empirical point of view, however, it is the most diﬃcult to measure
and is in general subject to more measurement error than other productivity measures. All
productivity measures are computed for Economic Census years — every five years between
1977 and 2007, inclusive.47
       Table 4 presents the odds ratios obtained from the estimation of the logit model in (20)
using measures of productivity instead of establishment size, and including all other controls
as in Tables 1-3. The estimates for the control variables are generally similar to the ones in
Tables 1 and 2, and are omitted. Tables 1 and 2 give much more precise estimates for age and
other controls, and complete estimates of year eﬀects, as these estimates are based on annual
data, rather than the quinquennial observations used in Table 4. The predicted probabilities
  46
       Zoltan Wolf has kindly provided help with the data on the revenue-based total factor productivity measure,
which is calculated using the methodology in Foster, Haltiwanger and Krizan (2001) — see their work for the
details of total factor productivity calculation.
  47
     In the analysis, the highest and lowest percentiles of the distributions of all productivity measures are
trimmed to prevent any influence of likely outliers.



                                                        31
for productivity measures based on Table 4 are in Figures 5 and 6.
   Consider first the eﬀects of productivity measures on the union targeting (election) likeli-
hood. The probability of targeting increases as total value of shipments per employee increases,
both in the case of all sectors and manufacturing. In manufacturing, establishments in the
top decile are about 38 times more likely to be targeted compared with the bottom decile. In
manufacturing, there is also a rise in the likelihood of targeting as value added per employee
increases, but the eﬀects are less pronounced and the diﬀerences across productivity percentiles
are not always highly significant. The top decile of value added per employee in manufacturing
is about 27 times more likely to be targeted compared with the bottom decile. The probability
of union targeting also increases as total factor productivity increases. The top decile in manu-
facturing has about 25 times the likelihood of being targeted compared with the bottom decile.
When the entire private sector is considered in Figure 6, the diﬀerences across percentiles of
value of shipments per labor are less pronounced and not highly significant. The top decile is
about 23 times more likely to be targeted compared with the bottom decile. Overall, these
eﬀects give support to Propositions 1 and 4.
   Turn, next, to the relationship between the productivity measures and the probability of
union win in a certification election. In manufacturing, there is some decline in this probability
as productivity increases, except in the case of total factor productivity. This pattern gives some
support to Propositions 2 and 5. In manufacturing establishments experiencing a certification
election, the union win probability is about 16 (15) times higher in establishments in the
bottom decile compared with the ones in the top decile, based on the value of shipments per
employee (value added per employee). In the case of the entire private sector, the likelihood of
a union win does not appear to change significantly across productivity categories.
   The predicted probability for successfully organizing an establishment follows a similar pat-
tern to that for targeting an establishment for the first certification election. The increase in
the likelihood of targeting generally overwhelms the slight decline in the likelihood of a union
win in a certification election, leading to a positive association between productivity measures
and the likelihood of first successful union organizing in an establishment. In the manufac-
turing sector, based on the value of shipments per employee (total factor productivity) unions
are 26 (27) times more likely to successfully organize an establishment in the top decile of
productivity compared with the bottom decile. The association between successful organizing

                                                32
and productivity is somewhat weaker and is not highly significantly diﬀerent across categories
in the case of value added per employee. The top decile is about 18 times more likely to
be successfully organized compared with the bottom decile. For the entire private sector, the
estimated likelihood of successfully organizing approximately doubles going from the bottom
decile to the top decile of value of shipments per employee.
   Finally, observe that more productive establishments are also more likely to be unionized
regardless of the productivity measure. This conclusion holds for all sectors as well as man-
ufacturing. In manufacturing, establishments in the highest productivity decile are about 3,
22 and 23 times more likely to be unionized compared with the ones in the lowest decile, for
value of shipments per employee, value added, and total factor productivity, respectively. In
the entire private sector, the likelihood of unionization is about twice as high in the top decile of
value added per employee, compared with the bottom decile. The positive association between
unionization and productivity generally support Propositions 3 and 6.


5.4     Robustness Analysis and Additional Results

      Some robustness checks reinforce the patterns observed so far. First, the estimated age
eﬀects analyzed pertain to all establishments that were born in or after 1977. The estimated
year eﬀects, however, indicate that there was a much higher rate of union organizing activity
in the late 1970s and early to mid 1980s. This higher rate of organizing activity can lead
to a disproportionate targeting of young firms born in late 1970s and early 1980s, possibly
resulting in a spurious negative correlation between age and union targeting likelihood (though
the year eﬀects would absorb some of this eﬀect). As a robustness check for the age eﬀects, all
estimations were repeated after restricting the sample to the 1990-2007 period. The results are
shown in Tables D.1 and D.2 in Appendix D. All estimated odds ratios, including those for age
categories, are largely similar in magnitude and significance to those obtained in Tables 1 and
2. Therefore, the results do not seem to be driven by the much higher rate of union organizing
activity in the early part of the sample period.
   The empirical analysis controls for any general eﬀects of calendar time by using year fixed
eﬀects. However, union certification elections have been on a secular decline, especially after
1982. In this unfavorable environment, unions may be increasingly focusing on more lucrative


                                                 33
targets. The estimated odds ratios for size categories in Table D.2 indicate that between 1990-
2007 there was indeed a steeper size profile for the odds of targeting in the manufacturing
sector. Unions had even higher odds of targeting larger establishments compared to smaller
ones during this period, as opposed to the entire 1977-2007 period. To further investigate
whether the estimated eﬀects are robust across diﬀerent time periods, Table D.3 repeats the
analysis in Table 2 for two diﬀerent time periods: 1977-1982 and 2000-2007. These periods
are chosen to highlight any stark diﬀerences. During the 1977-1982 period, union organizing
activity was much more intense, with many certification elections taking place. By 2000, the
union organizing activity had already experienced a long decline, and the unions had likely
adjusted to this unfavorable environment with potentially new strategies for targeting. For
both periods, the estimated odds ratios in Table D.3 are generally consistent with the estimates
for the entire period in Table 2, and the general conclusions about size and age eﬀects remain.48
However, there are some important diﬀerences. Table D.3 points to a much steeper size profile
for the odds of targeting for the 2000-2007 period. As their environment continued to become
less favorable for organizing, unions tended to target larger establishments in manufacturing
with even higher odds. This finding is also consistent with the evidence documented by Farber
(2013) regarding the union election and voter turnout patterns in a deteriorating environment
for unions.
       Another concern is that very small establishments (those with less than 5 employees) may
be matched with some certification elections as a result of the matching algorithm, even though
these establishments may not have significant union activity associated with them. Employ-
ment, age, and other data associated with these establishments may also in general be subject
to more measurement error compared to the larger ones. In addition, many of these estab-
lishments tend to be young. The age eﬀects found may therefore be in part driven by these
establishments. As a robustness check, the estimations in Tables 1 and 2 were repeated after
excluding small firms with 1-4 employees. The results are shown in Tables D.4 and D.5 in Ap-
pendix D. The size and age eﬀects remain significant and qualitatively similar to those reported
in Tables 1 and 2.
       In results not reported, the diﬀerences in the age eﬀects for establishments of multi-unit
  48
       Note that the estimated age eﬀects for the 1977-1982 period are limited to the age groups of 0-3 and 4-6
years, as establishments born during the 1977-1982 period cannot be more than 5 years old.


                                                       34
versus single-unit firms were also explored. For this purpose, interaction variables between
the multi-unit indicator and age categories were added to the specifications in Tables 1 and 2.
For manufacturing, the age eﬀects observed in union targeting remain significant and become
even more negative for establishments of single-unit firms, but there is little evidence that age
matters much for establishments of multi-unit firms. When all private sector is considered, the
eﬀects of age are somewhat less pronounced for both types of establishments.
       Another factor that may be relevant for a union’s targeting decision is an establishment’s
ability to oﬀer wages above and beyond what it currently pays to its employees. For instance,
a productive establishment may face higher demand for unionization if its wages are below
what its productivity would imply. A full analysis of the union targeting-establishment wage
relationship is not the focus of this paper. This relationship requires a more detailed exploration.
Here, an initial look at whether unions target establishments that are able to provide higher
wages is provided based on the logistic regression framework used so far. One potential measure
of this ability is the gap between an establishment’s labor productivity and the average wage
paid to its employees. Establishments that have higher labor productivity, but pay a relatively
low average wage, oﬀer potentially a greater surplus to a union, which the latter can partially
extract by demanding higher wages. More generally, establishments that oﬀer lower wages
may also be more likely to be targeted by unions, as demand for unionization would be higher
by workers in such establishments. However, some unions may also choose to target high-
wage establishments because in such establishments a union can readily secure high wages and
benefits for its members even when the union does not have a high bargaining power. It is
well known that larger and older establishments tend to pay higher wages.49 Given that the
results so far indicate a positive association between union targeting and establishment size
measures, it may be that unions target high-wage establishments. Another consideration is
that establishments that are more likely to be targeted by a union may raise their wages to
avoid unionization.50 Such an eﬀect implies that wages cannot be treated as exogenous to the
union targeting decision.51 In addition, wages in already unionized establishments are likely not
  49
     See, e.g., Brown and Medoﬀ (1989, 2003).
  50
     See Taschereau-Dumouchel (2012) for an analysis of the union threat eﬀect.
  51
     Under this union threat eﬀect on wages, unobserved characteristics of an establishment that lead to a
higher likelihood of unionization can also imply higher wages. Therefore, the unobserved factors determining
the union’s expected net benefit from targeting could be positively correlated with wages.


                                                      35
independent of the unobservable characteristics of an establishment that lead to union presence.
An analysis of these issues of endogeneity are left for future work.
       The analysis in Table 4 was repeated using the diﬀerence between labor productivity and
the average wage in an establishment in place of productivity. The results, shown in Table
D.6, are generally similar to the productivity eﬀects. Establishments that have a larger gap
between labor productivity and average wage tend to have higher odds of being targeted by
a union. Furthermore, unions appear to have lower odds of winning a certification election
in establishments with a larger gap. Tables D.6-D.9 provide estimates of the parameters of
interest by including two measures of wages in the specifications for Tables 1 and 2. The
first specification (Tables D.7 and D.8) includes the logarithm of the average wage paid by an
establishment.52 The second specification (Tables D.9 and D.10) uses the diﬀerence between
the logarithm of the average wage and its predicted value based on observable characteristics
of an establishment.53 This measure aims to identify establishments that pay a relatively high
average wage compared to what they would be expected to oﬀer based on their characteristics.
The results in Tables D.7-D.10 indicate that conditional on size and age, establishments with
high average wage and high diﬀerence between actual and predicted average wage have higher
odds of being targeted, but, at the same time, unions have lower odds of winning elections in
establishments that oﬀer higher average wage and have larger diﬀerence between actual and
predicted average wage.



6        Discussion
        The size eﬀects in Figures 3 and 4, and the productivity eﬀects in Figures 5 and 6, are gen-
erally consistent with the main predictions of the theory. Productive and larger establishments
  52
       It should also be noted that the average wage pertains to all employees in an establishment, not just the
ones in the potential bargaining unit. The data does not allow the separate measurement of wages for the
workers that try to organize. This measurement error can be important, especially when there is a large wage
inequality among workers in an establishment. Note also that establishments with zero reported payroll are
excluded from the analysis.
  53
     The predicted (log) average wage is obtained from an establishment-level regression of the logarithm of the
average wage on employment, age, multi-unit status, right-to-work status, state, 2-digit industry, and year fixed
eﬀects.



                                                        36
are more likely to be targeted by unions, and more likely to be successfully organized despite a
lower likelihood of a union win in certification elections in such establishments. Unionization
also tends to be concentrated in productive and large establishments at any point in time. The
age eﬀects in Figures 3 and 4 also indicate that unions generally organize in establishments
when they are younger, consistent with the learning process in the proposed model.
       The productivity eﬀects are generally much less pronounced and statistically less significant
than the size eﬀects. This result is not an artifact of the way size and productivity categories
are chosen to generate the estimates. The relatively weaker eﬀects of productivity are appar-
ent even when the estimates of the size eﬀects in Figures 3 and 4 are obtained for the same
percentile categories used for the productivity measures.54 There are several reasons why the
productivity eﬀects may be weaker than size eﬀects. The productivity eﬀects are estimated us-
ing much smaller samples (about 20% of the samples in the case of the size eﬀects), decreasing
the precision of the estimates to some degree. Productivity measures also contain more mea-
surement error than size measures, as they confound the measurement errors in employment,
revenue, and the costs of inputs. In addition, measures of current productivity and current size
need not always be strongly related. Suppose there are adjustment costs for capital or labor.
Then, a temporary fall in productivity may not be associated with a decline in size.55 It is
also possible that unions care more about size (employment) than the underlying productivity
of an establishment. In particular, unions that value broader employment for their members
would target businesses that are large, but not necessarily highly productive. Moreover, unions
may be using establishment size and sales as a stronger indicator of eligibility for organizing,
as they are much easier to observe than productivity. Theoretically speaking, there should
exist a weaker relationship between unionization and labor productivity, as measured by the
value of shipments per worker. For instance, imagine an environment where non-unionized
  54
       For instance, when employment is measured in categories of percentiles, the top decile has 30 times the
odds of being targeted compared to the bottom decile in manufacturing. From an expository point of view, size
measures expressed in terms of the absolute-value categories of employment and the value of shipments/receipts
are more readily interpreted than percentiles.
  55
     These adjustment costs may also apply to the “customer capital” of a firm. In models of stochastic customer
acquisition under informational frictions, such as Fishman and Rob (2002) or Dinlersoz and Yorukoglu (2012),
larger firms need not necessarily have high current productivity. In general, size and productivity can also have
diﬀerent levels of persistence.



                                                       37
establishments choose employment given an exogenous competitive wage common across all es-
tablishments. In such a case, non-unionized establishments with diﬀerent levels of total factor
productivity would hire labor up to the point where the marginal product of labor is equal
(to the common wage) across establishments. Labor productivity would then not be related to
underlying total factor productivity.56 Hence, it may not be related to the patterns of union
targeting. One way to gauge the relative importance of size and productivity in union activity
is to include both measures simultaneously in the estimations. Tables D.11 and D.12 repeat
the analysis in Tables 1 and 2 by including both size (employment) and labor productivity (the
value of shipments per worker) together in the estimations. These head-to-head comparisons
indicate that size retains its sign and significance as in Tables 1 and 2, but labor productivity
eﬀects tend to be weaker, especially when all sectors are considered together. In manufacturing,
however, the size and productivity eﬀects still retain their signs and significance.
       Note also that size and productivity eﬀects are generally much stronger and statistically more
significant in manufacturing than in the entire private sector. These diﬀerences may be driven
by a number of reasons. One reason is the diﬀerences in the size distribution of establishments
across sectors. In manufacturing, there is a higher fraction of very large establishments and
a smaller fraction of small ones, compared with sectors such as retail or services. The higher
dispersion of establishment size in manufacturing implies that the size eﬀects may be stronger
and more pronounced across size categories. Another reason may be the stronger tradition
of unionization in manufacturing than the rest of the economy. During the sample period
1977-2007, manufacturing employment exhibited an average union membership rate of 208%
whereas the corresponding figure in the entire private sector was 124%57 The higher level of
union activity in manufacturing suggests that unions in manufacturing may be more experienced
in identifying and organizing establishments that are more productive.
       The model emphasizes union learning as a potential mechanism behind the unionization
process. The age eﬀects documented in the data are consistent with this mechanism. There
may be alternative explanations for why age matters, though. For instance, unions may target
  56
       As an example, take a production function of the form    where  is labor and  is the total factor
productivity. If the wage is  then the first-order condition for labor is  −1 = . Labor productivity is
then  which will be common across firms even if total productivity diﬀers.
  57
     See the Union Membership and Coverage Database at www.unionstats.com.



                                                        38
younger businesses in part because management in such businesses may be inexperienced and
less aware of union strategies. It may be easier for unions to organize such young businesses,
as management opposition would be less intense, eﬀectively lowering the cost of organizing and
also potentially increasing the likelihood of a union win in a certification election.
    The theory and empirics abstracted from establishment exit. Note, however, that the esti-
mated probabilities of being a union establishment embed the eﬀects of unions on exit likelihood.
If, for instance, unionization increases the likelihood of exit, the steady-state rate of unioniza-
tion in the establishment population would be lower than in the case where unions had no eﬀect
on exit. These considerations, however, do not lead to empirical patterns that are inconsistent
with the model’s predictions. The analysis also assumed away union decertification. The rate
of decertification in the population of unionized establishments is reflected in the estimated
rate of unionization. Because decertifications are rare, they do not seem to have a large eﬀect
on the overall rate of unionization, and the relationship between unionization and size, age, or
productivity.



7     Conclusion
     Despite the long presence of union activity in the U.S., there has been a lack of systematic
evidence on which types of businesses unions select for organizing and when. A dynamic model
of union learning and organizing is proposed here to analyze the nature of union activity. A
union monitors establishments in an industry to learn about their underlying unknown produc-
tivity over time. Based on the learning process, it decides which firms are the most lucrative for
organizing. The model predicts that the union organizes productive and larger establishments
at any given age, and younger ones at any given size or productivity level. In the model, the
union’s benefit from organizing an establishment is increasing in the establishment’s productiv-
ity, because a more productive establishment can provide higher wages and larger employment
to the union. Establishment age also matters because the union’s information about productiv-
ity becomes more precise over time. Thus, the probability of obtaining a high level of benefits
that occur in the right tail of the productivity distribution diminish as an establishment ages.
Conditional on size, an older establishment then generates a lower expected benefit to the
union, at least when benefits are convex in productivity. A convex benefit function emerges

                                                39
in a wide variety of models of firm-union conduct. The likelihood of being targeted by the
union therefore declines with age, conditional on size. Furthermore, conditional on targeting
an establishment, the union has a lower expected probability of winning a certification election
when the establishment targeted is more productive or larger.
      The data on NLRB union elections matched with establishment-level data from U.S. Census
Bureau’s LBD and EC data generally support the model’s predictions. The main message is
that there are clear selection eﬀects in union organizing. First, unions tend to target large
and productive establishments early in their life-cycles. Second, unions are less likely to win
certification elections in larger and more productive establishments, conditional on targeting.
This second eﬀect is generally dominated by the first one, resulting in a positive relationship
between successful union organizing and productivity, as well as size. Size, age, and productivity
eﬀects appear to be more pronounced in the manufacturing sector, where unions have been
traditionally stronger.
      The selection eﬀects documented here are relevant for studies on the eﬀect of unions on firm-
and establishment-level outcomes. Unionized establishments are not a random sample of the
establishment population. If post-unionization outcomes depend on size, age, and productivity
around the time of unionization, this selection matters. The eﬀect of unions on the economy
overall, and on its individual sectors, can also depend on the nature of this selection. To the
extent that unions target larger, more productive firms in an economy, any eﬀects of unions on
business outcomes may be amplified. For instance, the decline of manufacturing could have been
influenced by the presence of unions in larger establishments. Increasing global competition
has been putting downward pressure on the profitability of all manufacturing establishments,
but especially the larger ones that produce basic goods highly substitutable with imports,
leading to their downsizing or exit.58 Whether unions have been able to extract rents from
such establishments and reduce their profitability, and hence have accelerated the decline in
manufacturing, is still an open question. For example, Dinardo and Lee (2004) find little eﬀect
of unions on the survival of relatively large manufacturing establishments, a result that may
in part be driven by the selection of unions into large, productive establishments. These large
establishments may be able to withstand any adverse eﬀects of unions on survival. Future
work can quantify the potentially disparate eﬀects of unions on small and medium versus large
 58
      See Holmes (2011).


                                                 40
establishments by using the comprehensive dataset constructed in this study. The decline in
manufacturing itself may have led to fewer targets for unions, as larger establishments have
gradually disappeared. The role of such eﬀects in the decline of unionization can also be
assessed. Finally, studies of unionization at the micro level can use the results and estimates
in this paper as a guide in constructing models of the unionization process consistent with the
patterns observed in the data.



References
 [1] Acemoglu, Daron, Aghion, Philippe and Giovanni L. Violante. 2001. “Deunionization,
    Technical Change and Inequality.” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy.
    55(1): 229-264.

 [2] Acikgoz, Omer T. and Baris Kaymak. 2012. “A Macroeconomic Analysis of the Rising Skill
    Premium and Deunionization in the United States.” forthcoming in Journal of Monetary
    Economics.

 [3] Addison, John and Hirsch, Barry. 1989. “Union Eﬀects on Productivity, Profits, and
    Growth: Has the Long Run Arrived?”, Journal of Labor Economics, 7(1): 72-105.

 [4] Alder, Simeon, Lagakos, David and Lee Ohanian. 2013. “The Decline of the U.S. Rust
    Belt: A Macroeconomic Analysis.” Manuscript, Arizona State University.

 [5] Brown, Charles, and James L. Medoﬀ. 1989. “The Employer Size-Wage Eﬀect”, Journal
    of Political Economy, 97(5): 1027-1059.

 [6] Brown, Charles, and James L. Medoﬀ. 2003. “Firm Age and Wages”, Journal of Labor
    Economics, 21(3): 677-698.

 [7] Calvo, Guillermo A. 1978. “Urban Unemployment and Wage Determination in LDC’S:
    Trade Unions in the Harris-Todaro Model”, International Economic Review, 19(1): 65-81.

 [8] Dinardo, John, and David Lee. 2004. “Economic Impacts of New Unionization on Private
    Sector Employers: 1984-2001”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(4): 1383-1441.



                                              41
 [9] Dinlersoz, Emin and Jeremy Greenwood. 2013. “The Rise and Fall of Unions in the U.S.”
    NBER working paper #18079.

[10] Dinlersoz, Emin and Mehmet Yorukoglu. 2012. “Information and Industry Dynamics.”
    American Economic Review, 102(2): 884-913.

[11] Dinlersoz, Emin and Ruben Hernandez-Murillo. 2002. “Did ‘Right-to-Work’ Work for
    Idaho?”, The Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, May, pp. 29-42.

[12] Dunlop, John T. 1944. Wage Determination under Trade Unions. The MacMillan Com-
    pany.

[13] Dunne, Tim, Roberts, Mark and Larry Samuelson. 1989. “The Growth And Failure Of
    U.S. Manufacturing Plants.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 104(4): 671-698.

[14] Farber, Henry. 2013. “Union Organizing Decisions in a Deteriorating Environment: The
    Composition of Representation Elections and the Decline in Turnout”, Working Paper
    #577, Industrial Relations Section, Princeton University.

[15] Farber, Henry and Bruce Western. 2001. “Accounting for the Decline of Unions in the
    Private Sector, 1973-1998.” Journal of Labor Research, 22(3): 459-485.

[16] Ferguson, J. P. 2008. “The Eyes of the Needles: A Sequential Model of Union Organizing
    Drives, 1999 - 2004.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 62(1): 1-18.

[17] Fishman, Arthur and Rafael Rob. 2002. “Consumer Inertia, Firm Growth and Industry
    Dynamics”, Journal of Economic Theory, 109(1): 24-38.

[18] Foster, Lucia, Haltiwanger, John, and C. J. Krizan. 2001. “Aggregate Productivity Growth.
    Lessons from Microeconomic Evidence”, in New Developments in Productivity Analysis,
    National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

[19] Freeman, Richard B. and James Medoﬀ. 1984. What do Unions Do?. Basic Books, New
    York.

[20] Frandsen, Brigham. 2013. “The Surprising Impacts of Unionization on Establishments: Ac-
    counting for Selection in Close Union Representation Elections”, Manuscript. Department
    of Economics, Brigham Young University.

                                             42
[21] Hadar, Josef and William R. Russell. 1971. “Stochastic Dominance and Diversification.”
    Journal of Economic Theory, 3 (3): 288—305.

[22] Hirsch, Barry and David MacPherson. 2003. “Union Membership and Coverage Database
    from the Current Population Survey: Note.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 56(2),
    349-354.

[23] Holmes, Thomas J. 1998. “The Eﬀects of State Policies on the Location of Industry:
    Evidence from State Borders.” Journal of Political Economy, 106 (4): 667-705.

[24] Holmes, Thomas J. 2006. “Geographic Spillover of Unionism.” NBER Working Paper
    12025, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

[25] Holmes, Thomas J. 2011. “The Case of the Disappearing Large-Employer Manufacturing
    Plants: Not Much of a Mystery After All”, Economic Policy Paper 11-4, Federal Reserve
    Bank of Minneapolis.

[26] Jovanovic, Boyan. 1982. “Selection and the Evolution of Industry.” Econometrica, 50 (3):
    649-670.

[27] Karlin, Samuel and Herman Rubin. 1956. “The Theory of Decision Procedures for Dis-
    tributions with Monotone Likelihood Ratio”, Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 27 (2):
    272-299.

[28] Krusell, Per and Leena Rudanko. 2013. “Unions in a Frictional Labor Market.” NBER
    working paper #18218.

[29] Lee, David, and Alexandra Mas. 2012. “Long Run Impacts of Unions on Firms: New
    Evidence from Financial Markets, 1961-1999”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(1),
    333-378.

[30] Manning, Alan. 1987. “An Integration of Trade Union Models in a Sequential Bargaining
    Framework.” The Economic Journal, 97: 121-139.

[31] Manning, Alan. 1994. “How Robust is the Microeconomic Theory of the Trade Union?.”
    Journal of Labor Economics, 12(3): 430-458.


                                             43
[32] McDonald, I. M., and Robert M. Solow. 1981. “Wage Bargaining and Employment.” Amer-
    ican Economic Review, 71: 896-908.

[33] Milgrom, Paul. 1981. “Good News and Bad News: Representation Theorems and Appli-
    cations”, The Bell Journal of Economics, 12(2): 380-391.

[34] Nickell, Stephen J. 1982. “A Bargaining Model of the Phillips Curve.” LSE Centre for
    Labour Economics Discussion Paper.

[35] Oswald, Andrew J. 1982. “The Microeconomic Theory of the Trade Union.” Economic
    Journal, 92: 269-283.

[36] Rosen, Sherwin. 1969. “Trade Union Power, Threat Eﬀects and the Extent of Organiza-
    tion”, Review of Economic Studies, 36(2):185-196.

[37] Schmitz, Jr, James A. 2005. “What Determines Productivity? Lessons From the Dramatic
    Recovery of the U.S. and Canadian Iron Ore Industries Following Their Early 1980s Crisis.”
    Journal of Political Economy 113: 582-625.

[38] Stokey, Nancy L, and Robert E. Lucas. 1989. Recursive Methods in Economic Dynamics.
    Third Ed. Harvard University Press. Cambridge, MA.

[39] Taschereau-Dumouchel, Mathieu. 2011. “The Union Threat.” Manuscript. The Wharton
    School, University of Pennsylvania.

[40] Voos, Paula. 1984. “Trends in Union Organizing Expenditures, 1953-1977.” Industrial and
    Labor Relations Review, 38(1): 52-63.




                                             44
              Table 1. Odds ratios based on logit model estimates — All Sectors
                                    (Size (employment) and age eﬀects)
Event:                          Certification:                   Successful           Union
                                Election Win                     Organizing Status
Probability:                      (  )       (  )  (  )               (  )
10-19 employees                  266 ∗∗∗        075 ∗∗∗         348 ∗∗∗             246 ∗∗∗
                                [0038]          [0023]         [0074]              [0043]

20-49 employees                  444 ∗∗∗        059 ∗∗∗         556 ∗∗∗             402 ∗∗∗
                                [0063]          [0019]         [0118]              [0080]

50-99 employees                  646 ∗∗∗        049 ∗∗∗         773 ∗∗∗             611 ∗∗∗
                                [0109]          [0019]         [0198]              [0143]

100-249 employees                829 ∗∗∗        043 ∗∗∗         946 ∗∗∗             804 ∗∗∗
                                [0152]          [0018]         [0226]              [0215]

250-499 employees                925 ∗∗∗        039 ∗∗∗        1074∗∗∗              875 ∗∗∗
                                [0263]          [0027]          [0455]             [0341]

500+ employees                  1024∗∗∗         027 ∗∗∗        1184∗∗∗             1149∗∗∗
                                 [0366]         [0024]          [0628]              [0624]

4-6 years                        082 ∗∗∗        104 ∗           088 ∗∗∗             258 ∗∗∗
                                [0010]          [0046]         [0016]              [0023]

7-9 years                        075 ∗∗∗        100             081 ∗∗∗             385 ∗∗∗
                                [0011]          [0033]         [0017]              [0046]
                                        ∗∗∗             ∗∗               ∗∗∗
10-12 years                      069            109             078                 494 ∗∗∗
                                [0012]          [0043]         [0019]              [0069]

13-15 years                      068 ∗∗∗        098             075 ∗∗∗             626 ∗∗∗
                                [0014]          [0046]         [0022]              [0100]

16-18 years                      064 ∗∗∗        103             074 ∗∗∗             765 ∗∗∗
                                [0016]          [0060]         [0026]              [0139]

19-21 years                      063 ∗∗∗        101             071 ∗∗∗             922 ∗∗∗
                                [0020]          [0071]         [0031]              [0191]

22-24 years                      059 ∗∗∗        093             067 ∗∗∗            1084∗∗∗
                                [0024]          [0088]         [0038]               [0263]

25+ years                        057 ∗∗∗        106             062 ∗∗∗            1317∗∗∗
                                [0029]          [0129]         [0043]               [0400]
                                        ∗∗∗             ∗∗∗              ∗∗∗
Multi-unit status                492            044             329                 305 ∗∗∗
                                [0063]          [0012]         [0061]              [0063]
                                        ∗∗∗             ∗∗∗              ∗∗∗
Firm union status                340            545             551                 504 ∗∗∗
                                [0029]          [0142]         [0062]              [0063]

Right-to-work status             088 ∗          089             083 ∗               093
                                [0054]          [0106]         [0051]              [0051]

Eligible employees % −                           075 ∗∗∗        −                    −
                                                 [0005]

Notes: Robust standard errors, clustered by establishment, are in brackets. (*), (**), (***) indicates

significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively. Models include 2-digit SIC industry, state, and year fixed eﬀects.

The following categories are omitted: 1-9 employees and 0-3 years of age.
           Table 2. Odds ratios based on logit model estimates — Manufacturing
                                    (Size (employment) and age eﬀects)
Event:                          Certification:                   Successful           Union
                                Election Win                     Organizing Status
Probability:                      (  )       (  )  (  )               (  )
10-19 employees                  579 ∗∗∗        063 ∗∗∗         646 ∗∗∗             278 ∗∗∗
                                [0290]          [0070]         [0475]              [0132]

20-49 employees                 1445∗∗∗         049 ∗∗∗        1475∗∗∗              565 ∗∗∗
                                 [0663]         [0050]          [1014]             [0280]

50-99 employees                 2505∗∗∗         037 ∗∗∗        2173∗∗∗              858 ∗∗∗
                                 [1265]         [0040]          [1691]             [0489]

100-249 employees               3169∗∗∗         028 ∗∗∗        2335∗∗∗              972 ∗∗∗
                                 [1692]         [0031]          [1954]             [0619]

250-499 employees               3282∗∗∗         025 ∗∗∗        2372∗∗∗              891 ∗∗∗
                                 [2163]         [0036]          [2548]             [0743]

500+ employees                  2298∗∗∗         017 ∗∗∗        1496∗∗∗              711 ∗∗∗
                                 [1964]         [0035]          [2194]             [0838]

4-6 years                        085 ∗∗∗        087 ∗∗          078 ∗∗∗             268 ∗∗∗
                                [0028]          [0060]         [0040]              [0681]

7-9 years                        077 ∗∗∗        089             073 ∗∗∗             418 ∗∗∗
                                [0030]          [0073]         [0046]              [0152]
                                        ∗∗∗             ∗                ∗∗∗
10-12 years                      068            104             071                 583 ∗∗∗
                                [0032]          [0103]         [0052]              [0256]

13-15 years                      066 ∗∗∗        078 ∗∗          057 ∗∗∗             775 ∗∗∗
                                [0035]          [0097]         [0055]              [0393]

16-18 years                      064 ∗∗∗        098             063 ∗∗∗            1002∗∗∗
                                [0043]          [0140]         [0069]               [0583]

19-21 years                      062 ∗∗∗        108             064 ∗∗∗            1284∗∗∗
                                [0052]          [0188]         [0084]               [0861]
                                        ∗∗∗             ∗∗               ∗∗∗
22-24 years                      053            052             038                1594∗∗∗
                                [0062]          [0136]         [0080]               [1248]

25+ years                        057 ∗∗∗        119             059 ∗∗∗            2062∗∗∗
                                [0086]          [0379]         [0132]               [1969]
                                        ∗∗∗             ∗∗∗              ∗∗∗
Multi-unit status                209            078             192                 278 ∗∗∗
                                [0067]          [0043]         [0095]              [0143]
                                        ∗∗∗             ∗∗∗              ∗∗∗
Firm-union status                201            216             282                 284 ∗∗
                                [0066]          [0156]         [0136]              [0109]

Right-to-work status             085            098             083                 099
                                [0112]          [0274]         [0177]              [0110]

Eligible employees % −                           078 ∗∗∗        −                    −
                                                 [0017]

Notes: Robust standard errors, clustered by establishment, are in brackets. (*), (**), (***) indicates

significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively. Models include 2-digit SIC industry, state, and year fixed eﬀects.

The following categories are omitted: 1-9 employees and 0-3 years of age.
                Table 3. Odds ratios based on logit model estimates
                        (Size (value of shipments/receipts) eﬀects)
Event:                  Certification:                   Successful          Union
                        Election Win                     Organizing Status
Probability:              (  )      (  )  (  )                (  )
                 All Sectors (Value of Shipments or Receipts)
$250-500K               113 ∗∗∗        106             168 ∗∗∗             124 ∗∗∗
                        [0042]         [0085]          [0097]              [0029]

$500K-1M                121 ∗∗∗        087 ∗           181 ∗∗∗             135 ∗∗∗
                        [0047]         [0072]          [0111]              [0034]

$1M-2.5M                172 ∗∗         073 ∗∗∗         244 ∗∗∗             186 ∗∗∗
                        [0066]         [0060]          [0151]              [0047]

$2.5-5M                 249 ∗∗∗        054 ∗∗∗         337 ∗∗∗             299 ∗∗∗
                        [0107]         [0053]          [0234]              [0084]

$5-10M                  300 ∗∗∗        049 ∗∗∗         399 ∗∗∗             387 ∗∗∗
                        [0138]         [0052]          [0298]              [0116]

$10M+                   374 ∗∗∗        034 ∗∗∗         495 ∗∗∗             443 ∗∗∗
                        [0160]         [0036]          [0350]              [0135]

                        Manufacturing (Value of shipments)
$250-500K               203 ∗∗∗        123             214 ∗∗∗             087
                        [0428]         [0603]          [0631]              [0088]

$500K-1M                609 ∗∗∗        143             738 ∗∗∗             194 ∗∗∗
                        [1034]         [0555]          [1744]              [0166]

$1M-2.5M                1224∗∗∗        087             1124∗∗∗             396 ∗∗∗
                        [1915]         [0308]          [2526]              [0300]

$2.5-5M                 2389∗∗∗        068             1908∗∗∗             661 ∗∗∗
                        [3856]         [0237]          [4605]              [0522]

$5-10M                  3142∗∗∗        056 ∗           2242∗∗∗             878 ∗∗∗
                        [5315]         [0196]          [5762]              [0731]

$10M+                   4878∗∗∗        042 ∗∗∗         2997∗∗∗             1118∗∗∗
                        [8374]         [0141]          [7900]              [0959]

Notes: Robust standard errors, clustered by establishment, are in brackets. (*), (**), (***) indicates

significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively. Models include all other explanatory variables

in Tables 1 and 2. The following categories are omitted: $0-250K value of shipments and 0-3 years of age..
             Table 4. Odds ratios based on logit model estimates
                                     (Productivity eﬀects)
Event:                    Certification:                    Successful           Union
                          Election Win                      Organizing Status
Probability:                (  )       (  )  (  )                (  )
   All Sectors (Value of shipments or Receipts per employee)
11-25 percentile           089            046 ∗           059                 121
                          [0255]          [0203]          [0203]              [0213]

26-50 percentile           176 ∗∗         068             139                 166 ∗∗∗
                          [0461]          [0237]          [0530]              [0215]

51-75 percentile           196 ∗∗∗        074             186                 216 ∗∗∗
                          [0511]          [0313]          [0752]              [0239]

76-90 percentile           153 ∗          097             138                 201 ∗∗∗
                          [0359]          [0421]          [0537]              [0246]

91-100 percentile          227 ∗∗         132             216 ∗               215 ∗∗∗
                          [0802]          [0781]          [0984]              [0384]

          Manufacturing (Value of shipments per employee)
11-25 percentile           180 ∗∗∗        066             162 ∗∗              122 ∗∗
                          [0274]          [0221]          [0356]              [0107]
                                  ∗∗∗                              ∗∗∗
26-50 percentile           298            067             257                 178 ∗∗∗
                          [0393]          [0199]          [0479]              [0132]

51-75 percentile           291 ∗∗∗        059 ∗           231 ∗∗∗             209 ∗∗∗
                          [0388]          [0176]          [0438]              [0150]

76-90 percentile           354 ∗∗∗        038 ∗∗∗         215 ∗∗∗             246 ∗∗∗
                          [0485]          [0118]          [0435]              [0177]

91-100 percentile          388 ∗∗∗        043 ∗∗∗         257 ∗∗∗             293 ∗∗∗
                          [0534]          [0135]          [0506]              [0218]

               Manufacturing (Value added per employee)
11-25 percentile           196 ∗∗∗        070             176 ∗∗∗             144 ∗∗∗
                          [0277]          [0211]          [0357]              [0113]

26-50 percentile           245 ∗∗∗        072             215 ∗∗∗             185 ∗∗∗
                          [0315]          [0200]          [0394]              [0126]
                                  ∗∗∗                ∗∗            ∗∗∗
51-75 percentile           226            051             161                 197 ∗∗∗
                          [0297]          [0146]          [0310]              [0131]

76-90 percentile           240 ∗∗∗        056 ∗∗          182 ∗∗∗             204 ∗∗∗
                          [0342]          [0172]          [0383]              [0139]

91-100 percentile          265 ∗∗∗        048 ∗∗∗         177 ∗∗∗             217 ∗∗∗
                          [0376]          [0146]          [0380]              [0153]

                 Manufacturing (Total factor productivity)
11-25 percentile           133 ∗∗∗        094             133 ∗               106
                          [0136]          [0212]          [0220]              [0077]

26-50 percentile           166 ∗∗∗        086             158 ∗∗∗             128 ∗∗∗
                          [0153]          [0181]          [0238]              [0097]

51-75 percentile           221 ∗∗∗        080             198 ∗∗∗             161 ∗∗∗
                          [0198]          [0163]          [0290]              [0124]
                                  ∗∗∗                              ∗∗∗
76-90 percentile           226            087             211                 172 ∗∗∗
                          [0211]          [0183]          [0322]              [0138]

91-100 percentile          254 ∗∗∗        108             270 ∗∗∗             233 ∗∗∗
                          [0242]          [0231]          [0417]              [0204]

Notes: Robust standard errors, clustered by establishment, are in brackets. (*), (**), (***) indicates

significance at the 10%, 5%, 1% level, respectively. Models include all other explanatory variables in

Tables 1 and 2. The 1-10 percentile category is omitted.
          Figure 1. Information requested by UAW in online applications for union organizing
                   (as of October 21, 2013)




Do you want to know more about joining the UAW?
If so, we need some basic information so we can provide the best possible support and assistance to you and your co-workers.

ALL INFORMATION IS CONFIDENTIAL!
In order to respond all fields are required except those marked optional.

An organizer will contact you within the next ten business days. Thanks for your interest!

If you prefer, you can call the UAW Organizing Department at 1-800 2GET-UAW (1-800-243-8829). You'll be connected to (or get a call
back from) a UAW organizer who can answer questions and tell you what it takes to organize a union at your workplace.

Your Name:


Your Address:


Your City:


Your State/Province: *


Email Address: *


Phone: include area code: *


Cell Phone (optional):


Best time to return your call: *


About the company

Name of your employer: *


Parent company, if any (optional):


City: *


State/Prov: *


Number of employees (best guess): *



                                                                                             http://www.uaw.org/content/contact-uaw-organizing
                                               Figure 1. Continued.

Product or Service: *


The employer's main customers: *




Does your employer have more than one workplace?: *

   Yes
   No

Are other workplaces owned by the employer organized by the UAW?: *

   Yes
   No

Are other workplaces owned by the employer organized by another union?: *

   Yes
   No

Is there another union involved at your workplace?: *

   Yes
   No

Have there been previous attempts to organize at your workplace?: *

   Yes
   No

Please describe what needs to be improved at your workplace.: *




UAW Solidarity House | 8000 East Jefferson Avenue
Detroit, Michigan 48214 | p. (313) 926-5000

© Copyright 2013 UAW. All Rights Reserved.
                                 Figure 2. The union’s timing of events and decisions for an age-a establishment



                                                                  U          A unionized establishment



                                                        Observe
     Enter the period
                                                        current                                         Obtain
                                                                                                                              Update the prior
    with the prior, µa‐1,
U                                                     productivity,                                                            for xa+1 to µa                   U
        for current                                                                                   benefit, B(xa)
      productivity, xa                                     xa




                                                                      N      A non‐unionized establishment




                                            Certification             Win                                    Obtain
                                                                                                                                                                U
                                              election            (Prob. ωa)                               benefit, B(xa)


      Enter the period         Target                                                   Observe
        with the win                                                                    current                             Update the
    probability, ωa, and
                                                                                      productivity,                          prior for
N    the prior, µa‐1, for
                                                                                           xa                                xa+1 to µa
          current                                                     Lose                                                                        Observe
      productivity, xa      Do not target                        (Prob. 1‐ ωa)                                                                     the win
                                                                                                                                                 probability,
                                                                                                             Obtain no
                                                                                                                                                     ωa+1       N
                                                                                                              benefit
                                                     Figure 3. Predicted probabilities of union activity in manufacturing establishments −− Size, Age, and Year Effects
                                          Size (Employment)                                       Size (Value of shipments)                                                          Age                                                      Year
                                                       Election, T                                                      Election, T                                                 Election, T                                               Election, T




                                                                                                                                                          .0012
                           .006




                                                                                          .005




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .003
                                                                                                                                                          .001
                           .004




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .002
                                                                                                                                                          .0008
                           .002




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .001
                                                                                                                                                          .0006
                                                                                                                                                          .0004
                           0




                                                                                          0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0
                                   1−9   10−19     20−49   50−99 100−249 250−499   500+       0−2.5    2.5−5     5−10    10−25   25−50    50−100   100+           0−3   4−6   7−9 10−12 13−15 16−18 19−21 22−24 25+           1980   1985    1990      1995        2000   2005


                                                     Election win, W                                               Election win, W                                                 Election win, W                                          Election win, W




                                                                                          .8




                                                                                                                                                          .6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .5
                           .6
                           .5




                                                                                          .6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .4
                                                                                                                                                          .4
                           .4
Predicted probability




                                                                                          .4
                           .3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .3
                           .2




                                                                                                                                                          .2
                                                                                          .2




                                   1−9   10−19     20−49   50−99 100−249 250−499   500+       0−2.5    2.5−5     5−10    10−25   25−50    50−100   100+           0−3   4−6   7−9 10−12 13−15 16−18 19−21 22−24 25+           1980   1985    1990      1995        2000   2005


                                                 Successful organizing, O                                      Successful organizing, O                                       Successful organizing, O                                  Successful organizing, O




                                                                                                                                                          .0005




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .0015
                           .002




                                                                                          .0015




                                                                                                                                                          .0004
                           .0015




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .001
                                                                                          .001




                                                                                                                                                          .0003
                           .001




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .0005
                                                                                          .0005




                                                                                                                                                          .0002
                           .0005




                                                                                                                                                          .0001
                           0




                                                                                          0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0
                                   1−9   10−19     20−49   50−99 100−249 250−499   500+       0−2.5    2.5−5     5−10    10−25   25−50    50−100   100+           0−3   4−6   7−9 10−12 13−15 16−18 19−21 22−24 25+           1980   1985    1990      1995        2000   2005


                                                     Union status, U                                               Union status, U                                                Union status, U                                           Union status, U
                           .015




                                                                                          .015




                                                                                                                                                          .03




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .015
                           .01




                                                                                          .01




                                                                                                                                                          .02




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .01
                           .005




                                                                                          .005




                                                                                                                                                          .01




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .005
                           0




                                                                                          0




                                                                                                                                                          0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0
                                   1−9   10−19     20−49   50−99 100−249 250−499   500+       0−2.5    2.5−5     5−10    10−25   25−50    50−100   100+           0−3   4−6   7−9 10−12 13−15 16−18 19−21 22−24 25+           1980   1985    1990      1995        2000   2005

                                                   Employees                                          Value of shipments ($100K)                                                 Age (years)                                                   Year
                        Note: Dashed curves indicate 95% pointwise confidence intervals.
                                                      Figure 4. Predicted probabilities of union activity in private sector establishments −− Size, Age, and Year Effects
                                          Size (Employment)                                       Size (Value of shipments)                                                                                          Age                                                      Year
                                                      Election, T                                                       Election, T                                                                                  Election, T                                              Election, T
                           .002




                                                                                          .001




                                                                                                                                                              .00035




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .0008
                           .0015




                                                                                          .0008




                                                                                                                                                              .0003




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .0006
                                                                                          .0006
                           .001




                                                                                                                                                              .00025




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .0004
                           .0005




                                                                                          .0004




                                                                                                                                                              .0002




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .0002
                                                                                          .0002
                           0




                                   1−9   10−19     20−49   50−99 100−249 250−499   500+       0−2.5    2.5−5     5−10     10−25       25−50   50−100   100+                                       0−3   4−6   7−9 10−12 13−15 16−18 19−21 22−24 25+           1980   1985    1990      1995        2000   2005


                                                      Election win, W                                              Election win, W                                                                                 Election win, W                                           Election win, W
                           .6




                                                                                          .6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .7
                                                                                                                                                              .55
                           .5




                                                                                          .5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .6
                                                                                                                                                              .5
Predicted probability

                           .4




                                                                                          .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .5
                                                                                                                                                              .45
                           .3




                                                                                          .3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .4
                                   1−9   10−19     20−49   50−99 100−249 250−499   500+       0−2.5    2.5−5     5−10     10−25       25−50   50−100   100+                                       0−3   4−6   7−9 10−12 13−15 16−18 19−21 22−24 25+           1980   1985    1990      1995        2000   2005


                                                 Successful organizing, O                                      Successful organizing, O                                                                       Successful organizing, O                                  Successful organizing, O




                                                                                                                                                              .00008 .0001 .00012 .00014 .00016
                           .001




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .0004
                                                                                          .0004




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .0003
                                                                                          .0003
                           .0005




                                                                                          .0002




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .0002
                                                                                          .0001




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .0001
                           0




                                   1−9   10−19     20−49   50−99 100−249 250−499   500+       0−2.5    2.5−5     5−10     10−25       25−50   50−100   100+                                       0−3   4−6   7−9 10−12 13−15 16−18 19−21 22−24 25+           1980   1985    1990      1995        2000   2005


                                                     Union status, U                                               Union status, U                                                                                Union status, U                                           Union status, U
                           .008




                                                                                          .004




                                                                                                                                                              .006




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .004
                           .006




                                                                                          .003




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .003
                                                                                                                                                              .004
                           .004




                                                                                          .002




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .002
                                                                                                                                                              .002
                           .002




                                                                                          .001




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .001
                           0




                                                                                                                                                              0




                                   1−9   10−19     20−49   50−99 100−249 250−499   500+       0−2.5    2.5−5     5−10     10−25       25−50   50−100   100+                                       0−3   4−6   7−9 10−12 13−15 16−18 19−21 22−24 25+           1980   1985    1990      1995        2000   2005

                                                    Employees                                         Value of shipments ($100K)                                                                                 Age (years)                                                   Year
                        Note: Dashed curves indicate 95% pointwise confidence intervals.
                                                                 Figure 5. Predicted probabilities of union activity in manufacturing establishments −− Productivity effects
                                                   Value of shipments per employee                                     Value added per employee                                                        Total factor productivity
                                                                   Election, T                                                       Election, T                                                                 Election, T
                            .0005 .001 .0015




                                                                                                        .0015




                                                                                                                                                                        .001 .002 .003 .004
                                                                                                        .001
                                                                                                        .0005
                            0




                                                  1−10   11−25    26−50     51−75      76−90   91−100           1−10     11−25    26−50    51−75       76−90   91−100                           1−10   11−25    26−50     51−75       76−90   91−100


                                                                 Election win, W                                                 Election win, W                                                               Election win, W




                                                                                                                                                                        .5
                                                                                                        .6
                            .6




                                                                                                                                                                        .4
Predicted probability




                                                                                                        .4
                            .4
                            .2




                                                                                                        .2




                                                                                                                                                                        .3
                                                  1−10   11−25    26−50     51−75      76−90   91−100           1−10     11−25    26−50    51−75       76−90   91−100                           1−10   11−25    26−50     51−75       76−90   91−100


                                                            Successful organizing, O                                        Successful organizing, O                                                       Successful organizing, O
                            .0002 .0004 .0006




                                                                                                        .0006




                                                                                                                                                                        .0005 .001 .0015 .002
                                                                                                        .0004
                                                                                                        .0002
                            0




                                                  1−10   11−25    26−50     51−75      76−90   91−100           1−10     11−25    26−50    51−75       76−90   91−100                           1−10   11−25    26−50     51−75       76−90   91−100


                                                                 Union status, U                                                 Union status, U                                                               Union status, U
                            .002 .004 .006 .008




                                                                                                        .006




                                                                                                                                                                        .01 .015 .02 .025
                                                                                                        .004
                                                                                                        .002




                                                  1−10   11−25    26−50     51−75      76−90   91−100           1−10     11−25    26−50    51−75       76−90   91−100                           1−10   11−25    26−50     51−75       76−90   91−100


                                                                                                                         Productivity percentile
                        Note: Dashed curves indicate 95% pointwise confidence intervals.
                                                  Figure 6. Predicted probabilities of union activity in private sector establishments −− Productivity effects

                                                                   Election, T                                                              Election win, W
                             .0006




                                                                                                                   .8
                             .0004




                                                                                                                   .6
                             .0002




                                                                                                                   .4
                                                                                                                   .2
Predicted probability


                             0




                                     1−10        11−25           26−50            51−75      76−90     91−100              1−10   11−25      26−50    51−75      76−90   91−100


                                                       Successful organizing, O                                                             Union status, U
                             .0003




                                                                                                                   .0015
                             .0002




                                                                                                                   .001
                             .0001




                                                                                                                   .0005
                             0




                                     1−10        11−25           26−50            51−75      76−90     91−100              1−10   11−25      26−50    51−75      76−90   91−100

                                                                                           Percentiles of value of shipments per employee

                        Note: Dashed curves indicate 95% pointwise confidence intervals.
Appendix

A      Proofs
     The following lemma will be used in the proof for Lemma 1.

Lemma 2 Let () be a bounded, (non-decreasing) increasing, (strictly) convex function in ,
where  is a normally distributed random variable with mean  and variance  2 . [()] is
(non-decreasing) increasing and (strictly) convex in .

    Proof. Observe that
                                       Z
                                                 1      ( − )2
                          [()] =        () √ exp[−          ]
                                                2       22

Now,
                                   Z
                                                1        ( − )2
                     [()] =   ( −  + )  √   exp[−          ]
                                               2         22
                               Z
                                           1          e2
                                                      
                             =      + ) √ exp[− 2 ]
                                 (e
                                          2        2

      e =  − . It immediately follows that [()] is (strictly) increasing and convex in 
where 
by diﬀerentiating with respect to .
    Proof of Lemma 1. Existence and uniqueness of . Let T be the operator defined by

                    +1 ≡ T = ( ) + {[(1 −  +1 ) |  ] − }                   (23)

T has a unique fixed point, , by the Banach fixed point theorem. To establish this result,
note that T satisfies Blackwell’s suﬃciency condition for a contraction mapping — Stokey and
Lucas (1989, Theorem 3.3). The operator T maps a bounded function  into another bounded
function, +1 , because  +1  and  are bounded. Similarly, if  is continuous in +1 , then
so is T in  . On this, T can be trivially seen from (23) to be continuous in  and .
Note that  is a function of the random variables +1 and +1 . The distribution for +1 is
normal with mean  and variance  2 . Recall that  2 evolves as a deterministic function of .
The distribution function for +1 is also normal with mean  and variance (1 −  )2  2 , from
(6). Therefore, [(1 −  +1 ) |  ] is a continuous function of  , and hence so is T . To
see that Blackwell’s suﬃciency condition holds, note that, first, T is monotone: for any two
functions 1 ≥ 2 , it follows that T1 ≥ T2 . Second, T satisfies the discounting hypothesis
for any constant   0:

             T( + ) = ( ) + {[(1 −  +1 )( + )|  ] − }

                           = ( ) + {[(1 −  +1 ) |  ] − } + (1 −  +1 )

                           = T + (1 −  +1 )

                            T + ,

because 1 − +1  1 Hence, T satisfies Blackwell’s suﬃciency condition.
    is increasing in  . Observe that  only enters into ( ) in (23), given  . The result
then immediately follows from the fact that ( ) is increasing in  .
    is decreasing in . Trivially, the function ([(1 − +1 )(+1 )] − ) is decreasing in .
Therefore, so is ( )
    is increasing in  . Assume that  is non-decreasing in +1 . It will now be shown
that this implies that T is increasing in  . Again,  is a function of the random variables
+1 and +1 . The distribution function for +1 is normal with mean  . Now, (+1 ) is
increasing in +1 . Hence, on this account, a higher value for  implies a higher value for
[(1 − +1 ) |  ], because  is an increasing function of +1 — Lemma 2. Likewise, +1
is normally distributed with mean  . Therefore, on this account, T is non-decreasing in  ,
and  is non-decreasing in +1 — again, Lemma 2. Putting both pieces together implies that
T is increasing in  . Consequently, T maps non-decreasing functions of  into increasing
ones. By Stokey and Lucas (1989, Theorem 3.2, Corollary 1) the fixed point  must then be
increasing in  .
   Convexity of  in  and  . It is easy to see that +1 is strictly convex in  because
( ) is strictly convex in  and {[(1 −  +1 ) |  ] − } does not depend on  , given
 . Suppose now that  is a convex function of  . Consider two priors, 1 and 2 . Let
 = 1 + (1 − )2 , for  ∈ (0 1). Convexity of T requires (T )(1     +1 ) + (1 −
)(T )(2     +1 ) ≥ (T )(     +1 ). Now, again  is a function of the random
variables +1 and +1 . The distribution of +1 is normal with mean  and variance 2 ,
while the distribution of +1 is also normal with mean  and variance (1 −  )2  2 . Note that

  (T )(1     +1 ) + (1 − )(T )(2     +1 )

               = {( ) + [(1 − +2 ) (+1   + 1 +1   +2 )|1  ] − }

            + (1 − ){( ) + [(1 −  +2 ) (+1   + 1 +1   +2 )|2  ] − }

                  ( ) + [(1 −  +2 ) (+1   + 1 +1   +2 )|  ] − 

                                                                          = (T )(     +1 )

The inequality follows from the facts that  is convex in +1 and strictly convex in +1
and an application of Lemma 2. Thus, T maps convex functions into strictly convex functions.
Therefore,  is strictly convex in  — Stokey and Lucas (1989, Theorem 3.2, Corollary 1).
    is decreasing in . From above, (+1  +1 +1  +2 ) is a bounded, increasing, strictly
convex function of the random variables +1 and +1 . The random variable +1 is normally
distributed with mean  and variance  2 , while +1 is normally distributed with mean  and
variance (1 −  )2  2 . Now, as can be seen from (3) and (5), 2 decreases with age, . Therefore,
an increase in , ceteris paribus, amounts to a mean-preserving shrinkage in +1 and +1 . As
a result, [(+1   + 1 +1  +2 )|−1  ] is decreasing in  by Hadar and Russell (1971,
Theorem 3).
   [|−1  ] is increasing in −1 and decreasing in  Prior to observing  , the union will
take  and  to be normally distributed random variables with mean −1 . From the parts
above, (      +1 ) is increasing in both  and   decreasing in  and strictly convex in
 and   Consequently, [(     +1 )|−1  ] is increasing in −1 and decreasing in .


   Proof of Proposition 1. By definition,  (−1  ) = 1−Γ([(     +1 )|−1  ]).
First, note that Γ is a decreasing function of [(      +1 )|−1  ], since Γ is a c.d.f.
Therefore, 1 − Γ is an increasing function of [(      +1 )|−1  ] By Lemma 1, this
last expectation is increasing in −1 and decreasing in . Therefore, so is  .
                                                                £ ¯                     ¤
    Proof of Proposition 2. By definition,  (−1  ) =    ¯       e (−1  )  But the
              e (−1  ) in (12) and Lemma 1 imply that 
definition of                                            e (−1  ) is decreasing in −1 and
increasing in . Therefore,  (−1  ) is also decreasing in −1 and increasing in .
   Proof of Proposition 3. By the definition of  in (16),  is increasing in −1 if  is.
But,  is increasing in −1 by Proposition 1. Therefore, so is . Moreover,  is increasing in 
                                                                      Q
because (−1  −2  · · ·  0  )−(−2  · · ·  0  −1) = { =1 [1−(−1  )]}(−1  ) 
0.
      Proof of Proposition 4.            The proof is in two parts. First, suppose that the c.d.f.
governing the observer’s beliefs Ω(−1 |  ) is increasing in  in the sense of first-order
stochastic dominance. Now,  (−1  ) is increasing in −1 by Proposition 1. The integral
in (17) is then increasing in  — Hadar and Russell (1971, Theorem 1). As a consequence,
  (  ) is increasing in  .
      Second, it will now be established that Ω(−1 |  ) is increasing in  in the sense of
first-order stochastic dominance. Let (−1 |  ) be the density function associated with Ω
Bayes’ Rule implies
                                              ( |−1  )(−1 |)
                                (−1 |  ) =                                               (24)
                                                       ( |)
                  R
where (−1 |) = (−1 |  ) , ( |−1  ) is the density associated with Φ( |−1  )
                R
and ( |) = ( |−1  )−1  First, it will be shown that (−1 |  ) satisfies the
monotone likelihood ratio property (MLRP). The MLRP is satisfied strictly if, given 2  1 ,
the following inequality holds

           (−1 |2  )(0−1 |1  ) − (−1 |1  )(0−1 |2  )  0 for −1  0−1 .   (25)

[See, e.g., Karlin and Rubin (1956), equation (2)]. For diﬀerentiable density functions, (25)
implies
                                      (−1 |2  )
                                                          0                           (26)
                                   −1 (−1 |1  )
assuming that (−1 |1  ) 6= 0 (which will be satisfied for a normal density). Using the
definition of  in (24), rewrite the suﬃcient condition for the MLRP (26) as
                     (1 |) (2 |−1  )      (1 |)  (2 |−1  )
                       [                         ]=               [                ]  0              (27)
                  −1 (2 |) (1 |−1  )    (2 |) −1 (1 |−1  )
Now,  is the density of a normal random variable with mean −1 and variance  2−1 . Therefore,
        (2 |−1  )         1              (1 − −1 )2 − (2 − −1 )2
          [                ]= √             exp[                               ]
     −1 (1 |−1  )     2−1 −1                 22−1
                                          1    (2 − 1 )      (1 − −1 )2 − (2 − −1 )2
                                   =√                     exp[                               ]  0
                                        2−1  2−1                     22−1
where the inequality follows because 2  1 . Thus, (−1 |  ) satisfies the MLRP strictly.
This implies that Ω is increasing in  in the sense of first-order stochastic dominance — Milgrom
(1981).
      Proof of Proposition 5. Note that
                                  Z
                        
                      (  ) =     (−1  )Ω(−1 |  )                                                   (28)
                                     ∙Z                                ¸
                                = −     (− (−1  ))Ω(−1 |  )

By Proposition 2,  (−1  ) is decreasing in −1  Therefore, − (−1  ) is increasing in −1 
Furthermore, Ω(−1 |  ) is increasing in  in the sense of first-order stochastic dominance,
as shown in the proof of Proposition 4. Consequently, the integral inside the brackets (28) is
increasing in  — Hadar and Russell (1971, Theorem 1). It follows that   (  ) is decreasing
in  
      Proof of Proposition 6.              is increasing in  . Observe that (−1  −2  · · ·  0  )
is increasing in −1 , for  = 1 · · ·  , because from (16)
            (−1  −2  · · ·  0  ) Q                                  (−1  )
                                            = =16= [1 −    (−1  )]                0
                      −1                                                        −1
The sign of the expression follows from Proposition 1. Next, let (−1  −2  · · ·  0 |  ) be
the density function for the sequence of priors (−1  −2  · · ·  0 ) conditional on  and .
This density can be expressed in terms of a product of one-step conditional densities

             (−1  −2  · · ·  0 |  ) = (−1 |  )(−2 |−1  ) · · · (1 |2  )

where (−2 |−1  ) is the density of −2 conditioned on −1 and . The form of the
above expression is justified from (6). Note that 0 =  is fixed (non-random). Therefore,


                 Z
  
 (  ) =         (−1  −2  · · ·  0  )(−1  −2  · · ·  0 |  )−1 · · · 1 Γ( −1 ) · · · Γ( 0 )
                 Z
             =       −2 (−1  )(−1 |  )−1 Γ(−1 ) · · · Γ(0 )

where                            Z
               (+1  ) =        −1 (  )( |+1  ) , for  = 2 · · ·   − 2

and                                      Z
                         1 (2  ) =       (−1  −2  · · ·  0  )(1 |2  )1 

Suppose −1 (  ) is increasing in  . Then,  (+1  ) is increasing in +1 . This occurs
because the c.d.f. for  is increasing in +1 , in the sense of first-order stochastic dominance,
by an argument similar to that employed in the proof of Proposition 4.59 To start the induction
hypothesis oﬀ, note that 1 (2  ) will be increasing in 2 , because  is strictly increasing in
2 and the c.d.f. associated with (1 |2  ) is stochastically increasing in 2 (in the sense of
first-order stochastic dominance).
         is increasing in . Note that for all 

    (   + 1) −   (  ) =
  Z
       (  −2  · · ·  0   + 1)(  −2  · · ·  0 |   + 1) −1 · · · 1 Γ(  ) · · · Γ(0 )
        Z
      − (−1  −2  · · ·  0  )(−1  −2  · · ·  0 |  )−1 · · · 1 Γ( −1 ) · · · Γ( 0 )

Using the definition of  (−1  −2  · · ·  0  )

                              (  −2  · · ·  0   + 1) −  (−1  −2  · · ·  0  )                  (30)
                             Q
                           =   =1 [1 − (−1  )](   + 1)  0


Also,
                  (  −2  · · ·  0 |   + 1) = ( |−1 )(−1  −2  · · ·  0 |  )

where  is the density of  conditional on −1 . Therefore,

      (  + 1) −   ( ) =
    Z
         (  −2  · · ·  0   + 1)( |−1 )(−1  −2  · · ·  0 | ) −1 · · · 1 Γ(  ) · · · Γ( 0 )
       Z
    −  (−1  −2  · · ·  0  )(−1  −2  · · ·  0 | )−1 · · · 1 Γ(−1 ) · · · Γ(0 )
    Z ∙Z                                                                                                 ¸
  =          (  −2  · · ·  0   + 1)( |−1 ) Γ(  ) −  (−1  −2  · · ·  0  )

         ×(−1  −2  · · ·  0 | )−1 · · · 1 Γ(−1 ) · · · Γ( 0 )
  59
       To see this, let Υ(−1 |  ) represent the cdf that is associated with the density function (−1 |  ).
Establishing MLRP for (−1 |  ) is equivalent to showing
                                          (−1 |0  )                (0 |−1  )
                                     [                  ] =       [                  ]  0                  (29)
                                    −1 (−1 |  )            −1 ( |−1  )
for any 0    where ( |−1  ) is the density of  conditional on −1 and —follow steps similar to those
used in the proof of Proposition 4. The derivation of equation (29) parrots that of (27). Note from (6) that
                                                                                                 ³               ´
( |−1  ) is the density of a normal random variable with mean −1 and variance (1 −  )2  2 −1 +  2 .
By mimicing the argument outlined in the proof of Proposition 4, it can be shown that (29) holds. It follows
that Υ(−1 |  ) is increasing in  (in the sense of first-order stochastic dominance).
The last expression is positive if the term in brackets is positive, or if
         Z
           (  −2  · · ·  0   + 1)( |−1 ) Γ(  )   (−1  −2  · · ·  0  )        (31)

But note that
Z                                                             Z
   (  −2  · · ·  0   + 1)( |−1 ) Γ( )    (−1  −2  · · ·  0  )( |−1 )

                                                                =  (−1  −2  · · ·  0  )

where the inequality follows from (30). Therefore,   is increasing in 



B         Derivation of () Under Alternative Models
        This Appendix shows that the union benefit function, ( ) in Assumption 1 is an in-
creasing and strictly convex function under many specifications of the monopoly union, right-
to-manage and eﬃcient bargaining paradigms of union and establishment conduct.


B.1         Setup

        Consider a setting where an establishment produces output, , according to the standard
production function,
                                           (;  ) =    0    1

where  drives total factor productivity,  , and  is the amount of labor hired. This formu-
lation for total productivity is standard when productivity shocks are assumed to be normally
distributed. Endow the union with the utility function

                                       ( ;  ) = ( −  )  ,    0                                 (32)

where  is the union wage rate and  is the fixed competitive wage rate non-union establish-
ments pay. The union values a high wage premium,  −  , and a high employment (which
equates with union membership). The objective function (32) is a Stone-Geary type utility
function.60 Variants of (32) are frequently used to model union preferences. For instance, Dun-
lop (1944) proposes the wage bill as the union’s objective function, ( ) =  which is a
  60
       The general form of the Stone-Geary utility function is ( −  ) ( − )   ≥ 0. The function in (32) sets
 = 0, i.e. the union desires any positive employment. Note that setting   0 would trivially imply that the
union does not organize small firms that cannot provide the union an employment of at least 
special case of (32) with  =  = 1 and  = 0 Rosen (1969), Calvo (1978), Oswald (1982), and
Manning (1987, 1994) use rent maximization as the objective, ( ;  ) = ( −  ) which
is another special case of (32) with  =  = 1. Another frequently used objective function is
the utilitarian one, ( ) = () where () is a strictly concave function. This formulation
implies that the union cares about the total utility of its  members, and corresponds to (32)
with  = 1 and  = 0 when () =  ,   1 a standard concave function. Finally, note
that the version of (32) with   1  = 1 −  and  = 0 is the familiar Cobb-Douglas utility
function.


B.2        Monopoly Union Model

        In the monopoly union model, the union picks , and then the establishment chooses .61
The establishment’s problem is
                                              max{  − }
                                                

which yields a demand for labor given by
                                                             1(1−)
                                       ∗ = (  ) = [       ]                                        (33)
                                                             
The union’s problem is
                                                           (1−)
                                       max{( −  ) [       ]        }                                 (34)
                                                          
The first order condition for this problem is
                                                                             µ    ¶
                           −1      (1−)                (1−)    1
                 ( −  )      [     ]        + ( −  )     [   ]         −     = 0
                                                            1−               
which has the solution
                                              
                                             ∗ =     
                                         − (1 − )
provided that  − (1 − )  0, which is the condition for an interior solution ∗ to exist.62
Note that ∗ is not a function of  . Plugging the expression for ∗ back into the union’s
objective function yields
                                                          h  i(1−) 
                                   ( ) = (∗ −  )                1−  
                                                           ∗
  61
       See Oswald (1982) for the monopoly union model. For a general exposition and discussion of all three
models discussed, see also Manning (1987, 1994).
 62
    The second-order condition associated with the maximization problem in (34) is also satisfied for the given
parameter restriction.
which is increasing and strictly convex in  


B.3         Right-to-Manage Model

        Consider now the case where the establishment is free to choose  (hence, right-to-manage),
given the union wage, , but where  is determined via Nash Bargaining.63 Once again,  will
be determined by (33). The bargaining problem reads

                           max{(  − )(1−) [( −  )  ] } for 0    1
                             


subject to (33). The objective function weights the establishment’s profits and the union’s
objective function, where the weight  reflects the union’s bargaining power. Diﬀerentiate the
objective function with respect to , while making use of the fact that the establishment has
chosen  to maximize its profits, to obtain

(1 − )( −  ) −1 = (1 − )( −  )−1   [(1 − ) +( −  )−1 ( )1(1−) −1(1−)−1 ]
                                                                                                             (35)
The solution is
                                                    + (1 − )
                                     ∗ =                                                                 (36)
                                             [ − (1 − )] + (1 − )
provided that  [ − (1 − )]+(1−)  0, which guarantees an interior solution, ∗ .64 Note,
again, that ∗ does not depend on   Therefore, ( ) now reads
                                                           h  i(1−) 
                                   ( ) = (∗ −  )                 1−  
                                                            ∗
which is strictly convex in  


B.4         Eﬃcient Bargaining Model

        Finally, consider eﬃcient bargaining.65 Both  and  are chosen simultaneously via Nash
Bargaining to solve the maximization problem

                           max{(  − )(1−) [( −  )  ] } for 0    1
                            

  63
       See Nickell (1982) for the right-to-manage model.
  64
       The second-order condition must also be satisfied for ∗ to be a maximizer. Note, however, that the derived
properties of ( ) hold at any interior solution ∗ 
  65
     See MacDonald and Solow (1981) for the eﬃcient bargaining model.
The first-order conditions for  and  respectively, read

                                    (  − ) − ( −  ) (1 − ) = 0                            (37)

                                (  − ) + (1 − )(  − ) = 0                             (38)

Adding the two equations together and rearranging yields the following relationship between
the optimal choices for  and 
                             ½                                           ¾1(1−)
                          ∗                   [ + (1 − )]
                          =                                                                            (39)
                                        [2(1 − ) − ]∗ − (1 − )

Furthermore, (38) implies
                                                    + (1 − )  ∗−1
                                         ∗ =                                                         (40)
                                                     + 1 − 
Substituting (39) into (40) and rearranging yields

                                          ( + (1 − )) (1 − )
               ∗ =                                                                   
                      [( + (1 − )) (2(1 − ) − ) − ( + 1 − ) ( + (1 − ))]

with the condition that ( + (1 − )) (2(1 − ) − ) − ( + 1 − ) ( + (1 − ))  0 which,
again, ensures an interior solution, ∗ .66 Once again, ∗ does not depend on   One can then
write                                        ½                                 ¾(1−)
                                                       ( + (1 − ))                       
                                ∗
                   ( ) = ( −  )                                                      1−  
                                                 [2(1 − ) − ] − (1 − )
which is a strictly convex function of  



C         Data

C.1        Trends in Certification and Decertification Elections

        The raw data from the NLRB was benchmarked against the published NLRB Annual
Reports, and the agreement is quite high, as is shown in Figure C.1 (left axis: certification
elections, right axis: decertification elections). The NLRB Annual Reports aggregate the
certification elections (RC) and the employer-requested elections (RM). The total number of
certification elections is about 7 000 per year for the period 1978-1980. Then, in 1981, it
drops to 6 000, and to about 3 500 in 1982. It remains relatively flat until 1992, and drops
  66
       Again, the second order condition must be satisfied for ∗ to be a maximizer. The derived properties of
( ) hold at any interior solution ∗ 
to 3 000 per year. A further fall occurs during the 2000’s. The raw data show basically the
same trend as in the published annual reports, with two exceptions. One is a clear instance of a
coverage gap in the year 1977: the raw data on NLRB certification elections contain only 4 500
elections rather than the nearly 9 000 in the NLRB Annual Report. The other occurs when
the data series switches from the data for 1977-1999 to the one that was downloaded directly
from www.data.gov for the period 1999-2007, with the greatest dip for the year 1997.
   Figure C.1 also shows the total number of decertification elections (RD) in the raw data and
the NLRB Annual Reports. These elections occur at a rate of around 800 − 900 per year for
the 1977-1986 period. This rate then shows a clear, gradual downward trend until 1997, when
it levels at about 400 per year. Similar to the certification elections, there is a clear coverage
gap in the year 1977.
   Figure C.2 plots the union win rate in the NLRB Annual Reports and the raw data used for
empirical analysis, again combining certification elections with employer-requested elections for
comparability. The rate at which unions win both certification and decertification elections are
basically flat until the year 1987. Unions consistently win about 47% of certification elections
with a slight dip during 1981-1982, and lose about 75% of decertification elections. After 1987,
the rate at which unions lose decertification elections falls to 71% and trends downward to
around 65%. Starting in 1987, the rate at which unions win certification elections increases
to about 50%, where it remains until 1995, with a slight dip during the 1990-1991 recession.
Thereafter, there is a slight drop around 1996, but then the rate at which unions win certification
elections rises to nearly 60% by 2007. The NLRB raw data appear to slightly understate the
increase in the election win rate in recent years relative to the published report.


C.2     Statistics on Matching

    The match rate for certification and decertification elections over time are shown in Figure
C.3. Considering both types of elections, the minimum match rate declines from about 80%
in 1977 to 71% in 1986. It is then stable until about 1994, when it starts trending downward,
reaching a low of 65% in 2000. Then, in 2001 it sharply returns to about 70%. This discontinuity
corresponds roughly with a change in the structuring of the source data for the LBD that
resulted in more complete and comprehensive source data. The trends in the match rate
are similar for certification and decertification elections, and do not vary substantially by the
election outcome, although match rates are lower in the case of decertification.
   In Table C.1, the rates of match for certification elections are shown by NLRB sector, which
diﬀer from the SIC sector definitions in general. For those sectors with a substantial number
of elections (Manufacturing, Retail Trade, Services, Trade, Transportation, and Utilities, and
Wholesale Trade), the match rates range from 70% to 77%. Construction and Manufacturing
elections have higher match rates, Wholesale Trade elections match to the LBD somewhat
less frequently, and Retail Trade, Services, and Trade, Transportation, and Utilities have lower
match rates.
     Certification                                                                                   Decertification
     10,000                                                                                                    1,000


      9,000                              Decertification Elections                                             900


      8,000                                                                                                    800


      7,000                                                                                                    700


      6,000                                                                  NLRB Annual                       600
                                                                             Report (RD)

      5,000                        NLRB Annual                                                                 500
                                  Report (RC+RM)             NLRB Raw Data
      4,000                                                      (RD)                                          400


      3,000                 Certification Elections                                                            300


      2,000                                                                                                    200
                                                                             NLRB Raw Data
                                                                               (RC+RM)
      1,000                                                                                                    100


          0                                                                                                    0
              1977   1980      1983      1986         1989   1992    1995      1998    2001   2004      2007




Figure C.1: The number of certification (RC+RM) and decertification (RD) elections — NLRB
Annual Report versus NLRB Raw Data
     0.65

                                                                                      NLRB Annual
      0.6                                                                            Report (RC+RM)


     0.55

                          Certification Elections
      0.5                                                                                         NLRB Raw Data
                                                                                                    (RC+RM)

     0.45

                                                                                 NLRB Annual
      0.4                                                                        Report (RD)


     0.35


      0.3                                                                                             NLRB Raw Data
                                                                                                          (RD)
                                                     Decertification Elections
     0.25


      0.2
            1977   1980      1983       1986        1989      1992       1995      1998        2001    2004       2007




Figure C.2: Union win rate in certification (RC+RM) and decertification (RD) elections —
NLRB Annual Report versus NLRB Raw Data
0.85


                                                         Certification Elections
 0.8



0.75



 0.7



0.65


                                                         Decertification Elections
 0.6



0.55



 0.5
       1977   1980   1983    1986   1989   1992   1995        1998       2001        2004   2007




                     Figure C.3: Match rates by year — All sectors
                    Table C.1. Match rates for selected sectors — 1977-2007


NLRB Sector Name                       Number of Certification Elections Match Rate
Construction                           7 380                                 769%
Manufacturing                          34 496                                776%
Retail Trade                           8 809                                 700%
Services                               26 123                                688%
Trade, Transportation, and Utilities 15 616                                  703%
Wholesale Trade                        7 246                                 747%
All other sectors                      3 394                                 701%
Total (All sectors)                    103 064                               731%
D   Robustness Analysis and Additional Results


       Table D.1. Odds ratios based on logit model estimates — All Sectors
                          (Sample restricted to the 1990-2007 period)
      Event:                          Certification:                   Successful           Union
                                      Election Win                     Organizing Status
      Probability:                      (  )       (  )  (  )               (  )
      10-19 employees                  234 ∗∗∗        076 ∗∗∗         298 ∗∗∗             228 ∗∗∗
                                      [0041]          [0029]         [0076]              [0043]
                                              ∗∗∗             ∗∗∗                ∗∗∗
      20-49 employees                  367            062             453                 371 ∗∗∗
                                      [0063]          [0025]         [0115]              [0078]

      50-99 employees                  546 ∗∗∗        049 ∗∗∗         629 ∗∗∗             566 ∗∗∗
                                      [0113]          [0025]         [0194]              [0141]

      100-249 employees                718 ∗∗∗        043 ∗∗∗         790 ∗∗∗             760 ∗∗∗
                                      [0157]          [0024]         [0261]              [0212]

      250-499 employees                816 ∗∗∗        041 ∗∗∗         916 ∗∗∗             831 ∗∗∗
                                      [0276]          [0036]         [0456]              [0333]

      500+ employees                   941 ∗∗∗        028 ∗∗∗        1053∗∗∗             1091∗∗∗
                                      [0396]          [0031]          [0650]              [0590]

      4-6 years                        084 ∗∗∗        099             091 ∗∗∗             249 ∗∗∗
                                      [0012]          [0035]         [0020]              [0027]

      7-9 years                        079 ∗∗∗        097             086 ∗∗∗             361 ∗∗∗
                                      [0013]          [0038]         [0021]              [0049]
                                              ∗∗∗                                ∗∗∗
      10-12 years                      074            104             084                 470 ∗∗∗
                                      [0014]          [0047]         [0023]              [0069]

      13-15 years                      072 ∗∗∗        097             080 ∗∗∗             607 ∗∗∗
                                      [0015]          [0048]         [0025]              [0095]

      16-18 years                      068 ∗∗∗        102             080 ∗∗∗             745 ∗∗∗
                                      [0018]          [0062]         [0029]              [0131]

      19-21 years                      067 ∗∗∗        102             077 ∗∗∗             901 ∗∗∗
                                      [0021]          [0074]         [0034]              [0181]

      22-24 years                      064 ∗∗∗        092             073 ∗∗∗            1059∗∗∗
                                      [0027]          [0090]         [0041]               [0245]

      25+ years                        061 ∗∗∗        109             068 ∗∗∗            1282∗∗∗
                                      [0032]          [0138]         [0047]               [1982]

      Multi-unit status                506 ∗∗∗        037 ∗∗∗         333 ∗∗∗             294 ∗∗∗
                                      [0082]          [0014]         [0076]              [0160]

      Firm union status                359 ∗∗∗        651 ∗∗∗         610 ∗∗∗             518 ∗∗∗
                                      [0037]          [0216]         [0081]              [0063]

      Right-to-work status             113 ∗          078             093                 112 ∗∗
                                      [0074]          [0387]         [0058]              [0057]

      Eligible employees % −                           077 ∗∗∗        −                    −
                                                       [0006]

      Notes: Robust standard errors, clustered by establishment, are in brackets. (*), (**), (***) indicates

      significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively. Models include 2-digit SIC industry, state,

      and year fixed eﬀects. The following categories are omitted: 1-9 employees and 0-3 years of age.
Table D.2. Odds ratios based on logit model estimates — Manufacturing
                        (Sample restricted to 1990-2007 period)
Event:                          Certification:                   Successful           Union
                                Election Win                     Organizing Status
Probability:                      (  )       (  )  (  )               (  )
10-19 employees                  548 ∗∗∗        066 ∗∗∗         634 ∗∗∗             242 ∗∗∗
                                [0420]          [0107]         [0719]              [0135]

20-49 employees                 1376∗∗∗         048 ∗∗∗        1516∗∗∗              497 ∗∗∗
                                [0964]          [0073]          [1593]             [0279]

50-99 employees                 2633∗∗∗         031 ∗∗∗        2231∗∗∗              744 ∗∗∗
                                [2006]          [0049]          [2650]             [0478]

100-249 employees               3344∗∗∗         023 ∗∗∗        2339∗∗∗              829 ∗∗∗
                                [2675]          [0038]          [2956]             [0589]

250-499 employees               3645∗∗∗         022 ∗∗∗        2668∗∗∗              781 ∗∗∗
                                [3442]          [0045]          [4117]             [0711]

500+ employees                  2456∗∗∗         017 ∗∗∗        1774∗∗∗              634 ∗∗∗
                                [2926]          [0048]          [3504]             [0790]

4-6 years                        084 ∗∗∗        097             082 ∗∗∗             266 ∗∗∗
                                [0041]          [0102]         [0065]              [0105]

7-9 years                        079 ∗∗∗        088             076 ∗∗∗             408 ∗∗∗
                                [0040]          [0033]         [0064]              [0197]
                                        ∗∗∗                                ∗∗∗
10-12 years                      069            104             073                 571 ∗∗∗
                                [0038]          [0125]         [0063]              [0298]

13-15 years                      067 ∗∗∗        076 ∗∗          059 ∗∗∗             772 ∗∗∗
                                [0040]          [0104]         [0060]              [0434]

16-18 years                      065 ∗∗∗        099             065 ∗∗∗            1001∗∗∗
                                [0046]          [0153]         [0074]               [0633]

19-21 years                      062 ∗∗∗        109             067 ∗∗∗            1291∗∗∗
                                [0053]          [0203]         [0091]               [0921]
                                        ∗∗∗             ∗∗                 ∗∗∗
22-24 years                      054            055             039                1609∗∗∗
                                [0063]          [0147]         [0084]               [1295]

25+ years                        058 ∗∗∗        126             062 ∗∗∗            2082∗∗∗
                                [0088]          [0427]         [0141]               [1982]
                                        ∗∗∗             ∗∗∗                ∗∗∗
Multi-unit status                212            072             185                 281 ∗∗∗
                                [0098]          [0059]         [0137]              [0160]
                                        ∗∗∗             ∗∗∗                ∗∗∗
Firm union status                202            220             299                 275 ∗∗∗
                                [0086]          [0281]         [0194]              [0118]

Right-to-work status             068 ∗∗         092             068                 097
                                [0120]          [0373]         [0192]              [0088]

Eligible employees % −                           072 ∗∗∗        −                    −
                                                 [0027]

Notes: Robust standard errors, clustered by establishment, are in brackets. (*), (**), (***) indicates

significance at the 10%, 5%, and the 1% level, respectively. Models include 2-digit SIC industry, state,

and year fixed eﬀects. The following categories are omitted: 1-9 employees and 0-3 years of age.
                            Table D.3. Odds ratios based on logit model estimates — Manufacturing
                           (Sample restricted to the 1982-1977 period)                           (Sample restricted to the 2000-2007 period)
Event:                 Certification:                   Successful           Union           Certification:                   Successful           Union
                       Election Win                     Organizing Status                    Election Win                     Organizing Status
Probability:             (  )       (  )  (  )               (  )   (  )         (  )  (  )                (  )
10-19 emp.              553 ∗∗∗        066 ∗           596 ∗∗∗             510 ∗∗∗       469 ∗∗∗         064            511 ∗∗∗             228 ∗∗∗
                       [0544]          [0172]         [0852]              [0553]         [0638]         [0200]          [0973]              [0158]

20-49 emp.             1167∗∗∗         056 ∗∗         1141∗∗∗             1014∗∗∗        1011∗∗∗         038 ∗∗∗        960 ∗∗∗             411 ∗∗∗
                        [1121]         [0137]          [1638]              [1113]        [1279]         [0109]          [1736]              [0275]

50-99 emp.             1705∗∗∗         054 ∗∗         1650∗∗∗             1465∗∗∗        1803∗∗∗         027 ∗∗∗        1341∗∗∗             617 ∗∗∗
                        [1843]         [0143]          [2655]              [1846]        [2471]         [0081]          [2731]              [0464]

100-249 emp.           2109∗∗∗         038 ∗∗∗        1685∗∗∗             1764∗∗∗        2287∗∗∗         018 ∗∗∗        1299∗∗∗             662 ∗∗∗
                        [2426]         [0107]          [2979]              [2377]        [3284]         [0058]          [2821]              [0539]

250-499 emp.           1858∗∗∗         021 ∗∗∗        1026∗∗∗             1530∗∗∗        2332∗∗∗         023 ∗∗∗        1768∗∗∗             637 ∗∗∗
                        [294]          [0083]          [2907]              [3129]        [3929]         [0086]          [4525]              [0657]

500+ emp.              1458∗∗∗         024 ∗∗∗         918 ∗∗∗            1035∗∗∗        2085∗∗∗         012 ∗∗∗        1255∗∗∗             519 ∗∗∗
                        [313]          [0128]         [3331]               [2858]        [4110]         [0057]          [4030]              [0692]

4-6 years               080 ∗∗         107             076 ∗               262 ∗∗∗       083 ∗           087            074 ∗               208 ∗∗∗
                       [0041]          [0102]         [0126]              [0186]         [0086]         [0204]          [0119]              [0165]

7-9 years              −                −               −                    −               074 ∗∗∗         072            065 ∗∗∗             294 ∗∗∗
                                                                                             [0082]         [0179]          [0112]              [0299]
                                                                                                    ∗∗∗                                 ∗
10-12 years            −                −               −                    −               071             104            074                 423 ∗∗∗
                                                                                             [0080]         [0261]          [0125]              [0461]

13-15 years            −                −               −                    −               063 ∗∗∗         066            059 ∗∗∗             575 ∗∗∗
                                                                                             [0074]         [0175]          [0096]              [0618]

16-18 years            −                −               −                    −               064 ∗∗∗         103            061 ∗∗∗             780 ∗∗∗
                                                                                             [0076]         [0276]          [0074]              [0833]

19-21 years            −                −               −                    −               062 ∗∗∗         117            055 ∗∗              965 ∗∗∗
                                                                                             [0075]         [0331]          [0011]              [1035]

22-24 years            −                −               −                    −               055 ∗∗∗         054 ∗∗         038 ∗∗∗             1226∗∗∗
                                                                                             [0076]         [0172]          [0091]              [1325]

25+ years              −                −               −                    −               058 ∗∗∗         113            039 ∗∗∗             1580∗∗∗
                                                                                             [0097]         [0444]          [0081]              [1871]
                                 ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗              ∗∗∗                    ∗∗∗          ∗∗∗              ∗∗∗                ∗∗∗
Multi-unit              268            072             255                 266           272             066            244                 309 ∗∗∗
                       [0199]          [0059]         [0286]              [0288]         [0245]         [0110]          [0341]              [0205]
                                 ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗              ∗∗∗                    ∗∗∗          ∗∗∗              ∗∗∗                ∗∗∗
Firm union              151            220             219                 269           228             173            312                 275 ∗∗∗
                       [0117]          [0281]         [0237]              [0236]         [0154]         [0294]          [0330]              [0134]

Right-to-work           107            092             097                 096           026 ∗∗          141            032                 092
                       [0268]          [0373]         [0422]              [0446]         [0182]         [2026]          [0396]              [0108]

Eligible emp.          −                083 ∗∗∗        −                    −               −                071 ∗∗∗        −                    −
                                        [0054]                                                              [0042]

Notes: Robust standard errors, clustered by establishment, are in brackets. (*), (**), (***) indicates significance at the 10%, 5%, and the 1% level,

respectively. Models include 2-digit SIC industry, state, and year fixed eﬀects. The following categories are omitted: 1-9 employees and 0-3 years of age.
 Table D.4. Odds ratios based on logit model estimates — All Sectors
           (Sample restricted to establishments with 5+ employees)
Event:                          Certification:                   Successful           Union
                                Election Win                     Organizing Status
Probability:                      (  )       (  )  (  )               (  )
10-19 employees                  175 ∗∗∗        084 ∗∗∗         181 ∗∗∗             161 ∗∗∗
                                [0028]          [0029]         [0042]              [0029]

20-49 employees                  320 ∗∗∗        067 ∗∗∗         318 ∗∗∗             284 ∗∗∗
                                [0052]          [0024]         [0074]              [0062]

50-99 employees                  504 ∗∗∗        056 ∗∗∗         479 ∗∗∗             464 ∗∗∗
                                [0097]          [0024]         [0133]              [0119]

100-249 employees                683 ∗∗∗        049 ∗∗∗         621 ∗∗∗             645 ∗∗∗
                                [0142]          [0023]         [0190]              [0189]

250-499 employees                787 ∗∗∗        046 ∗∗∗         729 ∗∗∗             733 ∗∗∗
                                [0239]          [0032]         [0324]              [0301]

500+ employees                   871 ∗∗∗        031 ∗∗∗         798 ∗∗∗             967 ∗∗∗
                                [0325]          [0027]         [0435]              [0535]

4-6 years                        082 ∗∗∗        106∗∗           087 ∗∗∗             222 ∗∗∗
                                [0012]          [0032]         [0017]              [0022]

7-9 years                        076 ∗∗∗        100             079 ∗∗∗             324 ∗∗∗
                                [0013]          [0036]         [0018]              [0044]
                                        ∗∗∗                                ∗∗∗
10-12 years                      069            107             075                 412 ∗∗∗
                                [0014]          [0046]         [0021]              [0066]

13-15 years                      066 ∗∗∗        096             068 ∗∗∗             516 ∗∗∗
                                [0016]          [0049]         [0023]              [0094]

16-18 years                      064 ∗∗∗        103             069 ∗∗∗             633 ∗∗∗
                                [0018]          [0062]         [0027]              [0131]

19-21 years                      063 ∗∗∗        098             066 ∗∗∗             768 ∗∗∗
                                [0022]          [0071]         [0031]              [0182]

22-24 years                      059 ∗∗∗        091             062 ∗∗∗             904 ∗∗∗
                                [0026]          [0088]         [0038]              [0249]

25+ years                        058 ∗∗∗        108             063 ∗∗∗            1115∗∗∗
                                [0032]          [0134]         [0046]               [0380]
                                        ∗∗∗
Multi-unit status                166            051∗∗∗          098                 140 ∗∗∗
                                [0023]           [0014]        [0022]              [0033]
                                        ∗∗∗             ∗∗∗                ∗∗∗
Firm union status                417            436             822                 598 ∗∗∗
                                [0053]          [0124]         [0168]              [0122]

Right-to-work status             103            099             106                 094
                                [0053]          [0387]         [0080]              [0054]

Eligible employees % −                           076 ∗∗∗        −                    −
                                                 [0006]

Notes: Robust standard errors, clustered by establishment, are in brackets. (*), (**), (***) indicates

significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively. Models include 2-digit SIC industry, state,

and year fixed eﬀects. The following categories are omitted: 5-9 employees and 0-3 years of age.
Table D.5. Odds ratios based on logit model estimates — Manufacturing
           (Sample restricted to establishments with 5+ employees)
Event:                          Certification:                   Successful           Union
                                Election Win                     Organizing Status
Probability:                      (  )       (  )  (  )               (  )
10-19 employees                  351 ∗∗∗        065 ∗∗∗         305 ∗∗∗             222 ∗∗∗
                                [0233]          [0107]         [0278]              [0136]

20-49 employees                  916 ∗∗∗        049 ∗∗∗         727 ∗∗∗             471 ∗∗∗
                                [0576]          [0073]         [0627]              [0326]

50-99 employees                 1656∗∗∗         037 ∗∗∗        1117∗∗∗              755 ∗∗∗
                                [1097]          [0049]          [1045]             [0575]

100-249 employees               2165∗∗∗         028 ∗∗∗        1236∗∗∗              882 ∗∗∗
                                [1484]          [0038]          [1225]             [0726]

250-499 employees               2316∗∗∗         025 ∗∗∗        1287∗∗∗              838 ∗∗∗
                                [1837]          [0045]          [1558]             [0837]

500+ employees                  1655∗∗∗         017 ∗∗∗         815 ∗∗∗             683 ∗∗∗
                                [1594]          [0048]         [1284]              [0891]

4-6 years                        083 ∗∗∗        087∗            076 ∗∗∗             236 ∗∗∗
                                [0028]          [0102]         [0041]              [0062]

7-9 years                        075 ∗∗∗        087             071 ∗∗∗             357 ∗∗∗
                                [0030]          [0033]         [0046]              [0135]
                                          ∗∗∗                            ∗∗∗
10-12 years                      066            103             067                 489 ∗∗∗
                                [0032]          [0125]         [0051]              [0224]

13-15 years                      064 ∗∗∗        073 ∗∗          054 ∗∗∗             640 ∗∗∗
                                [0037]          [0104]         [0053]              [0340]

16-18 years                      062 ∗∗∗        097             060 ∗∗∗             821 ∗∗∗
                                [0043]          [0153]         [0067]              [0502]

19-21 years                      059 ∗∗∗        099             058 ∗∗∗            1054∗∗∗
                                [0051]          [0203]         [0080]               [0742]
                                          ∗∗∗           ∗∗               ∗∗∗
22-24 years                      051            057             037                1292∗∗∗
                                [0061]          [0147]         [0081]               [1060]

25+ years                        056 ∗∗∗        130             061 ∗∗             1996∗∗∗
                                [0086]          [0427]         [0136]               [1701]
                                          ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗              ∗∗∗
Multi-unit status                161            077             140                 217 ∗∗∗
                                [0049]          [0059]         [0070]              [0112]
                                          ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗              ∗∗∗
Firm union status                211            221             336                 265 ∗∗∗
                                [0080]          [0281]         [0189]              [0132]

Right-to-work status             091            075             077                 097
                                [0125]          [0373]         [0172]              [0114]

Eligible employees % −                           077 ∗∗∗        −                    −
                                                 [0027]

Notes: Robust standard errors, clustered by establishment, are in brackets. (*), (**), (***) indicates

significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively. Models include 2-digit SIC industry, state,

and year fixed eﬀects. The following categories are omitted: 5-9 employees and 0-3 years of age.
       Table D.6. Odds ratios based on logit model estimates
 (Labor productivity minus average wage as explanatory variable)
Event:                    Certification:                    Successful          Union
                          Election Win                      Organizing Status
Probability:                (  )        (  )  (  )              (  )
                                         All Sectors
11-25 percentile           058 ∗∗∗         113            049∗∗∗             077∗
                          [0104]           [0213]          [0147]             [0106]
                                    ∗∗             ∗∗∗
26-50 percentile           078             031            045  ∗∗
                                                                                 068 ∗∗∗
                          [0202]           [0093]         [0160]             [0083]

51-75 percentile           115 ∗∗          084            099                 124 ∗∗∗
                          [0261]           [0246]         [0349]             [0126]

76-90 percentile           129 ∗           071            082                 138 ∗∗∗
                          [0366]           [0262]         [0290]             [0171]

91-100 percentile          086             105            083                 099
                          [0263]           [0345]         [0424]             [0223]

                                     Manufacturing
11-25 percentile           125             077            121                 131 ∗∗∗
                          [0186]           [0221]         [0251]             [0109]

26-50 percentile           186 ∗∗∗         059∗           154 ∗∗∗             166 ∗∗∗
                          [0239]           [0199]         [0281]             [0123]

51-75 percentile           194 ∗∗∗         051 ∗∗         148 ∗∗              195 ∗∗∗
                          [0249]           [0176]         [0271]             [0142]

76-90 percentile           233 ∗∗∗         037 ∗∗∗        141 ∗               237 ∗∗∗
                          [0308]           [0118]         [0278]             [0176]

91-100 percentile          263 ∗∗∗         043 ∗∗∗        179 ∗∗∗             288 ∗∗∗
                          [0350]           [0135]         [0349]             [0225]

Notes: Robust standard errors, clustered by establishment, are in brackets. (*), (**), (***)

indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively. Models include all other

explanatory variables in Tables 1 and 2. The 1-10 percentile category is omitted.
 Table D.7. Odds ratios based on logit model estimates — All Sectors
           (The logarithm of average wage as explanatory variable)
Event:                          Certification:                   Successful           Union
                                Election Win                     Organizing Status
Probability:                      (  )       (  )  (  )               (  )
log(average wage)                122 ∗∗∗        099             119 ∗∗∗             116 ∗∗∗
                                [0006]          [0029]         [0047]              [0009]

10-19 employees                  221 ∗∗∗        073 ∗∗∗         253 ∗∗∗             212 ∗∗∗
                                [0034]          [0023]         [0055]              [0040]

20-49 employees                  361 ∗∗∗        059 ∗∗∗         394 ∗∗∗             344 ∗∗∗
                                [0057]          [0019]         [0091]              [0078]

50-99 employees                  503 ∗∗∗        048 ∗∗∗         514 ∗∗∗             495 ∗∗∗
                                [0094]          [0019]         [0143]              [0133]

100-249 employees                611 ∗∗∗        039 ∗∗∗         586 ∗∗∗             609 ∗∗∗
                                [0124]          [0018]         [0179]              [0187]

250-499 employees                650 ∗∗∗        037 ∗∗∗         629 ∗∗∗             646 ∗∗∗
                                [0195]          [0026]         [0279]              [0274]

500+ employees                   681 ∗∗∗        022 ∗∗∗         635 ∗∗∗             783 ∗∗∗
                                [0254]          [0020]         [0349]              [0446]

4-6 years                        084 ∗∗∗        104             092 ∗∗∗             245 ∗∗∗
                                [0011]          [0029]         [0017]              [0023]
                                        ∗∗∗                                ∗∗∗
7-9 years                        077            099             085                 364 ∗∗∗
                                [0012]          [0033]         [0019]              [0047]

10-12 years                      071 ∗∗∗        110 ∗∗          082 ∗∗∗             467 ∗∗∗
                                [0013]          [0045]         [0022]              [0070]

13-15 years                      068 ∗∗∗        098             077 ∗∗∗             586 ∗∗∗
                                [0015]          [0047]         [0024]              [0100]

16-18 years                      064 ∗∗∗        103             075 ∗∗∗             713 ∗∗∗
                                [0017]          [0061]         [0028]              [0139]

19-21 years                      062 ∗∗∗        100             072 ∗∗∗             855 ∗∗∗
                                [0020]          [0071]         [0033]              [0190]

22-24 years                      058 ∗∗∗        093             068 ∗∗∗            1002∗∗∗
                                [0024]          [0088]         [0039]               [0260]
                                        ∗∗∗                                ∗∗
25+ years                        058            111             067                1249∗∗∗
                                [0031]          [0138]         [0047]               [0403]
                                        ∗∗∗             ∗∗∗                ∗∗∗
Multi-unit status                366            044             194                 233 ∗∗∗
                                [0058]          [0013]         [0047]              [0061]

Firm union status                511 ∗∗∗        601 ∗∗∗        1187∗∗∗              799 ∗∗∗
                                [0061]          [0161]          [0238]             [0164]

Right-to-work status             102            115            126∗∗∗               101
                                [0046]          [0115]           [0084]            [0054]

Eligible employees % −                           075 ∗∗∗        −                    −
                                                 [0005]

Notes: Robust standard errors, clustered by establishment, are in brackets. (*), (**), (***) indicates

significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively. Models include 2-digit SIC industry, state,

and year fixed eﬀects. The following categories are omitted: 1-9 employees and 0-3 years of age.
Table D.8. Odds ratios based on logit model estimates — Manufacturing
            (The logarithm of average wage as explanatory variable)
Event:                          Certification:                   Successful           Union
                                Election Win                     Organizing Status
Probability:                      (  )       (  )  (  )               (  )
log(average wage)                123 ∗∗∗        073 ∗∗∗         113 ∗∗∗             101
                                [0054]          [0036]         [0032]              [0025]

10-19 employees                  629 ∗∗∗        058 ∗∗∗         612 ∗∗∗             332 ∗∗∗
                                [0348]          [0070]         [0481]              [0043]

20-49 employees                 1593∗∗∗         044 ∗∗∗        1421∗∗∗              687 ∗∗∗
                                [0825]          [0049]          [1061]             [0078]

50-99 employees                 2818∗∗∗         033 ∗∗∗        2139∗∗∗             1076∗∗∗
                                [1592]          [0039]          [1804]              [0141]

100-249 employees               3611∗∗∗         025 ∗∗∗        2331∗∗∗             1237∗∗∗
                                [2154]          [0030]          [2126]              [0212]
                                          ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗                 ∗∗∗
250-499 employees               3789            022            2373                1160∗∗∗
                                [2731]          [0034]          [2736]              [0333]

500+ employees                  2619∗∗∗         015 ∗∗∗        1465∗∗∗              934 ∗∗∗
                                [2385]          [0033]          [2254]             [0590]

4-6 years                        084 ∗∗∗        085             078 ∗∗∗             253 ∗∗∗
                                [0028]          [0061]         [0041]              [0027]
                                          ∗∗∗                            ∗∗∗
7-9 years                        076            088             072                 387 ∗∗∗
                                [0030]          [0075]         [0046]              [0049]

10-12 years                      067 ∗∗∗        104             070 ∗∗∗             536 ∗∗∗
                                [0032]          [0106]         [0053]              [0069]

13-15 years                      064 ∗∗∗        074             055 ∗∗∗             707 ∗∗∗
                                [0037]          [0096]         [0053]              [0095]

16-18 years                      062 ∗∗∗        098             060 ∗∗∗             911 ∗∗∗
                                [0045]          [0144]         [0068]              [0131]

19-21 years                      059 ∗∗∗        105             061 ∗∗∗            1172∗∗∗
                                [0050]          [0189]         [0082]               [0181]

22-24 years                      052 ∗∗∗        056             037 ∗∗∗            1447∗∗∗
                                [0060]          [0146]         [0080]               [0245]
                                          ∗∗∗                            ∗∗
25+ years                        053            131             057                1869∗∗∗
                                [0082]          [0431]         [0129]               [1982]
                                          ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗              ∗∗∗
Multi-unit status                168            078             149                 236 ∗∗∗
                                [0054]          [0045]         [0078]              [0127]

Firm union status                213 ∗∗∗        239 ∗∗∗         348 ∗∗∗             277 ∗∗∗
                                [0079]          [0185]         [0191]              [0136]

Right-to-work status             088            087             082                 097
                                [0119]          [0252]         [0179]              [0111]

Eligible employees % −                           077 ∗∗∗        −                    −
                                                 [0019]

Notes: Robust standard errors, clustered by establishment, are in brackets. (*), (**), (***) indicates

significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively. Models include 2-digit SIC industry, state,

and year fixed eﬀects. The following categories are omitted: 1-9 employees and 0-3 years of age.
            Table D.9. Odds ratios based on logit model estimates — All Sectors
        (Actual minus predicted logarithm of average wage as explanatory variable)
Event:                                                  Certification:                   Successful      Union
                                                        Election Win                     Organizing Status
Probability:                                              (  )      (  )  (  )           (  )
Actual − predicted log(average wage)                    130 ∗∗∗         098            125 ∗∗∗        121 ∗∗∗
                                                        [0007]         [0014]          [0011]         [0010]

10-19 employees                                         219 ∗∗∗         074 ∗∗∗        250 ∗∗∗        211 ∗∗∗
                                                        [0033]         [0023]          [0054]         [0039]

20-49 employees                                         359 ∗∗∗         059 ∗∗∗        390 ∗∗∗        341 ∗∗∗
                                                        [0056]         [0020]          [0088]         [0077]

50-99 employees                                         504 ∗∗∗         048 ∗∗∗        512 ∗∗∗        495 ∗∗∗
                                                        [0093]         [0019]          [0141]         [0133]

100-249 employees                                       616 ∗∗∗         040 ∗∗∗        588 ∗∗∗        613 ∗∗∗
                                                        [0123]         [0018]          [0178]         [0187]

250-499 employees                                       658 ∗∗∗         037 ∗∗∗        633 ∗∗∗        650 ∗∗∗
                                                        [0196]         [0026]          [0280]         [0275]

500+ employees                                          705 ∗∗∗         022 ∗∗∗        652 ∗∗∗        802 ∗∗∗
                                                        [0262]         [0020]          [0357]         [0457]

4-6 years                                               085 ∗∗∗         103            093 ∗∗∗        245 ∗∗∗
                                                        [0011]         [0029]          [0017]         [0023]
                                                               ∗∗∗                                 ∗∗∗
7-9 years                                               078             099            087            367 ∗∗∗
                                                        [0012]         [0034]          [0019]         [0046]

10-12 years                                             073 ∗∗∗         109 ∗∗         085 ∗∗∗        474 ∗∗∗
                                                        [0013]         [0045]          [0022]         [0070]

13-15 years                                             071 ∗∗∗         098            080 ∗∗∗        598 ∗∗∗
                                                        [0015]         [0047]          [0025]         [0100]

16-18 years                                             067 ∗∗∗         103            079 ∗∗∗        731 ∗∗∗
                                                        [0018]         [0061]          [0029]         [0139]

19-21 years                                             066 ∗∗∗         100            076 ∗∗∗        881 ∗∗∗
                                                        [0021]         [0071]          [0034]         [0193]

22-24 years                                             062 ∗∗∗         093            072 ∗∗∗        1039∗∗∗
                                                        [0026]         [0088]          [0042]         [0266]
                                                               ∗∗∗                                 ∗∗
25+ years                                               063             111            073            1306∗∗∗
                                                        [0033]         [0136]          [0051]         [0416]
                                                               ∗∗∗              ∗∗∗                ∗∗∗
Multi-unit status                                       389             044            203            245 ∗∗∗
                                                        [0059]         [0013]          [0049]         [0063]

Firm union status                                       513 ∗∗∗         600 ∗∗∗        1192∗∗∗        801 ∗∗∗
                                                        [0060]         [0161]          [0238]         [0164]

Right-to-work status                                    102             115            126∗∗∗         101
                                                        [0046]         [0116]           [0083]        [0054]

Eligible employees %                                    −                075 ∗∗∗        −               −
                                                                        [0005]

Notes: Robust standard errors, clustered by establishment, are in brackets. (*), (**), (***) indicates

significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively. Models include 2-digit SIC industry, state,

and year fixed eﬀects. The following categories are omitted: 1-9 employees and 0-3 years of age.
        Table D.10. Odds ratios based on logit model estimates — Manufacturing
        (Actual minus predicted logarithm of average wage as explanatory variable)
Event:                                                  Certification:                   Successful      Union
                                                        Election Win                     Organizing Status
Probability:                                              (  )      (  )  (  )           (  )
Actual − predicted log(average wage)                    118 ∗∗∗         076 ∗∗∗        109 ∗∗∗        099
                                                        [0023]         [0037]          [0033]         [0026]

10-19 employees                                         633 ∗∗∗         059 ∗∗∗        617 ∗∗∗        333 ∗∗∗
                                                        [0351]         [0071]          [0485]         [0197]

20-49 employees                                         1603∗∗∗         045 ∗∗∗        1432∗∗∗        691 ∗∗∗
                                                        [0833]         [0050]          [1074]         [0457]

50-99 employees                                         2838∗∗∗         034 ∗∗∗        2156∗∗∗        1081∗∗∗
                                                        [1607]         [0040]          [1825]         [0807]

100-249 employees                                       3646∗∗∗         025 ∗∗∗        2353∗∗∗        1243∗∗∗
                                                        [2178]         [0031]          [2151]         [1016]
                                                                  ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗                ∗∗∗
250-499 employees                                       3856            023            2406           1166∗∗∗
                                                        [2778]         [0035]          [2772]         [1167]

500+ employees                                          2753∗∗∗         015 ∗∗∗        1514∗∗∗        942 ∗∗∗
                                                        [2491]         [0032]          [2315]         [1234]

4-6 years                                               085 ∗∗∗         085 ∗∗         078 ∗∗∗        253 ∗∗∗
                                                        [0028]         [0061]          [0041]         [0066]
                                                               ∗∗∗              ∗                  ∗∗∗
7-9 years                                               077             086            073            388 ∗∗∗
                                                        [0031]         [0073]          [0047]         [0145]

10-12 years                                             069 ∗∗∗         101            071 ∗∗∗        537 ∗∗∗
                                                        [0033]         [0102]          [0053]         [0242]

13-15 years                                             066 ∗∗∗         071 ∗∗∗        056 ∗∗∗        709 ∗∗∗
                                                        [0038]         [0092]          [0054]         [0372]

16-18 years                                             065 ∗∗∗         091            062 ∗∗∗        913 ∗∗∗
                                                        [0044]         [0135]          [0069]         [0551]

19-21 years                                             062 ∗∗∗         099            063 ∗∗∗        1175∗∗∗
                                                        [0053]         [0177]          [0084]         [0818]

22-24 years                                             055 ∗∗∗         051 ∗∗∗        039 ∗∗∗        1450∗∗∗
                                                        [0064]         [0134]          [0082]         [1177]
                                                               ∗∗∗                                 ∗∗
25+ years                                               057             119            059            1873∗∗∗
                                                        [0088]         [0389]          [0133]         [1856]
                                                               ∗∗∗              ∗∗∗                ∗∗∗
Multi-unit status                                       184             068            157            237 ∗∗∗
                                                        [0060]         [0041]          [0082]         [0128]

Firm union status                                       214 ∗∗∗         236 ∗∗∗        350 ∗∗∗        277 ∗∗∗
                                                        [0080]         [0183]          [0192]         [0137]

Right-to-work status                                    088             088            082            098
                                                        [0119]         [0254]          [0178]         [0112]

Eligible employees %                                    −                077 ∗∗∗        −               −
                                                                        [0019]

Notes: Robust standard errors, clustered by establishment, are in brackets. (*), (**), (***) indicates

significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively. Models include 2-digit SIC industry, state,

and year fixed eﬀects. The following categories are omitted: 1-9 employees and 0-3 years of age.
       Table D.11. Odds ratios based on logit model estimates — All Sectors
[Size (employment) and productivity (value of shipments per employee) eﬀects together]

Event:                       Certification:                   Successful           Union
                             Election Win                     Organizing Status
Probability:                   (  )      (  )  (  )                (  )
10-19 employees              625 ∗∗∗        151             715 ∗∗∗             479 ∗∗∗
                             [2210]         [0886]          [3341]              [1060]

20-49 employees              1089∗∗∗        075             1032∗∗∗             954 ∗∗∗
                             [3471]         [0424]          [3436]              [1857]

50-99 employees              1646∗∗∗        073             1815∗∗∗             1371∗∗∗
                             [4725]         [0551]          [7011]              [2605]
                                       ∗∗∗                              ∗∗∗
100-249 employees 1845                      067             1873                1436∗∗∗
                             [5793]         [0523]          [7845]              [2723]

250-499 employees 2219∗∗∗                   045             2573 ∗∗∗            2360∗∗∗
                             [8946]         [0647]          [14463]             [5437]
                                       ∗∗∗                              ∗∗∗
500+ employees               1471           042             2053                2712∗∗∗
                             [4296]         [0300]          [4677]              [7450]

11-25 percentile             081            058 ∗           052∗∗               083
                             [0242]         [0191]           [0186]             [0218]

26-50 percentile             149            054             108                 105
                             [0404]         [0211]          [0444]              [0259]

51-75 percentile             146            043             136                 130
                             [0459]         [0317]          [0564]              [0319]

76-90 percentile             109            035             175 ∗               124
                             [0297]         [0511]          [0421]              [0318]

91-100 percentile            143            051             177 ∗               104
                             [0578]         [0352]          [0417]              [0255]

Notes: Robust standard errors, clustered by establishment, are in brackets. (*), (**), (***) indicates

significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively. Models include all other explanatory variables

in Table 1. The following categories are omitted: 1-9 employees, 0-3 years of age, 1-10 percentile.
    Table D.12. Odds ratios based on logit model estimates — Manufacturing
[Size (employment) and productivity (value of shipments per employee) eﬀects together]

Event:                       Certification:                   Successful           Union
                             Election Win                     Organizing Status
Probability:                   (  )      (  )  (  )                (  )
10-19 employees              761 ∗∗∗         074            694 ∗∗∗             375 ∗∗∗
                             [1086]         [0107]          [0278]              [1176]

20-49 employees              1949∗∗∗         077            1683∗∗∗             546 ∗∗∗
                             [2605]         [0073]          [0627]              [1741]

50-99 employees              3438∗∗∗         080            2603∗∗∗             931 ∗∗∗
                             [4921]         [0049]          [1045]              [3165]

100-249 employees 4166∗∗∗                    084            2825∗∗∗             950 ∗∗∗
                             [6343]         [0038]          [1225]              [3284]

250-499 employees 4422∗∗∗                    076            2542∗∗∗             774 ∗∗∗
                             [7845]         [0045]          [1558]              [2810]

500+ employees               3785∗∗∗         080            2151∗∗∗             658 ∗∗∗
                             [8268]         [0048]          [1284]              [2496]

11-25 percentile             138 ∗∗         056∗∗           107                 138∗
                             [0192]          [0212]         [0220]              [0244]
                                    ∗∗∗                ∗             ∗∗∗
26-50 percentile             198             063            158                 186 ∗∗∗
                             [0237]         [0181]          [0238]              [0268]
                                    ∗∗∗                ∗∗            ∗∗
51-75 percentile             190             057            142                 281 ∗∗∗
                             [0229]         [0163]          [0290]              [0497]

76-90 percentile             230 ∗∗∗         036 ∗∗∗        132                 278 ∗∗∗
                             [0290]         [0183]          [0322]              [0399]

91-100 percentile            270 ∗∗∗         041 ∗∗∗        167 ∗∗∗             295 ∗∗∗
                             [0347]         [0231]          [0417]              [0331]

Notes: Robust standard errors, clustered by establishment, are in brackets. (*), (**), (***) indicates

significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively. Models Models include all other explanatory variables

in Table 1. The following categories are omitted: 1-9 employees, 0-3 years of age, 1-10 percentile.
