NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MEDICAID: A REVIEW OF THE LITERATURE
Marianne P. Bitler
Madeline Zavodny
Working Paper 20169
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20169

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2014

This chapter was prepared for the Edward Elgar Handbook in Law and Economics Federalism Volume.
We thank Kitt Carpenter, Jonathan Klick and Lara Shore-Sheppard for helpful comments. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Marianne P. Bitler and Madeline Zavodny. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Medicaid: A Review of the Literature
Marianne P. Bitler and Madeline Zavodny
NBER Working Paper No. 20169
May 2014
JEL No. I1,I13
ABSTRACT
We review the existing literature about the effects of the Medicaid program. We first describe the program’s
structure and how it has changed over time. We then discuss findings on coverage, crowd out, take-up
and health. Finally, we look at effects of the program on non-health outcomes such as welfare use
and labor supply, marriage and fertility, and savings.

Marianne P. Bitler
Department of Economics
University of California, Irvine
3151 Social Science Plaza
Irvine, CA 96297
and NBER
mbitler@uci.edu
Madeline Zavodny
Agnes Scott College
141 E. College Ave.
Decatur, GA 30030
mzavodny@agnesscott.edu

Medicaid is the public health insurance program for eligible low-income individuals and families
in the United States. The program has grown considerably since it was created in 1965. Medicaid
and the related Children’s Health Insurance Program were projected to cover over 60 million
people, almost one-fifth of the population, in fiscal year 2010 at a cost of $427 billion. These
numbers will surely rise as a result of the Affordable Care Act (ACA), the health insurance
reform law passed in 2010, which among other changes allows states to expand Medicaid
eligibility for adults to 138 percent of the federal poverty guideline.
Medicaid is jointly funded by the federal and state governments and is administered by
states. States must follow certain federal mandates but also traditionally have had considerable
leeway to determine eligibility and services. This creates cross-state variation that helps
researchers identify the program’s effects on people’s behavior. Indeed, states are not even
required to have a Medicaid program. Twenty-six states began offering Medicaid within the first
year it was created, and 23 others plus the District of Columbia joined over the next few years.
The holdout was Arizona, which created a Medicaid program only in 1982 (Gruber, 2003).
There are large differences across states in per-capita Medicaid expenditures.
Expenditures per Medicaid beneficiary in fiscal year 2007 were $8450 in New York and $3168
in California, compared with an overall average of $5163 (Gilmer and Kronick, 2011). These
differences partly arise from the considerable discretion states have to set reimbursement levels
to health care providers and to set eligibility rules. They also arise from differences in patterns of
procedure use, outcomes and the underlying characteristics of populations, such as the
percentages elderly and disabled (e.g., Fisher et al., 2003a, 2003b). The partisan make-up of the
state legislature appears to affect state eligibility rules for children, with states with more
Democrats in the legislature having more generous eligibility rules; political party of the

1

governor and partisan control of the legislature are not significantly related to program
generosity, however (Baughman and Milyo, 2008).
This chapter provides an overview of the economics of Medicaid. After explaining how
the program is structured, we briefly discuss the economics of health insurance and then delve
into two key issues: take-up and crowd-out. The chapter then turns to the evidence on the effects
of Medicaid on health and other behaviors. We conclude with some thoughts on the future of
Medicaid and important areas for future research.

Program Structure
To be eligible for Medicaid, a person must meet resource and categorical restrictions. The
resource restrictions include having income below a specified low threshold that varies with
family size and composition. States determine the income thresholds, subject to minimums and
maximums set by the federal government. Some states also impose a limit on assets, although
few states consider assets when determining children’s eligibility (Department of Health and
Human Services, 2010). Prior to the implementation of the ACA, the categorical restrictions in
most states limited eligibility to people who belong to one of several demographic groups:
children, parents of dependent children, pregnant women, the blind and disabled and the elderly.
There is also a “medically needy” program for people who would otherwise be eligible but
whose incomes are too high to qualify for Medicaid unless their medical expenses are subtracted
from their income. During the 2000s, a few states extended coverage to low-income, nondisabled non-elderly childless adults and/or parents.
The ACA encourages states to expand eligibility for Medicaid. Federal funding has been
made available to states that expand eligibility to people with incomes below 138 percent of the

2

federal poverty level. This extends coverage to non-disabled, childless adults of working age
with relatively low incomes, a group that previously had a very low rate of Medicaid eligibility.
If all states choose to participate the ACA-related Medicaid expansions, up to 16 million
additional people will become eligible for Medicaid by 2014. However, as of December 2013, 14
states were planning to participate in 2014, two at a later date and 23 had no plans to participate
in the expansions, thus continuing the federalist nature of the current system (Kaiser Family
Foundation, 2013).
Historically, Medicaid eligibility was limited to people receiving cash welfare benefits
through the Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC) or Supplemental Security Income
(SSI) programs.1 Welfare reform and other legislative changes during the 1980s and 1990s
eroded the link between Medicaid and cash welfare programs. As Figure 1 shows, these changes
led to a doubling in the percentage of the population covered by Medicaid at some point in a
given year.
Medicaid eligibility was expanded dramatically for children and pregnant women
beginning in the mid-1980s. The early phase of the expansions required states to cover several
groups of poor pregnant women that did not meet the family structure requirements of the AFDC
program. In the later phases of the expansion, states were first allowed to cover additional groups
of low- and middle-income pregnant women and young children and then required to do so. For
example, states were required to cover pregnant women and children under age 6 in families with
incomes up to 133 percent of the federal poverty line by April 1990, and by July 1991 they were
required to begin phasing in coverage for all children under age 19 in families with incomes up

1

AFDC (reconfigured as Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) as part of the 1996 welfare reform law)
provided monthly benefits to low-income families with minor children. SSI is a program administered by the Social
Security Administration that pays monthly benefits to disabled, blind, and elderly (65 and older) individuals with
low incomes and assets.

3

to 100 percent of the poverty line.2 States also were given the option to extend coverage to
pregnant women and children under age 6 in families with incomes up to 185 percent of the
poverty line. States can extend coverage even further at their own expense.
As a result of the expansions, the fraction of all children aged 0-15 eligible for Medicaid
increased from around 13 percent in 1983 to almost 31 percent in 1996. However, the fraction
actually enrolled in Medicaid only increased from 13 percent to about 23 percent (Gruber, 2003).
There are several potential reasons for such low take-up, as explored below. Another result of the
expansions is that over one-third—and in some recent years over two-fifths—of births in the
U.S. are covered by Medicaid each year.
There was considerable variation in the timing and extent of the expansions across states.
For example, in July 1991, 29 states exceeded the required threshold of 133 percent of the
poverty line for pregnant women and young children; six of those had expanded coverage just in
the previous six months. Eligibility increases tended to be larger in the South, where states
traditionally had very low income limits for AFDC eligibility, than in the Northeast and West,
where AFDC programs tended to be relatively generous even before the expansions. In the mid1990s, a number of states received waivers from the traditional AFDC program that gave them
even more latitude to expand Medicaid eligibility. Finally, the formal delinking of cash welfare
for families with children from Medicaid eligibility that came with federal welfare reform
devolved even more flexibility to the states in determining eligibility.
The State Children’s Health Insurance Program (SCHIP, later shortened to CHIP) was
created in 1997 to provide public health insurance to children in families with incomes too high
to be eligible for Medicaid but typically too low to afford private health insurance. States were
allowed to provide coverage to uninsured children in families with incomes up to 200 percent of
2

See Gruber (2003) for details on the expansions.

4

the poverty line or 50 percentage points above their threshold for traditional Medicaid. This led
to considerable cross-state variation in program generosity. States also differ in the degree of
cost-sharing and the types of services covered and in whether expansions were implemented
through the state’s traditional Medicaid program or not. When the program was reauthorized in
2009, the minimum eligibility threshold was set at 200 percent of the poverty line. Together,
Medicaid and CHIP covered one-third of all children in the U.S. in 2009 (Kaiser Family
Foundation, 2010a). As discussed below, crowd-out from private insurance is a major concern
with regard to Medicaid and CHIP.
Partly as a result of the expansions, women of child-bearing age and children comprised
about 70 percent of Medicaid recipients in 2009. However, the elderly and the disabled
accounted for the majority of program expenditures, largely because of the high cost of longterm care. Medicaid covers a large share of the low income elderly and disabled. Nearly 8.8
million Medicare beneficiaries have incomes low enough to qualify for Medicaid. These people
are called “dual eligibles.” Medicaid covers these participants’ Medicare premiums and costsharing and services not covered by Medicare, such as long-term care. In 32 states and DC, SSI
beneficiaries are automatically eligible for Medicaid. In another seven states, SSI beneficiaries
are eligible for Medicaid but must file a separate application. The remaining states have rules for
Medicaid eligibility that differ from the eligibility rules for SSI.
Another important component of Medicaid eligibility involves citizenship or legal
residency.3 Before welfare reform, most documented legal residents were eligible for safety net
programs like Medicaid on the same terms as U.S. citizens. Unauthorized immigrants were
typically ineligible for all benefits except emergency Medicaid. Emergency Medicaid includes

3

Bitler and Hoynes (2013) survey immigrant eligibility for Medicaid and SCHIP as well as other safety net
programs.

5

coverage for emergency medical conditions that can last for a limited period and can include
pregnancy and limited post-partum care. The passage of the Personal Responsibility and Work
Opportunity Reconciliation Act (PRWORA) and the Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant
Responsibility Act in 1996 rescinded many benefits for documented (legal) immigrants. At the
same time, responsibility for deciding eligibility for various immigrant groups shifted
considerably to the states. Many states have chosen to cover both permanent residents and
qualified alien immigrants as well as those permanently residing under color of law (e.g., New
York). Federal law has since changed, allowing more groups of non-citizens to be covered.
Medicaid participation declined among immigrants relative to U.S. natives after welfare reform
(Watson 2010).
A number of states have obtained what are termed section 1115 research and
demonstration waivers that allow them to explore other ways of broadening coverage as well as
to explore effects of other changes to Medicaid rules. For example, in addition to expanding
eligibility, states can explore using different rules in different parts of the state, giving different
benefits to different groups, restricting access to different providers or mandating use of
managed care and changing reimbursements. However, states cannot alter some aspects of the
program, such as services for pregnant women and children. States also can get family planning
waivers to expand provision of family planning services to populations not otherwise eligible for
Medicaid or SCHIP (e.g., Kearney and Levine, 2009). These experiments or pilots must not
reduce access or quality of care, and they must be budget neutral. This is the authority under
which Arizona first implemented a Medicaid program, which was in place from 1982 to 2006.
This is also the same demonstration program through which the state of Massachusetts
implemented parts of its health care reform.

6

Costs, Reimbursement and Managed Care
Medicaid accounts for about one-sixth of all health care spending, making it a large item in
federal and state budgets. Indeed, Medicaid represents the largest transfer of funds from the
federal government to the states. The federal government shares from a minimum of 50 percent
to a maximum of 83 percent of Medicaid costs with states. The matching rates—called the
“Federal Medical Assistance Percentage,” or FMAP—were temporarily increased during 20082011 because of the economic downturn.
States have engaged in a variety of creative tactics to increase federal funding and reduce
their own financial contribution to their Medicaid program. These tactics involve taxes on health
care providers; intergovernmental transfers (IGTs) from publicly-owned providers to state or
local governments; upper payment limits (UPLs), in which providers receive payments in excess
of costs and then make IGTs back to the state; and disproportionate-share hospital (DSH)
payments, which are federal funds given to states to allocate to hospitals that serve
disproportionate numbers of low-income patients (the ACA reduces DHS payments, under the
rationale that places that expand Medicaid to adults under 138 percent of the poverty level will
need less reimbursement for uncompensated care for the uninsured).4 A study offers this
example: a state receives $10 million revenue from a hospital via a tax (or via an IGT if it is a
public hospital). The state then makes a $12 million DSH payment to the hospital. If the state has
a 50 percent FMAP, the state gets $6 million in federal matching funds. In the end, the hospital
has netted $2 million, the state has netted $4 million and the federal government has paid $6
million, only one-third of which actually went to the hospital (Coughlin, Ku and Kim, 2000).
4

Practically, this provides additional financial incentive for states to adopt the Medicaid expansion. States that do
not adopt the expansion not only forgo almost 100 percent federal funding, but do so in the context of reduced DHS
payments.

7

The fact that states have considerable discretion over their Medicaid program creates room for
such shenanigans to occur. In response, the federal government has imposed restrictions aimed at
ending such tactics and has cut the size of the DSH program (and will do so more as ACA is
implemented). This is important since research indicates that DSH funding is associated with
reduced mortality if states are not able to expropriate it (Baicker and Staiger, 2005).
In an effort to control Medicaid program costs, states impose caps on how much they will
reimburse health care providers. These caps vary greatly across states. Medicaid reimbursement
levels fell in inflation-adjusted terms over 2003-2008, and Medicaid reimbursement levels were
only 72 percent of Medicare reimbursement levels in 2008 (Zuckerman, Williams and Stockley,
2009). Low reimbursement levels have made some health care providers unwilling to treat
patients covered by Medicaid. Twenty-eight percent of physicians surveyed in 2008 reported
their practices were not accepting any new Medicaid patients (Boukus, Cassil and O’Malley,
2009). Medicaid reimbursement levels appear to affect participants’ access to doctors (Shen and
Zuckerman, 2005) and to dentists (Buchmueller, Orzol and Shore-Sheppard, 2013).
Many states also have turned to managed care programs as a way to control costs.5
Medicaid managed care programs either pay a fixed monthly fee to a managed care provider
(called “capitated” plans because costs are made on a per patient basis) or combine a fixed fee to
a primary care provider with fee-for-service payments to other providers (called “primary care
case management”). About 70 percent of Medicaid recipients receive some or all of their
Medicaid-covered services through managed care (Kaiser Family Foundation, 2010a). There is
considerable variation across states. In some states, the vast majority of Medicaid recipients are
enrolled in managed care while two states (Alaska and Wyoming) do not have a Medicaid

5

Another reason cited for implementing managed care is that it enables enrollees to improve their health outcomes
by being part of a health care system that encourages preventive care and improves access to primary care.

8

managed care program at all. Mandatory managed care requires one of two kinds of waivers,
either the 1115 research and demonstration waivers described above or a section 1915(b)
freedom of choice waiver.6 As early as September 1995, 42 states and the District of Columbia
had implemented 1915(b) waivers (Rowland and Hanson, 1996).
Findings are mixed about the extent to which mandates to move Medicaid recipients to
managed care plans reduce expenditures (Duggan, 2004; Duggan and Hayford, 2013; Herring
and Adams, 2011) and about the extent to which the move to managed care has affected
utilization (Howell et al., 2004; Baker and Afendulis, 2005; Bindman et al., 2005; Currie and
Fahr, 2005; Kaestner et al., 2005). Until recently, most Medicaid managed care was provided to
women and children. Some studies project big cost savings from shifting the aged and disabled
Medicaid populations to managed care, although research on the cost savings regarding the
disabled is mixed (e.g., Lo Sasso and Freund, 2000; Coughlin, Long and Graves, 2008/2009;
Burns, 2009). We discuss impacts on health below.
Long-term care accounts for over one-third of total Medicaid spending. Medicaid covers
institutional services in residential facilities, including room and board, at Medicaid-certified
nursing homes, which provide skilled nursing care, rehabilitation and long term care and
predominately serve the aged and younger individuals with physical disabilities, and at other
institutions that serve individuals with mental retardation and developmental disabilities. Since
1983, Medicaid has provided some long-term care via home and community-based services in
some states through what are termed home and community-based service waivers.
Finally, Medicaid subsidizes hospitals that serve a large share of low-income patients
(e.g., the uninsured or those with Medicaid) under the DSH program. Funds are allocated to

6

Introduced in the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1981, section 1915(b) waivers allow states to implement
mandatory managed care for a subset of the state or a subset of the state’s Medicaid beneficiaries.

9

states, which then distribute them to qualifying hospitals. The 2010 health insurance reform law
will reduce DSH payments during 2014-2020.

Overview of the Economics of Health Insurance
Like markets for other forms of insurance, the market for health insurance involves two classic
asymmetric information problems: adverse selection and moral hazard. Adverse selection arises
when people who expect to have higher-than-average health care costs are more likely to seek
health insurance. This is a problem if insurers cannot charge higher prices to policyholders who
are likely to have higher claims. Moral hazard arises when having health insurance changes
people’s choices in ways that increase health care costs. For example, people with insurance
might visit the doctor for minor ailments because they know the insurer bears part of the cost of
the visits.
Because Medicaid must cover all individuals and families that meet the eligibility
requirements, the program experiences adverse selection. The population eligible for Medicaid is
also likely to be adversely selected—in worse health than others—given the positive relationship
between health and income in the U.S. This is part of why Medicaid is publicly funded: the
people it covers would not be able to pay the premiums of actuarially-fair private insurance
plans, insurance that charged them fees that covered their expected claims. Medicaid therefore
subsidizes—typically at a 100 percent rate—their health insurance. The subsidy is designed to
ensure that certain groups have health care coverage and therefore access to health care. This
may be socially optimal since some health care involves positive externalities, benefits to people
besides the recipients themselves. These positive externalities are thought to be particularly large
for children and pregnant women, the groups that were the focus of the Medicaid expansions

10

during the 1980s and 1990s. Research on Wisconsin’s Medicaid program that included
premiums and copays for relatively high-income participants suggests that participation and
health care visits are very responsive to such costs (Dague, 2013).
In theory, the fact that Medicaid makes health care essentially free for participants should
create moral hazard as well. However, not all providers accept Medicaid patients, and seeking
health care requires spending time and effort in addition to (usually) money. These factors may
limit the extent to which Medicaid patients consume “too much” health care. It is also not clear
that Medicaid patients receive the same quality of care as privately-insured patients. This is
another asymmetric information problem—health care providers are better informed than
patients in general, and perhaps even more so than Medicaid patients. Medicaid patients then will
receive the optimal quantity and quality of care only if providers are concerned about providing
it, either because of professional ethics or because of regulations or other forces.
It is difficult to assess whether Medicaid participants receive the same quality of health
care as other patients. Medical care is a credence good—its quality often cannot be measured
either before or after it is received. Even if research shows differences in medical care or health
outcomes between Medicaid participants and other people, the source of those differences may
be unclear. There are likely to be differences between Medicaid participants and other people
that researchers cannot observe that would result in differences in medical care and health
outcomes regardless of the quality of care. Studies on the effects of Medicaid therefore tend to
focus on relatively simple outcomes that would respond quickly to the availability of health
insurance, such as the likelihood that a young child made a well-child visit in the last year or that

11

a pregnant woman received prenatal care during the first trimester, rather than on more complex
health outcomes.7
How Medicaid structures its payments to providers may affect participants’ medical care
and health outcomes. Providers who are paid a flat fee per Medicaid patient—the capitated
managed care model—may not be willing to take on relatively unhealthy patients, or perhaps any
Medicaid patients at all if payments are too low. However, capitated models should create
incentives for cost-effective preventative care, conditional on a provider being willing to take on
a patient. Medicaid managed care programs based on a fee-for-service model, in contrast, may
create incentives for providers to supply services that are relatively profitable even if they are not
cost-effective. Research shows that financial incentives tend to affect providers in the ways
predicted by economic theory (e.g., Adams, Bronstein and Florence, 2003; Quast, Sappington
and Shenkman, 2008). Interestingly, Garthwaite (2012) shows that the introduction of SCHIP led
to both a decrease in hours spend by pediatricians on patient care and an increase in the share of
physicians participating in the program.
An additional consideration is that states have flexibility to set provider reimbursement
levels. Levels are almost always set lower than Medicare or private reimbursement levels, and
this is often cited as a reason for providers to stop accepting Medicaid patients. Yet the evidence
is not as damning as one might expect. Cunningham and May (2006) report that 85 percent of
physicians were serving Medicaid patients in 2004-2005. Zuckerman et al. (2004) report that in
2001, 54 percent of all physicians and 67 percent of specialists were accepting most or all new
Medicaid patients.

7

A further challenge we discuss below is that health itself likely does not respond right away to the availability of
health insurance.

12

Medicaid also has the power to affect prices for prescriptions. Since a large number of
people obtain pharmaceutical coverage from Medicaid, this suggests the program can influence
prices. Medicaid uses the average private sector price to decide what it will pay, which gives
drug makers an incentive to increase private prices if Medicaid will be a large purchaser
(Duggan and Scott-Morton, 2006). The federal structure of the Medicaid program may reduce its
power to influence prices for other aspects of health care, however, since states differ in their
reimbursement rates to providers and coverage of some services.
Economic theory also predicts that targeted programs like Medicaid affect participants’
behavior along other dimensions. People may change their behavior in order to qualify for the
program. For example, families may work less in order to keep their income below the program
threshold, women may opt not to marry, and the elderly may spend down their assets in order to
be eligible for Medicaid. The empirical evidence on these theories is discussed below.
Government transfer programs like Medicaid affect the general population, not just
participants and providers. Transfer programs are funded via taxes, which distort people’s
behavior. However, targeted programs like Medicaid cost less than universal programs that cover
the entire population. There is an efficiency tradeoff—targeted programs may create more
behavioral distortions since people change their behavior to be eligible, but they require less tax
revenue than a universal program would and hence create fewer tax-related distortions. An
additional inefficiency with regard to Medicaid involves crowd out, displacement from private
insurance to public insurance.

13

Crowd-out
Individuals and families may opt not to have private health insurance if they are eligible for
Medicaid or may drop existing private insurance if they become eligible for public insurance.
This is termed “crowd-out” in the economics literature.8 People covered by Medicaid typically
have far lower out of pocket health care costs than people with private health insurance since
Medicaid is highly subsidized. From a broader perspective, however, crowd-out does not
necessarily confer any savings; it transfers costs from certain individuals and families (and
possibly their employers) to taxpayers without necessarily improving health. Indeed, if Medicaid
recipients receive worse medical care, crowd out may be a public health concern as well as a
fiscal problem. On the other hand, to the extent that the transfers are welfare enhancing for lowincome families by freeing up funds otherwise used for health insurance and societal preferences
put more weight on income to the bottom of the distribution than on income accruing higher up,
crowd-out could be welfare enhancing.
Findings on the extent of crowd-out are mixed. In the first and seminal paper in this
literature, Cutler and Gruber (1996) estimate that the crowd-out rate was almost 50 percent
during 1987-1992: For every two people who took up Medicaid as a result of the expansions, one
person dropped or did not take up private coverage. In a now standard approach, this paper used
survey data on income and demographics for a national sample of children and state rules
concerning eligibility to simulate state eligibility rates. This approach avoids endogeneity
problems associated with modeling take up of private or public insurance as a function of
family’s own Medicaid eligibility. If a researcher simply regressed outcomes on own eligibility
(as imputed by the researcher), a host of issues could arise. First, there could be measurement

8

Crowd-out also can occur if employers do not provide employer-sponsored health insurance because a large
proportion of their employees have other options, such as Medicaid.

14

error because none of the survey data sets typically used to assess these questions contains all of
the information needed to determine eligibility and there is reporting error in existing survey
measures.9 Secondly, there is the concern than even though a researcher controls for observable
factors that determine eligibility, there might still be unobserved factors that are associated with
both take-up and health. Finally, there are concerns with reverse causality: Families with sick
children may have lower income and qualify for Medicaid because of the illness.
Subsequent research reports a wide range of estimates of the extent of crowd-out. Studies
report crowd-out rates ranging from 0 to 60 percent (e.g., Dubay and Kenney, 1996; Blumberg,
Dubay and Norton, 2000; Shore-Sheppard, 2000; Lo Sasso and Buchmueller, 2004; Ham and
Shore-Sheppard, 2005; Gruber and Simon, 2008; Shore-Sheppard, 2008). Estimates differ
because of different data sets, different control variables and different time periods; research that
examines the sensitivity of crowd-out estimates to data, specifications and time periods seems
warranted; recent work by Shore-Sheppard (2008) is an important step towards understanding
the role of specification and time-period differences.10
Crowd-out can occur among employers, who subsidize most of the private health
insurance in the U.S., as well as among families. Research looking at firm- as well as familylevel decisions finds that expanded Medicaid did not affect whether employers offer insurance to
workers but may have changed the probability that firms offer family coverage (Shore-Sheppard,
Buchmueller and Jensen 2000).
The issue of crowd-out extends beyond Medicaid and CHIP. The 2010 Affordable Care
Act was scheduled to expand Medicaid coverage to all non-elderly people with incomes up to
9

The instrumental variable strategy Cutler and Gruber (1996) and subsequent research uses cannot solve the
measurement error problem if instrumenting for a binary variable.
10
Recent work using administrative data from Wisconsin by Dague et al. (2012) suggests crowd out between 4 and
18 percent for children and parents. Shore-Sheppard’s preferred estimates suggest little crowd-out and indicate that
the lack of inclusion of age-specific trends drives this difference from Cutler and Gruber’s findings.

15

133 percent of the poverty line, require people to have health insurance or pay a fine and set up
state-run health exchanges. The Supreme Court ruled that this expansion of Medicaid is optional,
and only 28 states have announced plans to expand Medicaid in this fashion. It will be interesting
to see how many newly-eligible people drop private coverage for Medicaid in expansion states
and how many employers stop making health insurance available to their employees and their
families as more options open up via the Medicaid expansion and the exchanges.

Take-up
Take-up is the extent to which people who are eligible for a program actually enroll in the
program and receive program benefits. As with many other public assistance programs, take-up
of Medicaid is incomplete. Using an updated version of the method in Currie and Gruber (1996a,
1996b) and Gruber and Yelowitz (2000), Gruber (2003) reports that, take-up was quite high for
children aged 0-15 during the early 1980s but fell as the program expanded. This is not
surprising since the expansions extended eligibility to those with higher incomes and better
access to private insurance.
There are several potential reasons for incomplete take-up of Medicaid. First, not all
eligible people may be aware that they are eligible.11 In fact, Sonier, Boudreaux and Blewett
(2013) project that a large share of the increase in participation in Medicaid under the ACA will
come from this already eligible population (a so-called “welcome-mat” effect), based on findings
that the Massachusetts Health Reform led to a large increase in Medicaid enrollment among
those previously eligible. Those who are aware of their potential eligibility for Medicaid may

11

For example, Aizer and Currie (2004) find that among immigrant women, greater use of public prenatal care by
women of the same background (ethnicity and race) is associated with more own use but that much of this
association goes away once they control for the hospital of delivery, casting some doubt on whether it is driven by
information sharing.

16

face barriers to enrolling in the program. Beyond paperwork hurdles, participating in a meanstested program may involve stigma (Moffitt, 1983). Immigrant families may also be concerned
about whether applying for Medicaid will trigger removal of any unauthorized family members
or harm their ability to naturalize or sponsor relatives to immigrate. Heightened federal
immigration enforcement appears to have “chilled” Medicaid participation among children in
immigrant families, even when the children are U.S. citizens (Watson, 2010).
Another possible reason for low take-up is perceived low quality of Medicaid. The fact
that some health care providers do not accept Medicaid because of low reimbursement rates
further reduces people’s incentive to enroll in the program. In addition, eligible individuals and
families have relatively little incentive to apply for Medicaid until they need medical care.
However, medical care providers, especially hospitals, have an incentive to enroll eligible
patients who do not have private health insurance to ensure that they get paid. Some eligible
people therefore get enrolled in Medicaid at the time care is rendered. As noted by Aizer (2003),
this means that the population enrolled in Medicaid tends to be less healthy than the population
eligible for Medicaid. This can lead to biased estimates of the effect of Medicaid on health unless
studies correct for the fact that individuals are more likely to be enrolled in Medicaid if they have
needed medical care.
Researchers have taken advantage of the expansions to inform estimates of takeup. For example, Ham, Ozbeklik and Shore Sheppard (2011) find average effects of the
expansions on take-up that differ somewhat across demographic groups. Estimates range from
0.41 for whites to 0.62 for non-whites, and also vary in other predictable ways, with higher rates
for more disadvantaged groups.

17

Take-up appears to affect estimates of the effect of the Medicaid expansions. Card and
Shore-Sheppard (2004) take advantage of law changes that required states to make low-income
children born after a particular date or of a particular age eligible for Medicaid. Using a
regression discontinuity approach that compared children on either side of these age cutoffs, they
find evidence of smaller effects of the Medicaid expansions on children’s coverage than Currie
and Gruber (1996a) and Cutler and Gruber (1996). They attribute the difference to very low takeup rates among the newly eligible.

Effects on Health
Lack of health insurance is likely to increase mortality and morbidity since the uninsured are less
able to afford medical care, on average. However, it is difficult to determine the true effect of
health insurance on people’s health because of adverse selection. Most economics studies use
quasi-experimental techniques to reduce the bias created by adverse selection in estimates of
program effects. These studies rely on cross-state variation in policies or changes in policies
within states—so-called “natural experiments” or quasi-experiments—to identify the effects of
health insurance. Only a few studies use true experiments in which some individuals were
randomly assigned health insurance coverage while others were not. Research on the effects of
Medicaid on health relies on cross-state or within-state variation since to date only the Oregon
Health Insurance Experiment randomized control trial has been run to evaluate the effects of
Medicaid.
Studies on the effects of Medicaid on health face several challenges. One challenge is
creating the correct counterfactual and comparison group: would Medicaid participants have no
insurance or private insurance if they were not covered by Medicaid? The true answer is likely

18

some of each, which implies that Medicaid may benefit some groups—people who would
otherwise have no insurance—more than others—people who are crowded out of private
coverage. Studies that report null effects of Medicaid therefore may be capturing offsetting
effects on different groups.
Data limitations are another challenge. Studies often use data sets that lack information
on individuals’ insurance coverage, which makes it impossible to estimate the structural effect of
Medicaid coverage on health outcomes. Alternatively, data sets with good measures of health
outcomes, health care coverage and health care utilization often lack good measures of income,
which are necessary to impute eligibility for Medicaid. Research that uses instruments for
simulated eligibility—the approach pioneered by Cutler and Gruber (1996) for studying the
effect of the Medicaid expansions on health insurance coverage—identifies only the local
average treatment effect, or the effect of Medicaid among individuals made eligible by the
expansions, not the effect of extending Medicaid eligibility to a random person or even the
average effect of eligibility. Studies frequently report reduced-form effects that give the
relationship between a measure of Medicaid eligibility—not actual Medicaid participation—and
health. Although their results are indirect evidence on Medicaid’s effects, reduced-form studies
avoid the selection bias that can plague some structural studies. Controlling for selection into
Medicaid requires being able to identify at least one exogenous factor that affects individuals’
decision whether to take-up Medicaid coverage. Few data sets or research strategies meet that
challenge. Thus, both reduced-form and the more structural studies have limitations. In practice,
there are few structural papers in this literature.
Finally, studies that rely on cross-state differences or within-state changes in Medicaid
policy implicitly assume that these differences or changes are exogenous. This may not be the

19

case (e.g., Baughman and Milyo, 2008). Although states may be unlikely to change Medicaid
eligibility based on health outcomes, they can and do change Medicaid eligibility rules as
economic conditions change, and those changes in economic conditions do affect health
outcomes. Studies therefore face difficulty isolating the impact of changes in Medicaid on health
outcomes.

Health Outcomes among Children
Research indicates that being eligible for Medicaid increases children’s access to medical care.
For example, the eligibility expansions that occurred between 1984 and 1992 decreased the
probability that a child went without a doctor’s visit during the last year by one-half and
increased the probability that a child visited a doctor’s office in the last two weeks by two-thirds
(Currie and Gruber, 1996a). Increases in Medicaid eligibility resulted in more hospitalizations of
children as well, particularly for conditions for which hospitalization could not be avoided by
obtaining appropriate primary care (Currie and Gruber, 1996a; Dafny and Gruber, 2005).
However, Medicaid may reduce child hospitalizations for ambulatory-care-sensitive conditions,
which tend to be avoidable with appropriate primary care (Kaestner, Joyce and Racine, 2001;
Aizer, 2003, 2007; Dafny and Gruber, 2005). This suggests that Medicaid may increase use of
preventative care.
Medicaid eligibility may improve children’s health as well. The Medicaid expansions are
associated with reductions in child mortality (Currie and Gruber, 1996a; Meyer and Wherry,
2012). However, there is less evidence of a positive impact on morbidity. One study concludes
that Medicaid’s impact on health outcomes may occur only over time by putting children on a
better health trajectory as they age (Currie, Decker and Lin, 2008).

20

Looking at the rollout of Medicaid during the late 1960s and early 1970s, Almond,
Decker and Simon (2012a) find that Medicaid availability is associated with an increase in nonwhite fertility. In a second paper, Almond, Decker and Simon (2012b) find that Medicaid
increased hospital use among children in families with little education and for unmarried
mothers. Medicaid availability does not appear to have affected maternal mortality or early
childhood mortality, however. Using a slightly different strategy and leveraging the relative
increase in the share of the population who became covered with the introduction of Medicaid,
Goodman-Bacon (2013) finds that the program’s introduction is associated with reductions in
child and infant mortality among non-whites.
Studies have reached mixed conclusions about the effect of Medicaid managed care
versus traditional fee-for-service care on infant and children’s health. It is important for research
that examines voluntary managed care plans to control for potential selection of healthier people
into such plans, which would bias results towards finding pro-health effects. Research therefore
tends to focus on mandatory managed care plans. Managed care is associated with less
emergency room usage and more outpatient and specialist visits (Baker and Afendulis, 2005;
Garrett, Davidoff and Yemane, 2003), which suggests increased preventative care. Troublingly,
managed care is associated with higher incidence of low birth weight, prematurity and neonatal
death in a California study, perhaps because it lowered the likelihood a mother received prenatal
care during the first trimester of the pregnancy (Aizer, Currie and Moretti, 2007). Other research,
however, finds that managed care did not adversely affect infant health outcomes in some other
states (e.g., Conover, Rankin and Sloan, 2010; Levinson and Ullman, 1998).

21

Health Outcomes among Infants and Pregnant Women
There is a sizable literature on the effect of Medicaid on health outcomes related to pregnancy
and birth since pregnant women and infants were a target of the eligibility expansions of the late
1980s and early 1990s. Findings are mixed. Several national-level studies find that Medicaid
eligibility improved prenatal care and some birth outcomes (e.g., Currie and Gruber, 1996b;
Dubay et al., 2001) while others find little effect (e.g., Dave et al., 2010/2011). Studies of
specific states also find little effect of Medicaid on prenatal care and birth outcomes (e.g.,
Epstein and Newhouse, 1998; Piper, Ray and Griffin, 1990). The results may be mixed because
of differences in study methodology and study populations. For example, it appears to matter
whether studies examine potential eligibility for Medicaid versus actual Medicaid enrollment.
Whether Medicaid is compared to no insurance or to private insurance also seems to affect
results. Medicaid eligibility appears to reduce the quantity and intensity of care during childbirth
compared to private insurance but improve it relative to no insurance (Currie and Gruber, 2001).
More recent variation driven by welfare reform-induced declines in cash welfare participation
may have reduced use of prenatal care, offsetting some of the expansion effects (Currie and
Grogger, 2002).
The literature is more conclusive that Medicaid managed care does not improve prenatal
care. On balance, studies suggest that managed care delays the start of prenatal care (e.g., Aizer,
Currie and Moretti, 2007; Kaestner, Dubay and Kenney, 2005). However, managed care may
reduce smoking rates among pregnant women and repeat C-section rates (Howell et al., 2004).
Medicaid’s effect, if any, on birth outcomes has the potential to matter well beyond
infancy. Increases in Medicaid and CHIP eligibility are associated with increases in test scores

22

later in childhood, probably by improving health status at birth (Levine and Schanzenbach,
2009).

Health Outcomes among Non-elderly Adults
Other than pregnant women, there is little research on the effects of Medicaid on non-elderly
adults’ health outcomes.12 This is not surprising since non-elderly adults are eligible for
Medicaid only if they meet the resource and categorical restrictions, which has largely limited
the eligible population to very low-income parents (often mothers) of dependent children and the
blind or disabled. The late 1980s and early 1990s expansions increased cancer-screening rates
among mothers and reduced the fraction of parents who reported they needed to see a doctor but
did not because of cost (e.g., Busch and Duchovny, 2005). Research also indicates that Medicaid
increases access to care for mothers relative to not having any insurance but not relative to
private insurance (e.g., Long, Coughlin and King, 2005). One early study that examined effects
of cutbacks in Medicaid (known as MediCal in California) in the early 1980s, when a number of
medically indigent adults lost their benefits, found evidence of worse health outcomes (Lurie et
al., 1984). States that extended eligibility to low-income, non-disabled childless adults during the
2000s saw a decrease in mortality and an improvement in self-reported health relative to
neighboring states that did not expand eligibility (Sommers, Baicker and Epstein, 2012).
There is a larger literature on the effects of Medicaid managed care on adults’ health
outcomes. This literature has focused on the likelihood of using an emergency room or of seeing
a health care provider in the last year. Some of this research does not distinguish between

12

Dague et al. (2013b) study the expansion of a state public insurance program to childless adults who had high
rates of chronic illness but were otherwise much like the population to be covered by the ACA-related Medicaid
expansions. They find that expanded eligibility led to increases in outpatient care and emergency room use but a
decrease in preventable hospitalizations.

23

Medicaid recipients who voluntarily enrolled in managed care versus those who had no choice as
part of their Medicaid coverage. That makes it difficult to evaluate the results given the
possibility of selection bias, as discussed earlier. On balance, research suggests that managed
care may reduce the likelihood of visiting an emergency room visits and may increase the
likelihood of having seen a health care provider in the last year (Hurley, Freund and Paul, 1993;
Rowland et al., 1995; Garrett and Zuckerman, 2005). There are few rigorous studies of the effect
of Medicaid managed care on adult health outcomes other than those related to provider access.
An exciting recent study examines the effects of becoming eligible to participate in
Medicaid via a lottery (Finkelstein and Baicker, 2011, Finkelstein et al., 2012, Baicker, Taubman
et al., 2013, Taubman et al., 2014). In 2008, Oregon used a lottery to randomly offer Medicaid to
a subset of a population of childless adults aged 19-64. The lottery was implemented in a way
that allowed researchers to examine the health effects of Medicaid participation among a more
randomly selected group of adults who had access to Medicaid (won the lottery) and did not have
access (lost the lottery) than usual studies of program participants and non-participants. Data was
collected from other sources to add to the administrative data. The findings are striking: Winning
the “Medicaid lottery” is associated with a large increase in health care utilization (including
emergency rooms) and to some extent with an improvement in self-rated health and mental
health and increased rates of diabetes detection and management but not with an improvement in
measured physical health outcomes.

Health Outcomes among Elderly Adults
Research consistently indicates that “dual eligible” elderly have worse health status and greater
health service usage than elderly people who participate only in Medicare (Pezzin and Kasper,

24

2002). However, Medicaid eligibility and enrollment is likely endogenous with respect to health
outcomes since the poor tend to have worse health. The fact that Medicaid has far more
extensive coverage of long-term care than Medicare likely makes endogeneity bias worse for
studies of the elderly than for studies of children and non-elderly, non-disabled adults. Because
there have been relatively few changes in Medicaid eligibility for the elderly, researchers have
had little opportunity to take advantage of natural experiments that would help identify the health
effects of Medicaid among the elderly. However, there have been changes in Medicaid rules
regarding long-term care that researchers have exploited. Results suggest that Medicaid policies
have little effect on whether the elderly enter a nursing home instead of receiving care at home
(e.g., Norton and Kumar, 2000; Grabowski and Gruber, 2007).

Effects on Other Behaviors
Welfare Participation and Labor Supply
Before the welfare reforms of the late 1990s, participation in the main cash welfare
program—Aid to Families with Dependent Children—conferred automatic eligibility for
Medicaid. For families with young children, the health care coverage associated with Medicaid
might quite realistically have created a substantial incentive to participate in welfare. It is a
challenge to separate the effects of Medicaid from those of AFDC since most individuals
participated in both. Early studies in this literature, such as Blank (1989) and Winkler (1991),
found little effect of Medicaid on welfare participation.13 Moffitt and Wolfe (1992) use
longitudinal data from the Survey of Income and Program Participation and model the value
associated with Medicaid with a family-specific proxy for health care expenditures. They find
13

See Currie and Madrian (1999) for a more general discussion of the difficulties of looking at effects of health
insurance on labor market outcomes. For a more thorough discussion of the older literature on Medicaid, see Moffitt
(1992).

25

large and significant effects of Medicaid on welfare participation, with the effects concentrated
among those with high expected health care expenditures.
As with the question of insurance coverage and crowd-out, the more recent literature uses
variation in Medicaid eligibility parameters associated with the expansions of the late 1980s and
early 1990s to examine effects on welfare participation. Yelowitz (1995) takes advantage of the
fact that these expansions decoupled eligibility for Medicaid from eligibility for AFDC for
families with children, creating a notch in families’ budget constraints for families with no other
access to health insurance coverage. Using data from the Current Population Survey, Yelowitz
finds that the expansions, as parameterized by the difference in the percent of the poverty level at
which eligibility for AFDC and Medicaid differed, led to a large and significant increase in
AFDC participation. Ham and Shore-Sheppard (1995) look at the same question, with a more
flexible specification that allows the thresholds for Medicaid and AFDC to have their own
effects and that incorporates more institutional features to calculate AFDC eligibility calculation.
They find no impact of the expansions on AFDC receipt and are able to reject the specification
used by Yelowitz (1995). Results from the Oregon “Medicaid lottery” indicate that Medicaid
participation increases receipt of food stamps but had little impact on receipt of other
government benefits (Baicker et al., 2013).
Studies have also used the expansions to examine effects on labor supply. Yelowitz
(1995) finds that the expansions of the late 1980s and early 1990s led to an increase in labor
supply while Ham and Shore-Sheppard (2005) find that no effect on labor supply. Dave et al.
(2013) find a negative effect of the expansions on employment among women who recently gave
birth. After Tennessee disenrolled a large number of childless adults from its public health
insurance program in 2005, employment and job search increased among childless adults in the

26

state relative to other Southern states (Garthwaite, Gross and Notowidigdo, 2013). Results from
the Oregon “Medicaid lottery,” in contrast, do not indicate a significant effect of Medicaid
participation on employment or earnings (Baicker et al, 2013; Finkelstein et al., 2013). Meyer
and Rosenbaum (2001) look at the combined effects of a host of social programs (such as AFDC,
Medicaid and welfare reform waivers) and the tax system (the Earned Income Tax Credit on the
labor supply of single mothers, incorporating various incentive effects. They find that Medicaid
had little impact on labor supply while the tax system had the largest impact.
Several studies use at the staggered introduction of Medicaid across states over time in
the late 1960s and early 1970s to look at the effect of Medicaid on AFDC participation and labor
supply. Decker and Selck (2012) find that the introduction of Medicaid explained about 10% of
the increase in AFDC caseloads. Using individual data, they find the increase occurred because
of an increase in take-up, not because of an increase in eligibility or a decline in labor force
participation. Strumpf (2011) also finds no effects on labor supply.
Another mechanism through which Medicaid can affect labor supply is job lock. Job lock
posits that access to employer-provided health insurance induces employees to stay at employers
they otherwise would have left. Hamersma and Kim (2009) look at the effect of Medicaid
expansions of parental coverage and find that expanded eligibility reduces job lock among
unmarried women, with few other effects.

Marriage and Fertility
Medicaid also may affect marriage and fertility behavior. Until the expansions, Medicaid was
tightly linked to participation in cash welfare programs, the largest of which—Aid to Families
with Dependent Children, or AFDC—was largely restricted to single mothers. Economic theory

27

therefore predicts that AFDC and Medicaid reduced the incentive to marry and increased the
incentive to have children. Research on the introduction of Medicaid during the late 1960s and
early 1970s finds evidence of the predicted positive effect on single motherhood (Decker, 2000).
The 1980s and 1990s Medicaid expansions, in contrast, decoupled Medicaid from AFDC and
therefore increased Medicaid eligibility for two-parent families. This had a positive effect on
marriage rates (Yelowitz, 1998). The expansions also may have increased birth rates because
they reduced the cost of health care for pregnant women and children, but recent research finds
there was little effect on fertility (DeLeire, Lopoo and Simon, 2011; Zavodny and Bitler, 2010),
while some older work finds some impacts (e.g., Joyce and Kaestner, 1996).
Medicaid also can affect via fertility through its coverage of family planning services,
including contraceptives and abortion. Expanding women’s eligibility for family planning
services reduces births by increasing contraceptive use (Kearney and Levine, 2009). States can
opt to cover abortion in Medicaid at their own expense. Such coverage is positively associated
with abortion rates and negatively associated with birth rates (Zavodny and Bitler, 2010).

Savings
Medicaid may affect people’s savings behavior. There are several reasons to expect Medicaid to
reduce how much money people save. First, like any insurance program, Medicaid reduces the
need for precautionary savings to cover uncertain health care expenses. Second, Medicaid
imposes asset tests for eligibility. Until the mid 1980s, there was an asset cap of $1000 for
AFDC eligibility, which also conferred Medicaid eligibility. While that cap has been dropped,
Medicaid continues to impose asset limits for dual eligibles. This gives elderly and disabled
people with low incomes an incentive to not exceed those limits. However, Medicaid may boost

28

savings among some recipients by freeing up money that they otherwise would spend on health
insurance and health care.
One difficulty with estimating the effect of Medicaid on savings is that Medicaid
eligibility is endogenous with respect to savings, particularly when asset limits are in effect.
Gruber and Yelowitz (1999) therefore use an identification strategy similar to Currie and Gruber
(1996a, 1996b) to simulate Medicaid eligibility in order to examine its relationship with savings
during the late 1980s and early 1990s. They conclude that Medicaid eligibility substantially
reduced families’ level of assets and the likelihood that a family had any assets at all. Gittleman
(2011) reports that some of Gruber and Yelowitz’s results are sensitive to the choice of cohort
and empirical model. Gross and Notowidigdo (2011) find that the Medicaid expansions were
associated with a decrease in personal bankruptcies but had no effect on business bankruptcies.
Using data from the Oregon Health Insurance Experiment, Finkelstein et al. (2012) find that one
year of access to Medicaid for low-income adults without children lead to a statistically
significant decline in the presence of medical debt and both medical and overall collections, but
no significant effect on overall bankruptcy or a summary measure of overall access to credit.
The adverse effect on savings is likely to be concentrated in the middle of the income and
wealth distributions. People with very low incomes and wealth typically do not have enough
assets to be concerned about Medicaid’s asset limit. If faced with an adverse health event, their
assets are likely to quickly fall below Medicaid’s limit. People with very high incomes or wealth
are unlikely to ever qualify for Medicaid coverage and are likely to have private health
insurance. Consistent with this, Maynard and Qiu (2009) find evidence that Medicaid has a
strong negative effect on savings for households in middle of the wealth or income distributions.

29

Medicaid may have particularly large effects on savings among the elderly because it has
considerably more extensive coverage of long-term care than Medicare. However, research
suggests that these effects are fairly small. For example, Gardner and Gilleskie (2006) report that
doubling the asset limit for nursing home coverage would increase the percentage of elderly with
positive assets by about 1 percentage point and would increase average assets by less than 10
percent.
Medicaid’s coverage of long-term care may affect the market for long-term care
insurance as well. Long-term care insurance is implicitly a form of savings. Very few people buy
long-term care insurance, partly because such insurance tends to be expensive and not
actuarially-fairly priced. The existence of Medicaid and the implicit tax it levies on private longterm care insurance further reduces the incentive to purchase such insurance. Brown and
Finkelstein (2011) provide an overview of research in this area. They conclude that Medicaid
does reduce the market for long-term care insurance. As with savings, however, the effect
appears to be relatively small.

Conclusion
What the future holds for Medicaid depends heavily on politics and the macroeconomy. In the
wake of the 2007-2009 recession, high unemployment boosted the number of people eligible for
Medicaid at the same time as tax revenues shrank. Fiscal woes motivated a number of
Republican governors and members of Congress to press for changes to the 2010 ACA that
would allow states to drop Medicaid enrollees without forfeiting federal funds. Several states
have moved toward making cuts that do not put federal funds at risk. A few governors have even
threatened that their states might stop participating in the program altogether.

30

The joint federal-state structure of Medicaid gives rise to striking differences across
states. The federal government provides more generous matching funds to poorer states, but
states still must bear a share of Medicaid costs. Poorer states therefore tend to have less generous
Medicaid programs: lower provider reimbursement rates, coverage of fewer health care services
and lower eligibility thresholds. This results in considerable differences in access to care across
states and limits the ability of the federal government to help states deal with the effects of
regional business cycles on Medicaid spending.
The existing federal-state structure of Medicaid does have some advantages. It allows for
experimentation across states. Such experimentation can reveal cost-effective programs that
other states then adopt. In addition, researchers have long relied on variation across states to
examine the effects of Medicaid and other public policies.
We conclude by highlighting some important avenues for future research. Assessing the
effects of ACA-related expansions on health, labor market outcomes and other behaviors among
previously underserved groups (non-disabled, childless adults working age with relatively low
incomes) is clearly a critical research area. Here, variation will come from several sources. First,
there will be cross-state variation in Medicaid eligibility generosity for childless adults (and
some for parents as well) since not all states are participating in the expansions (and even among
the expanders, the timing is not uniform). Secondly, regardless of whether they have expanded
Medicaid or not, states are now required to use a new version of countable income for
determining eligibility—modified AGI—and to use a consistent income disregard (5 percent).
This movement to a considerably more uniform system creates cross-state variation that
researchers can couple with over-time variation in how and when states implement the
expansions and make other changes to their Medicaid systems.

31

Another critical need is for more randomized control trials that examine the effects of
Medicaid on health and other outcomes. The Oregon Health Insurance Experiment offers an
excellent model of how to design such studies. More such experiments in other areas are needed
and their results are likely to be of great interest to researchers and policymakers alike.
Another hole in the literature is systematic reviews of existing studies of Medicaid,
particularly those that evaluate managed care. A large literature examines the consequences of
the shift to managed care from fee-for-service on providers’ decision-making and Medicaid
participants’ health outcomes. This literature indicates that reimbursement structure affects
providers’ decision-making but is mixed on whether the shift to managed care has improved
health outcomes. In addition, more research on the cost effectiveness of managed care is needed.
One study concludes that managed care actually increases government spending, not lowers it,
and does so without improving health outcomes (Duggan 2004). This is an important and
disturbing possibility given that states continue to look to managed care to reduce Medicaid
costs.

32

References
Adams, E. Kathleen, Janet M. Bronstein and Curtis S. Florence. 2003. “The Impact of Medicaid
Primary Care Case Management on Office-Based Physician Supply in Alabama and Georgia,”
40 Inquiry 269-82.
Aizer, Anna. 2003. “Low Take-Up in Medicaid: Does Outreach Matter and for Whom?” 93
American Economic Review Papers & Proceedings 238-41.
Aizer, Anna. 2007. “Public Health Insurance, Program Take-Up and Child Health,” 89 Review of
Economics and Statistics 400-15.
Aizer, Anna, and Janet Currie. 2004. “Networks or Neighborhoods? Correlations in the Use of
Publicly-Funded Maternity Care in California,” 88 Journal of Public Economics 2573-85.
Aizer, Anna, Janet Currie and Enrico Moretti. 2007. “Does Managed Care Hurt Health?
Evidence from Medicaid Mothers,” 89 Review of Economics and Statistics 385-99.
Almond, Douglas, Sandra Decker and Kosali Simon. 2012a. “The Impact of Medicaid’s
Introduction on Birth Rates,” Mimeo, Department of Economics, Columbia University.
Almond, Douglas, Sandra Decker and Kosali Simon. 2012b. “The Impact of Medicaid’s
Introduction on Use of Health Care and Health Outcomes,” Mimeo, Department of Economics,
Columbia University.
Baker, Laurence, and Christopher Afendulis. 2005. Medicaid Managed Care and Health Care for
Children,” 40 Heath Services Research 1466-88.
Baicker, Katherine, Amy Finkelstein, Jae Song and Sarah Taubman. 2013. “The Impact of
Medicaid on Labor Force Activity and Program Participation: Evidence from the Oregon Health
Insurance Experiment,” NBER Working Paper 19547.
Baicker, Katherine, and Douglas Staiger. 2005. “Fiscal Shenanigans, Targeted Federal Health
Care Funds, and Patient Mortality,” 120 Quarterly Journal of Economics 345-86.
Baicker, Katherine, Sarah Taubman, Heidi Allen, Mira Bernstein, Jonathan Gruber, Joseph
Newhouse, Eric Schneider, Bill Wright, Alan Zaslavsky and Amy Finkelstein. 2013. “The
Oregon Experiment-Effects of Medicaid on Clinical Outcomes,” 368 New England Journal of
Medicine 1713-1722.
Baughman, Reagan, and Jeffrey Milyo. 2008. “How Do States Formulate Medicaid and SCHIP
Policy? Economic and Political Determinants of State Eligibility Levels,” Mimeo, Department of
Economics, University of Missouri.

33

Bindman, Andrew, Arpita Chattopadhyay, Dennis Osmond, William Huen and Peter Bacchetti.
2005. “The Impact of Medicaid Managed Care on Hospitalizations for Ambulatory Care
Sensitive Conditions,” 40 Health Services Research 19-38.
Bitler, Marianne, and Hilary Hoynes. 2013. “Immigrants, Welfare and the U.S. Safety Net,” in
David Card and Steven Raphael, ed., Immigration, Poverty and Socioeconomic Inequality. New
York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Blank, Rebecca. 1989. ‘The Effect of Medical Need and Medicaid on AFDC Participation,” 24
Journal of Human Resources 54-87.
Blumberg, Linda, Lisa Dubay and Stephen Norton. 2000. “Did the Medicaid Expansions for
Children Displace Private Insurance? An Analysis Using the SIPP,” 19 Journal of Health
Economics 33-60.
Boukus, Ellyn, Alwyn Cassil and Ann S. O’Malley. 2009. “A Snapshot of U.S. Physicians: Key
Findings from the 2008 Health Tracking Physician Survey,” Data Bulletin Results from HSC
Research no. 35. www.rwjf.org/files/research/hscbulletin35sept2009.pdf, accessed April 15,
2012.
Brown, Jeffrey R., and Amy Finkelstein. 2011. “Insuring Long-Term Care in the United States,”
25 Journal of Economic Perspectives 119-42.
Buchmueller, Thomas C., Sean Orzol and Lara D. Shore-Sheppard. 2013. The Effect of
Medicaid Payment Rates on Access to Dental Care Among Children. NBER Working Paper
19218.
Burns, Marguerite. 2009. “Medicaid Managed Care and Cost Containment in the Adult Disabled
Population,” 47 Medical Care 1069-76.
Busch, Susan H., and Noellia Duchovny. 2005. “Family Coverage Expansions: Impact on
Insurance Coverage and Health Care Utilization of Parents,” 25 Journal of Health Economics
876-90.
Card, David, and Lara Shore-Sheppard. 2004. “Using Discontinuous Eligibility Rules to Identify
the Effects of the Federal Medicaid Expansions on Low-Income Children,” 86 Review of
Economics and Statistics 752-66.
Conover, Christopher, Peter Rankin and Frank Sloan. 2001. “Effects of Tennessee Medicaid
Managed Care on Obstetrical Care and Birth Outcomes,” 26 Journal of Health Politics, Policy,
and Law 1291-324.
Coughlin, Teresa, Sharon Long and John Graves. 2008/2009. “Does Managed Care Improve
Access to Care for Medicaid Beneficiaries with Disabilities? A National Study,” 45 Inquiry 395407.

34

Coughlin, Teresa, Leighton Ku and Johnny Kim. 2000. “Reforming the Medicaid
Disproportionate Share Hospital Program,” 22 Health Care Financing Review 137-57.
Cunningham, Peter, and Jessica May. 2006. “Medicaid Patients Increasingly Concentrated
Among Physicians,” Tracking Report No. 16, Center for Studying Health System Change.
Currie, Janet, Sandra Decker and Wanchuan Lin. 2008. “Has Public Health Insurance for Older
Children Reduced Disparities in Access to Care and Health Outcomes?” 27 Journal of Health
Economics 1407-652.
Currie, Janet, and John Fahr. 2005. “Medicaid Managed Care: Effects on Children’s Medicaid
Coverage and Utilization of Care,” 89 Journal of Public Economics 85-108.
Currie, Janet, and Jeffrey Grogger. 2002. “Medicaid Expansions and Welfare Contractions:
Offsetting Effects on Prenatal Care and Infant Health,” 21 Journal of Health Economics 313-35.
Currie, Janet, and Jonathan Gruber. 1996a. “Health Insurance Eligibility, Utilization of Medical
Care, and Child Health,” 111 Quarterly Journal of Economics 431-66.
Currie, Janet, and Jonathan Gruber. 1996b. “Saving Babies: The Efficacy and Cost of Recent
Changes in the Medicaid Eligibility of Pregnant Women,” 104 Journal of Political Economy
1263-96.
Currie, Janet, and Jonathan Gruber. 2001. “Public Health Insurance and Medical Treatment: The
Equalizing Impact of the Medicaid Expansions,” 82 Journal of Public Economics 63-90.
Currie, Janet, and Brigitte Madrian. 1999. “Health, Health Insurance, and the Labor Market,” in,
Orley Ashenfelter and David Card, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics Volume 3. Amsterdam:
Elsevier.
Cutler, David, and Jonathan Gruber. 1996. “Does Public Insurance Crowd Out Private
Insurance?” 111 Quarterly Journal of Economics 391-430.
Dafny, Leemore, and Jonathan Gruber. 2005. “Public Insurance and Child Hospitalizations:
Access and Efficiency Effects,” 89 Journal of Public Economics 109-29.
Dague, Laura. 2013. “Effects of Medicaid Premiums and Copayments on Insurance Coverage,
Utilization, and Health: A Regression Discontinuity Approach,” Journal of Health Economics,
forthcoming..
Dague, Laura, Thomas DeLeire, Donna Friedsam, Lindsey Leininger, Sarah Meier and Kristen
Voskuil. 2012. “What Fraction of Medicaid Enrollees Have Access to Private Insurance?
Estimates from Administrative Data,” Mimeo, Bush School, Texas A&M University.

35

Dave, Dhaval, Sandra Decker, Robert Kaestner and Kosali Simon. 2010/2011. “The Effect of
Medicaid Expansions on Health Insurance Coverage of Pregnant Women: An Analysis Using
Deliveries,” 47 Inquiry 315-30.
Dave, Dhaval, Sandra Decker, Robert Kaestner and Kosali Simon. 2013. “The Effect of
Medicaid Expansions in the Late 1980s and Early 1990s on the Labor Supply of Pregnant
Women,” NBER Working Paper 19161.
Decker, Sandra, and Frederic Selck. 2012. “The Effect of the Original Introduction of Medicaid
on Welfare Participation and Labor Supply,” 10 Review of Economics of the Household 541-56.
DeLeire, Thomas, Lenard Lopoo and Kosali Simon. 2011. “Medicaid Expansions and Fertility in
the United States,” 48 Demography 725-47.
Department of Health and Human Services. 2010. “Connecting Kids to Coverage: Continuing
the Progress,” 2010 CHIPRA Annual Report.
www.insurekids.gov/professionals/reports/chipra/2010_annual.pdf, accessed 4/12/2012.
Dubay, Lisa, Theodore Joyce, Robert Kaestner and Genevieve Kenney. 2001. “Changes in
Prenatal Care Timing and Low Birth Weight by Race and Socioeconomic Status: Implications
for the Medicaid Expansions for Pregnant Women,” 36 Health Services Research 373-98.
Dubay, Lisa, and Genevieve Kenney. 1996. “Revisiting the Issues: The Effects of Medicaid
Expansions on Insurance Coverage of Children,” 6 The Future of Children 152-61.
Duggan, Mark. 2004. “Does Contracting Out Increase the Efficiency of Government Programs?
Evidence from Medicaid HMOs,” 88 Journal of Public Economics 2549-72.
Duggan, Mark, and Tamara Hayford. 2013. “Has the Shift to Managed Care Reduced Medicaid
Expenditures? Evidence from State and Local-Level Mandates,” 32 Journal of Policy Analysis
and Management 505-535.
Duggan, Mark, and Fiona Scott-Morton. 2006. “The Distortionary Effects of Government
Procurement: Evidence from Medicaid Prescription Drug Purchasing,” 121 Quarterly Journal of
Economics 1-30.
Epstein, Arnold, and Joseph Newhouse. 1998. “Impact of Medicaid Expansions on Early
Prenatal Care and Health Outcomes,” 19 Health Care Financing Review 85-99.
Finkelstein, Amy, and Katherine Baicker. 2011. “The Effects of Medicaid Coverage,” 365 New
England Journal of Medicine 683-5.
Finkelstein, Amy, Sarah Taubman, Bill Wright, Mira Bernstein, Jonathan Gruber, Joseph
Newhouse, Heidi Allen, Katherine Baker and the Oregon Health Study Group. 2012. “The
Oregon Health Insurance Experiment: Evidence from the First Year,” 127 Quarterly Journal of
Economics 1057-106.
36

Fisher, Elliott, David Wennberg, Therese Stukel, Daniel Gottlieb, F.L. Lucas and Etiole Pinder.
2003a. “The Implications of Regional Variations in Medicare Spending. Part 1: The Content,
Quality and Accessibility of Care,” 138 Annals of Internal Medicine 273-87.
Fisher, Elliott, David Wennberg, Therese Stukel, Daniel Gottlieb, F.L. Lucas and Etiole Pinder.
2003b. “The Implications of Regional Variations in Medicare Spending. Part 2: Health
Outcomes and Satisfaction with Care,” 138 Annals of Internal Medicine 288-98.
Gardner, Lara, and Donna Gilleskie. 2006. The Effects of State Medicaid Policies on the
Dynamic Savings Patterns of the Elderly,” NBER Working Paper 12208.
Garthwaite, Craig. 2012. “The Doctor Might See You Now: The Supply Side of Public Health
Insurance Expansions,” 4 American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 190-215.
Garthwaite, Craig, Tal Gross and Matthew Notowidigo. 2013. “Public Health Insurance, Labor
Supply, and Employment Lock,” NBER Working Paper 19220.
Garrett, B., Davidoff, A, and Yemane, A. 2003. “Effects of Medicaid Managed Care Programs
on Health Services Access and Use,” 32 Health Services Research 575-94.
Garrett, Bowen, and Stephen Zuckerman. 2005. “National Estimates of the Effects of Mandatory
Medicaid Managed Care Programs on Health Care Access and Use, 1997-1999,” 43 Medical
Care 649-57.
Gilmer, Todd, and Richard Kronick. 2011. “Differences In The Volume of Services and in Prices
Drive Big Variations in Medicaid Spending among US States and Regions,” 30 Health
Affairs1316-24.
Gittleman, Maury. 2011. “Medicaid and Wealth: A Re-Examination,” 11 B.E. Journal of
Economic Analysis and Policy.
Goodman-Bacon, Andrew. 2013. “Public Insurance and Mortality: Evidence from Medicaid
Implementation,” Mimeo, Department of Economics, University of Michigan.
Grabowski, David, and Jonathan Gruber. 2007. “Moral Hazard in Nursing Home Use,” 26
Journal of Health Economics 560-77.
Gross, Tal, and Matthew Notowidigdo. 2011. “Health Insurance and the Consumer Bankruptcy
Decision: Evidence from the Expansion of Medicaid,” 95 Journal of Public Economics 767-78.
Gruber, Jonathan. 2003. “Medicaid,” in Robert A. Moffitt, ed., Means-Tested Transfer Programs
in the United States, Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.

37

Gruber, Jonathan, and Kosali Simon. 2008. “Crowd-out 10 Years Later: Have Recent Public
Insurance Expansions Crowded Out Private Health Insurance?” 27 Journal of Health Economics
201-17.
Gruber, Jonathan, and Aaron Yelowitz. 1999. “Public Health Insurance and Private Savings,”
107 Journal of Political Economy 1249-74.
Ham, John, and Lara Shore-Sheppard. 2005. “The Effect of Medicaid Expansions for LowIncome Children on Medicaid Participation and Private Insurance Coverage: Evidence from the
SIPP,” 89 Journal of Public Economics 57-83.
Ham, John, Serkan Ozbeklik and Lara Shore-Sheppard. 2011. “Estimating Heterogeneous Takeup and Crowd-Out Responses to Marginal and Non-Marginal Medicaid Expansions,” NBER
Working Paper 16112.
Hamersma, Sarah, and Matthew Kim. 2009. “The Effect of Parental Medicaid Expansions on Job
Mobility.” 28 Journal of Health Economics 761-70.
Herring, Brad, and E. Kathleen Adams. 2011. “Using HMOs to Serve the Medicaid Population:
What are the Effects on Utilization and Does the Type of HMO Matter?” 20 Health Economics
446-60.
Howell, Embry, Lisa Dubay, Genevieve Kenney and Anna Sommers. 2004. “The Impact of
Medicaid Managed Care on Pregnant Women in Ohio: A Cohort Analysis,” 39 Health Services
Research 825-46.
Hurley, Robert E., Deborah A. Freund and John E. Paul. 1993. Managed Care in Medicare:
Lessons for Policy Design. Ann Arbor, MI: Health Administration Press.
Joyce, Theodore, and Robert Kaestner. 1996. “The Effect of Expansions in Medicaid Income
Eligibility on Abortion,” 33 Demography 181-92.
Kaestner, Robert, Lisa Dubay and Genevieve Kenney. 2005. “Managed Care and Infant Health:
An Evaluation of Medicaid in the US,” 60 Social Science and Medicine 1815-33.
Kaestner, Robert, Theodore Joyce and Andrew Racine. 2001. “Medicaid Eligibility and the
Incident of Ambulatory Care Sensitive Hospitalizations for Children,” 52 Social Science and
Medicine 305-13.
Kaiser Family Foundation. 2010a. Medicaid and Managed Care: Key Data, Trends and Issues.
Washington, DC: Kaiser Family Foundation. http://www.kff.org/medicaid/upload/8046.pdf
Kaiser Family Foundation. 2013. Status of State Action on the Medicaid Expansion Decision, as
of December 11, 2013. Washington, DC: Kaiser Family Foundation. http://kff.org/healthreform/state-indicator/state-activity-around-expanding-medicaid-under-the-affordable-care-act/

38

Kearney, Melissa S., and Phillip B. Levine. 2009. “Subsidized Contraception, Fertility, and
Sexual Behavior,” 91 Review of Economics and Statistics 137-151.
Levine, Phillip B., and Diane Schanzenbach. 2009. ”The Impact of Children’s Public Health
Insurance Expansions on Educational Outcomes,” in David Cutler, Alan Garber, and Dana
Goldman, eds., Frontiers in Health Policy Research, Vol. 12. Berkeley, CA: Berkeley Electronic
Press.
Levinson, Arik, and Frank Ullman. 1998. “Medicaid Managed Care and Infant Health,” 17
Journal of Health Economics 351-68.
Long, Sharon, Teresa Coughlin and Jennifer King. 2005. “How Well Does Medicaid Work in
Improving Access to Care?” 40 Health Services Research 39-58.
Lo Sasso, Anthony, and Thomas Buchmueller. 2004. “The Effect of the State Children’s Health
Insurance Program on Health Insurance Coverage,” 23 Journal of Health Economics 1059-82.
Lo Sasso, Anthony, and Deborah Freund. 2000. “A Longitudinal Evaluation of the Effect of
Medi-Cal Managed Care on Supplemental Security Income and Aid to Families with Dependent
Children Enrollees in Two California Counties,” 38 Medical Care 937-47.
Lurie, Nicole, Nancy B. Ward, Martin F. Shapiro and Robert H. Brook. 1984. “Termination from
Medi-Cal—Does It Affect Health?” 311 New England Journal of Medicine 480-84.
Maynard, Alex, and Jiaping Qiu. 2009. “Public Insurance and Private Savings,” 24 Journal of
Applied Econometrics 282-308.
Meyer, Bruce D., and Dan T. Rosenbaum. 2001. “Welfare, The Earned Income Tax Credit, and
The Labor Supply of Single Mothers,” 116 Quarterly Journal of Economics 1063-114.
Meyer, Bruce D., and Laura R. Wherry. 2013. “Saving Teens: Using a Policy Discontinuity to
Estimate the Effects of Medicaid Eligibility,” NBER Working Paper 18309.
Moffitt, Robert A. 1983. “An Economic Model of Welfare Stigma,” 73 American Economic
Review 1023-35.
Moffitt, Robert. 1992. “Incentive Effects of the U.S. Welfare System: A Review,” 30 Journal of
Economic Literature 1-61.
Moffitt, Robert, and Barbara Wolfe. 1992. “The Effect of the Medicaid Program on Welfare
Participation and Labor Supply,” 74 Review of Economics and Statistics 615-26.
Norton, Edward, and V. Kumar. 2000. “The Long-Run Effect of the Medicare Catastrophic
Coverage Act,” 37 Inquiry 174-87.

39

Pezzin, Liliana E., and Judith D. Kasper. 2002. “Medicaid Enrollment and Elderly Medicare
Beneficiaries: Individual Determinants, Effects of State Policy, and Impact on Service Use,” 37
Health Services Research 827-47.
Piper, Joyce M., Wayne A. Ray and Marie R. Griffin. 1990. “Effects of Medicaid Eligibility
Expansion on Prenatal Care and Pregnancy Outcome in Tennessee,” 264 Journal of the
American Medical Association 2219-23.
Quast, Troy, David E. Sappington and Elizabeth Shenkman. 2008. “Does the Quality of Care in
Medicaid MCOs vary with the form of Physician Compensation?” 17 Health Economics 545-50.
Rowland, Diane, and Kristina Hanson. 1996. “Medicaid: Moving to Managed Care,” 15 Health
Affairs 150-2.
Rowland, Diane, Sara Rosenbaum, Lois Simon and Elizabeth Chait. 1995. Medicaid and
Managed Care: Lessons from the Literature. Washington, DC: Kaiser Commission on the Future
of Medicaid.
Shen, Yu-Chu, and Stephen Zuckerman. 2005. “The Effect of Medicaid Payment Generosity on
Access and Use among Beneficiaries,” 40 Health Services Research 723-44.
Shore-Sheppard, Lara. 2000. “The Effect of Expanding Medicaid Eligibility on the Distribution
of Children’s Health Insurance Coverage,” 54 Industrial and Labor Relations Review 59-77.
Shore-Sheppard, Lara. 2008. “Stemming the Tide: The Effect of Expanding Medicaid Eligibility
on Health Insurance Coverage,” 8 B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy.
Shore-Sheppard, Lara, Thomas Buchmueller and Gail Jensen. 2000. “Medicaid and Crowding
Out of Private Insurance: A Re-Examination Using Firm-Level Data,” 19 Journal of Health
Economics 61-91.
Sommers, Benjamin D., Katherine Baicker and Arnold M. Epstein. 2012. “Mortality and Access
to Care among Adults after State Medicaid Expansions,” 367 New England Journal of Medicine
1025-1034.
Sonier, Julie, Michel Boudreaux and Lynn Blewett. 2013. “Medicaid `Welcome-Mat’ Effect of
Affordable Care Act Implementation Could Be Substantial,” 32 Health Affairs 1319-1325.
Strumpf, Erin. 2011. “Medicaid’s Effect on Single Women’s Labor Supply: Evidence from the
Introduction of Medicaid,” 30 Journal of Health Economics 531-48.
Taubman, Sarah, Heidi Allen, Bill Wright, Katherine Baicker, Amy Finkelstein and the Oregon
Health Study Group. 2014. “Medicaid Increase Emergency Department Use: Evidence from
Oregon’s Health Insurance Experiment,” 343 Science 263-268.

40

U.S. Census Bureau. various years. Statistical Abstract of the United States. Washington, DC:
U.S. Department of Commerce.
U.S. House of Representatives, Committee on Interstate and Foreign Commerce, Subcommittee
on Health and the Environment. 1976. Data on the Medicaid Program: Eligibility, Services,
Expenditures Fiscal Years 1966-76. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Winkler, Anne. 1991. “The Incentive Effects of Medicaid on Women’s Labor Supply,” 26
Journal of Human Resources 308-37.
Yelowitz, Aaron S. 1995. “The Medicaid Notch, Labor Supply, and Welfare Participation:
Evidence from Eligibility Expansions,” 110 Quarterly Journal of Economics 909-39.
Yelowitz, Aaron S. (1998). “Will Extending Medicaid to Two-Parent Families Encourage
Marriage?” 33 Journal of Human Resources 833-65.
Zavodny, Madeline, and Marianne Bitler. 2010. “The Effect of Medicaid Eligibility Expansions
on Fertility,” 71 Social Science and Medicine 918-24.
Zuckerman, Stephen, Joshua McFeeters, Peter Cunningham and Len Nichols. 2004. “Changes in
Medicaid Physician Fees, 1998-2003: Implications for Physician Participation,” Health Affairs
Supplementary Web Exclusives W-3-398-84.
Zuckerman, Stephen, Aimee Williams and Karen Stockley. 2009. “Trends in Medicaid Physician
Fees, 2003-2008,” 28 Health Affairs 510-9.

41

Figure 1. Medicaid Recipients as a Percentage of
the U.S. Population, 1968-2008

Percentage of U.S. Resident Population

25

20

15

10

5

0
1968

1972

1976

1980

1984

1988

1992

1996

2000

2004

2008

Year

Sources: Medicaid Data from US House of Representatives (1976), Gruber (2003) and U.S.
Census Bureau (various years); population data from www.census.gov.

42

