                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES



             HUMAN CAPITAL EFFECTS OF ANTI-POVERTY PROGRAMS:
           EVIDENCE FROM A RANDOMIZED HOUSING VOUCHER LOTTERY

                                             Brian Jacob
                                            Max Kapustin
                                            Jens Ludwig

                                        Working Paper 20164
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20164


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2014

This paper is part of a larger project with Greg Duncan, James Rosenbaum, Michael Johnson and Jeffrey
Smith. Generous financial support was provided by the National Consortium on Violence Research,
the Northwestern University / University of Chicago Joint Center for Poverty Research, the Smith
Richardson Foundation, the William T. Grant Foundation, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(award U01-CE001631), a HUD Urban Studies Postdoctoral Fellowship (to Jacob), a Health Policy
Investigator Award from the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation and visiting scholar awards from the
Brookings Institution, Russell Sage Foundation, and LIEPP at Sciences Po (to Ludwig), and core operating
support to the University of Chicago Crime Lab from the Joyce, MacArthur and McCormick foundations.
We thank Roseanna Ander, John Baj, Lucy Mackey Bilaver, Ken Coles, Jack Cutrone, Christine Devitt,
Megan Ferrier, Robert Goerge, Ron Graf, Anjali Gupta, Barry Isaacson, Bong Joo Lee, Charles Loeffler,
Ernst Melchior, Mark Myrent, Stacy Norris, Jennifer O’Neil, Todd Richardson, and William Riley
for their assistance in obtaining and interpreting the data used in this study. For helpful comments
we thank Randall Akee, John DiNardo, Greg Duncan, Lisa Gennetian, Nora Gordon, Larry Katz, Jeffrey
Kling, Katherine Magnuson, Ed Olsen, Katherine O’Regan, Marianne Page, Steve Raudenbush, Todd
Richardson, Armin Rick, Lynn Rodgers, Mark Shroder, and seminar participants at the Chicago Federal
Reserve, the NBER 2006 Summer Institute, the University of California, Berkeley, and the University
of Chicago Harris School and Committee on Education for helpful comments. Thanks to Seth Bour,
Eric Chyn, Megan Ferrier, Wei Ha, Jonathan Hershaff, Josh Hyman, Joe Peters, Sarah Rose, Matthew
Smith, Elias Walsh, Jake Ward, Caroline Weber, Thomas Wei and Patrick Wu for excellent assistance
working with the data. All opinions and any errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w20164.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Brian Jacob, Max Kapustin, and Jens Ludwig. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Human Capital Effects of Anti-Poverty Programs: Evidence from a Randomized Housing
Voucher Lottery
Brian Jacob, Max Kapustin, and Jens Ludwig
NBER Working Paper No. 20164
May 2014
JEL No. H53,H75,I38,J13,J24,R38

                                                  ABSTRACT

Whether government transfer programs increase the human capital of low-income children is a question
of first-order policy importance. Such policies might help poor children if their parents are credit constrained,
and so under-invest in their human capital. But it is also possible that whatever causes parents to have
low incomes might also directly influence children’s development, in which case transfer programs
need not improve poor children’s long-term life chances. While several recent influential studies suggest
anti-poverty programs have larger human capital effects per dollar spent than do even the best educational
interventions, identification is a challenge because most transfer programs are entitlements. We overcome
that problem by studying the effects on children of a generous transfer program that is heavily rationed—means-tested
housing assistance. We take advantage of a randomized housing voucher lottery in Chicago in 1997,
for which 82,607 people applied, and use administrative data on schooling, arrests, and health to track
children’s outcomes over 14 years. We focus on families living in unsubsidized private housing at
baseline, for whom voucher receipt generates large changes in both housing and non-housing consumption.
Estimated effects are mostly statistically insignificant and always much smaller than those from recent
studies of cash transfers, and are smaller on a per dollar basis than the best educational interventions.


Brian Jacob                                               Jens Ludwig
Gerald R. Ford School of Public Policy                    University of Chicago
University of Michigan                                    1155 East 60th Street
735 South State Street                                    Chicago, IL 60637
Ann Arbor, MI 48109                                       and NBER
and NBER                                                  jludwig@uchicago.edu
bajacob@umich.edu

Max Kapustin
Department of Economics
238 Lorch Hall
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
kapustin@umich.edu




An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w20164
                                              I. INTRODUCTION

         The inter-generational elasticity of income in the United States is estimated to be 0.5 or

0.6, much higher than estimates for many other developed countries (Black and Devereux 2011).

One hypothesis for why disadvantage is passed down from one generation to the next is that

credit constraints cause poor parents to under-invest in children’s human capital (Becker and

Tomes 1986), which, if true, suggests a straightforward policy solution: transfer more resources

to poor families. While the US devotes fewer resources to anti-poverty income transfers than

other developed nations (Smeeding 2006), we nonetheless have the same desire for anti-poverty

programs to enhance long-term productivity, and not simply alleviate short-term material need.

In announcing the War on Poverty in 1964, for example, President Lyndon B. Johnson argued:

“Very often a lack of jobs and money is not the cause of poverty, but the symptom. The cause

may lie deeper in our failure to give our fellow citizens a fair chance to develop their own

capacities, in a lack of education and training, in a lack of medical care and housing…”

         Several recent influential studies suggest that anti-poverty programs may have an even

higher return in educational outcomes than best-practice educational interventions, which if

correct would imply there is no tradeoff to government between helping the poor in the short

term and reducing inter-generational poverty in the long term. For example, Dahl and Lochner

(2012) examine the effects of expanding the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) during the 1990s

and estimate that an extra $1,000 in family income (in 2013 dollars)1 raises children’s test scores

by 0.045 standard deviations (SD) overall, by 0.06 for black or Hispanic youth, and by 0.065 for

males. Duncan, Morris, and Rodrigues (2011) estimate similar impacts using data from several

welfare-to-work experiments. Milligan and Stabile (2011) find even larger impacts in Canada,

1
  Unless otherwise noted, all dollar amounts reported in this paper are in 2013 inflation-adjusted dollars. The
estimates we report in text are slightly different from those reported in the original papers we cite because we have
re-scaled their estimates to reflect the effect per $1,000 in constant 2013 dollars.


	                                                        1
where $1,000 in extra child-care benefits increases math scores by 0.05 SD overall and 0.177 SD

for boys. Akee et al. (2010) study the effects of income received by low-income Native

American families from the opening of a casino on tribal land in North Carolina. Their reduced-

form effect corresponds to an income change of $4,000, and implies that an extra $1,000

increases high school graduation by about 6 percentage points in the poorest families. Few if any

educational interventions produce gains per dollar spent of these magnitudes.

              However, the literature on the relationship between family income and child outcomes is

controversial, owing largely to the challenge of disentangling causal effects from unobserved

factors. Whatever makes it difficult for parents to succeed in the labor market may also adversely

affect the development of their children. In that case, simply transferring resources to poor

parents may not be enough to help poor children; what may be required is an intervention that

targets the family attributes that drive the correlation between income and child outcomes, or a

direct provision of educational services that compensate for what disadvantaged children are

otherwise not receiving. The best empirical studies in this literature, such as those mentioned

above, try to overcome this identification challenge by studying the effects of transfer programs

that change the resources available to families. This strategy is complicated by the fact that most

of America’s largest transfer programs are entitlements available to all eligible people.

              In this paper, we estimate the impact of an unusually generous US social program—

means-tested housing assistance—on important long-run outcomes of children. We take

advantage of a large housing voucher lottery that was carried out in Chicago in July 1997, when

for the first time in a dozen years the city began accepting applications again for the voucher

program.2 A total of 82,607 eligible people applied; by way of comparison there were about



2
       We use “housing voucher” as shorthand for tenant-based rental subsidies. See Appendix A for a discussion.


	                                                           2
300,000 households in poverty in Chicago at the time.3 The number of applicants was far greater

than the number of vouchers so applicants were randomly assigned to a wait list. We show below

that this assignment was indeed random and greatly affected the chance a family was offered a

voucher.4 We are able to link applicants to a wide range of local, state, and federal administrative

databases that allow us to measure outcomes for children in these families up to 14 years after

the voucher lottery, including standardized test scores, high school graduation, arrest rates,

earnings, and social welfare receipt as adults, and health outcomes from Medicaid claims data.

        Our study focuses on the 90 percent of applicants living in unsubsidized private housing

at the time of the lottery, for which a housing voucher represents a large, positive real income

shock. The voucher allows these families to consume additional housing, but also allows them to

consume more of other goods because it substantially reduces the fraction of their income they

must contribute to rent. Our study thus answers a different question from that of the Moving to

Opportunity (MTO) demonstration, which offered housing vouchers to families living in public

housing. Families in MTO who were offered a voucher received a different form of housing

assistance that allowed them to move to different neighborhoods, but did not directly change the

resources available to families because the program rules for public housing and housing

vouchers are identical in terms of the income eligibility limits and required rent contributions.5

        Our study makes two important contributions. First, to the best of our knowledge, it is the

first study of housing vouchers to use a credibly exogenous source of variation and to examine

the long-term outcomes of a large sample of children using rich administrative data. There has


3
  In 2000 there were ~2.9 million people in Chicago, with an average of 2.67 people per household and a poverty
rate in the city equal to 28.5 percent. http://www.brookings.edu/research/reports/2003/11/livingcities-chicago
4
  Shea’s (2000, p. 182) paper on this topic notes that “perhaps future researchers will focus on more convincingly
exogenous sources of parental income variation, such as lottery winnings or large changes in public transfers.” We
essentially combine both of these sources of variation.
5
  Results of the 5-year MTO follow are in Kling, Ludwig, and Katz (2005), Sanbonmatsu et al. (2006), and Kling,
Liebman, and Katz (2007), while long-term results are in Sanbonmatsu et al. (2011) and Ludwig et al. (2011, 2012).


	                                                      3
been one other randomized study of housing vouchers (Mills et al. 2006), but it has only modest

sample sizes and relies on parents’ reports of children’s outcomes (see Appendix B for more

details).6 This dearth of evidence is surprising given the scale of low-income housing programs,

which receive $40 billion in federal spending each year—more than the total spending on Title I

or Pell Grant programs in education, and over twice as much as is spent on cash welfare (Falk

2012). Despite this sizable budget, housing programs are very costly per recipient, so only one-

quarter of income-eligible families participate (Rice and Sard 2009). Families with children are a

key target population and make up half of all participants in the voucher program.

        Second, we shed new light on how means-tested transfer programs generally affect

children’s human capital and long-term life outcomes. Housing vouchers greatly increase the

disposable cash available to families by reducing the amount they must contribute toward rent.

The distinction between housing vouchers and cash transfers is further narrowed because poor

families tend to spend a sizable share of their income on housing. Relative to most prior studies,

ours includes a very large sample, a randomized research design, long-term follow-up, and the

ability to examine multiple child outcomes (e.g., schooling, crime, and health). Moreover, the

housing voucher we study is extremely generous. The average subsidy for our sample is over

$12,000, sizable compared to the average income of our sample ($19,000). The low average

income of our sample also means we focus on the part of the income distribution where effects

should be largest (Løken, Mogstad, and Wiswall 2012). We also use administrative data to




6
  Mills et al. (2006) has a sample of N = 2,481. Their confidence intervals do not allow them to reject effects of
treatment on the treated (TOT) smaller than about 8 percent of a standard deviation (SD) for highest grade
completed, about 25 percent SD for whether the child has ever been suspended or expelled in school, and about 30
percent SD for the behavior problems index (Mills et al. 2006, Exhibits 6.3 and 6.4). In terms of measuring
outcomes, Theunissen et al. (1998) compare child and parent reports about the child’s physical health, cognitive
functioning, social functioning, and emotions and find correlations between 0.44 and 0.61.


	                                                       4
measure outcomes, which have low rates of sample attrition and may be less susceptible to self-

reporting error than surveys.

       We find few statistically significant effects of housing vouchers on children’s schooling

outcomes, crime, or health, none of which are significant once we account for multiple

hypothesis testing. Our estimates are also much smaller than what we would expect based on the

results of recent studies of the effects of cash transfers. Even if we make the extreme assumption

that additional housing consumption has no effect on children’s outcomes, our confidence

intervals rule out effects of income on outcomes like test scores for male children that are larger

than one-third the size of those in Dahl and Lochner (2012) and one-eighth those in Milligan and

Stabile (2011). The confidence interval around our estimate for income effects on high school

graduation rates for males lets us rule out effects larger than about one-quarter of Akee et al.

(2010). We get qualitatively similar findings if we restrict attention to just those infra-marginal

families whose baseline housing consumption is equal to what is essentially the voucher’s

maximum rent; for these families receipt of a voucher is very close to being a pure cash transfer.

       The main threat to internal validity with these results is from a slight treatment-control

difference in migration out of the Chicago Public Schools, which could, in theory, bias our

estimates of the education outcomes. However, as we show below, the amount of differential

attrition is extremely small and a variety of sensitivity analyses suggest that any resulting bias is

negligible. Moreover, we find no differential attrition from Illinois, which means that our crime

and health outcomes (which come from state agency data) should not suffer from any such bias.

       Our estimates also imply that extra cash transfers beyond the current level provided in the

US are likely to have a smaller impact (per dollar) than the best-practice educational

interventions explicitly designed to improve children’s human capital. These findings are




	                                                5
consistent with Currie’s (2006) observation that in-kind programs targeted at specific outcome

domains for poor children (in this case, education) are more effective than “a cash program that

is not targeted at any particular outcome” (p. 3). Since the effect of income on children’s

outcomes is surely non-linear, our estimates do not imply that abandoning the existing system of

social supports to children in the US would not harm their outcomes.

              The next section discusses the program rules for housing vouchers and the candidate

mechanisms through which receipt of a housing voucher might affect children’s outcomes.

Section III provides background on the 1997 housing voucher lottery that serves as the basis for

our empirical analysis. Sections IV and V discuss our data and empirical strategy. Our results are

in Section VI, while the limitations and implications of our results are in Section VII.

                                             II. CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK

              In this section, we first describe how the housing voucher program works, and then

discuss how participation in the housing voucher program might influence childhood outcomes.

A. Housing program rules

              Housing vouchers subsidize low-income families to live in private-market housing.7

Eligibility limits for housing programs are a function of family size and income, and prioritize

what the US Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) terms “very low-income

households,” with incomes for a family of four below 50 percent of the local median.

              The maximum subsidy available to families is governed by the Fair Market Rent (FMR),

which is partly a function of family size (larger families get a higher FMR to lease a larger rental

unit). The FMR is also linked to the local metropolitan area’s private-market rent distribution,




7
       This discussion is based on the excellent summary in Olsen (2003).


	                                                            6
usually set at the 40th or 50th percentile, and so varies over time and across areas.8

        Families receiving vouchers are required to contribute towards rent 30 percent of their

adjusted income, which under program rules can be substantially less than total income. The

voucher covers the difference between the family’s rent contribution and the lesser of the FMR

or the unit rent. Voucher recipients can keep the subsidy for as long as they meet income and

other eligibility requirements.9 For additional details about housing voucher rules, and how they

interact with other social programs, see Appendix A.

B. Mechanisms through which housing vouchers might affect child outcomes

        Receipt of a housing voucher may influence children’s long-term outcomes in three

possible ways: 1) by improving the quality of the housing conditions in which children reside; 2)

by allowing parents to invest more in non-housing goods that may be developmentally

productive for children; and 3) by reducing parental labor supply.

        Figure I presents the budget constraint facing families that are trying to decide how to

allocate income I between the consumption of housing (H) and other (non-housing) goods (C),

both normalized so that PH = PC = 1. Consider a family at baseline with budget constraint DJ

that, prior to receiving a voucher, locates at point B. After receiving a voucher subsidy with a

cost to the government of S (in our sample, on average S = $12,501), their new budget constraint

is given by DUVL, where D – CV is the rent contribution required by the voucher program. If the

family leases a unit with rent up to the FMR, their new consumption bundle is at point V.

        Increased consumption of housing


8
  The FMR for a two-bedroom apartment in the Chicago area, in nominal dollars, equaled $699 in 1994, $732 in
1997, and $762 in 2000.
9
  Families using a voucher undergo annual examinations of their income and household composition by their local
Public Housing Authority (PHA). These examinations determine the family’s continued eligibility and establish the
housing assistance payment (HAP) made by the PHA on the family’s behalf. If a family’s income rises to the point
where their HAP is zero, they may continue to be enrolled for six months at which point, if the subsidy is not
restored, their contract will terminate.


	                                                      7
         The most obvious change for a family receiving a housing voucher is that their housing

consumption increases substantially, from HB to HV. For families in our study, average annual

rent at baseline is $9,372 (Table I), while the FMR for these families is on average $16,220, so

the maximum change in housing consumption from using a voucher is on average HV – HB =

$6,849. This represents a 73 percent increase in housing consumption, or about 36 percent of the

average baseline income of our families ($18,978).

         Figure II gives some sense for the distribution of HV – HB across families that leased up

with a voucher, estimated as the rent recorded by the government the first time the household

uses a voucher minus our estimate for their baseline (pre-lottery) rent.10 The distribution includes

some negative changes in rent (housing consumption) from using a housing voucher, which

could occur in the short run (as we are examining here) but should dissipate in the long run as

housing consumption rises for all voucher recipients.11 If housing markets function at all well,

we would expect higher-rent units to be either higher quality or located in more desirable

neighborhoods. We show below that in practice families do not move to notably “better”

neighborhoods, so most of the increase in housing consumption presumably comes from

improved housing units as suggested by Mills et al. (2006).12


10
   Actual baseline rent is unobserved in our data. Instead, we assign to each family the average rent paid by
demographically-similar households in their baseline census tract using a special tabulation of 2000 Census data
from Chicago conducted for us by the Census Bureau. See Appendix D for details.
11
   In the short run, we could see declines in housing consumption (market rent) among those families who are living
at baseline in apartments with rents close to or above the FMR. The housing voucher program provides families with
a limited amount of time to find a new unit. Previous research suggests that not all landlords are willing to lease
units to families with vouchers because of minimum housing quality restrictions (and inspections), paperwork, and
other program requirements. A family with a baseline rent close to the FMR might move into a unit with lower rent
in the short run because of these search constraints. In the long run, we expect families to adjust and re-optimize.
12
   Some observers have noted landlords are aware of the rent limits in the voucher program and some artificially
raise the rent of a unit to meet the tenant’s new ability to pay (Mallach 2007; Collinson and Ganong 2013). To the
extent that this is the case, the estimates described above may overstate the increase in housing consumption. The
welfare-to-work voucher study by Mills et al. (2006) suggests that even if this occurs to some degree, the net effect
of housing voucher receipt may be an increase in unit quality or size. For example, the share of families in the
control group that live in crowded housing conditions (more than one person per bedroom) at the time of their
follow-up survey is about 39 percent, while the effect of voucher use (the TOT effect) is minus 22 percentage points


	                                                       8
         A large correlational literature has found that at least some specific features of housing

units, like presence of toxins or crowding, are associated with outcomes such as respiratory

problems in children (Leventhal and Newman 2010).13 Few studies are able to control for

unobserved family attributes that may confound estimates of housing effects on children. One

exception is Currie and Yelowitz (2000), who use the sex composition of children in a family as

an instrument for receipt of public housing and find that families in housing projects experience

less overcrowding, and children, especially males, are less likely to be held back in school.

         Increased consumption of other goods

         Receipt of a housing voucher also allows a family to greatly increase their spending on

non-housing goods (from CB to CV in Figure I) by reducing out-of-pocket spending on rent. Our

sample spends on average $9,372 on rent at baseline, over half their total income.14 Receipt of a

voucher would let the average family in our sample reduce out-of-pocket spending on housing to

D – CV = $3,719 (the average required rent contribution by the voucher program), resulting in

average increased consumption of other non-housing goods of CV – CB = $5,653, which equals

45 percent of the total voucher subsidy cost to the government and 29 percent of average

baseline income for families. This represents a 59 percent gain in non-housing consumption.

         While a large body of research has studied the relationship between income and

children’s outcomes (e.g., Brooks-Gunn and Duncan 1997; Mayer 1997; see also Appendix B),

(p<.05); see Table 5.3 of Mills et al. 2006, p. 139. Similarly, the share of control group families reporting two or
more housing problems is 13.5 percent, and the TOT is again about one-half that (minus 7 percentage points),
although is not quite significant.
13
   For example, Fisk et al. (2007) find building dampness and mold to be associated with a 30-50 percent increase in
respiratory and asthma-related outcomes, while Sharfstein et al. (2001) survey families on a Section 8 waiting list in
Boston and find that nearly half of respondents report that their children suffered health problems, ranging from
mental distress to asthma, as a consequence of substandard housing conditions. For a discussion of other studies of
housing vouchers that mix together the different mechanisms examined here, see Appendix B.
14
   Nationwide, nearly two-thirds of extremely low-income renters, defined as those with incomes below 30 percent
of area median income, spend half or more of their income on housing. Nearly 80 percent of these families spend at
least 30 percent of their income on housing. Among all renter households, around one-quarter spend at least half
their income on housing, and over one-half spend at least 30 percent of their incomes on housing (Bipartisan Policy
Center 2013, p. 83).


	                                                        9
credibly identified estimates are rare. As Almond and Currie (2011) note, “it is…remarkably

difficult to find examples of policies that increase incomes without potentially having a direct

effect on outcomes.” In addition to the research focused exclusively on academic outcomes of

children (e.g., Dahl and Lochner 2012), Milligan and Stabile (2011) find that an extra child-care

benefit resulted in improved physical health in males and mental health in females. Using

variation in the rollout of the Food Stamp Program, Almond et al. (2011) find exposure to Food

Stamps in the later stages of pregnancy increases birth weight.

       Compared to a housing voucher of cost S to the government, an equally costly cash

transfer would lead a recipient to consume less housing and more non-housing goods (point X, in

Figure I) compared to the voucher bundle V. Which of these two consumption bundles would be

more developmentally productive for children depends on how developmentally productive

housing is compared to whatever else parents would spend extra cash on instead. While voters

must think housing is better than cash for at least some aspects of well-being (hence the

provision of an in-kind rather than a cash benefit), it seems safe to assume that an upper bound

for the effects of a housing voucher on children is the effect of a similarly costly cash transfer.

       To better understand how our results compare to those from existing studies of cash

transfers, we generate a set of lower bound estimates for the implied effect of income on child

outcomes under the (probably extreme) assumption that a dollar of housing and a dollar of non-

housing consumption are equally helpful for children. We also calculate an upper bound for the

effect of income on child outcomes by making an equally extreme assumption in the other

direction, namely that additional housing has no impact on children’s outcomes so that the effect

of a housing voucher on children comes entirely from the change induced in non-housing

consumption. Specifically, we estimate the size of the cash transfer that would lead to the same




	                                               10
gain in non-housing goods as families get from receiving a voucher (CV – CB in Figure III,

represented by S*). The required cash transfer is larger than just the gain in non-housing

consumption under the voucher, because when families get extra cash (e.g., through the EITC)

they will likely choose to spend a portion of it on housing. We assume an income elasticity of

housing of 0.35 (Mayo 1981; Polinsky and Ellwood 1979), which implies S* = $6,377.15 This

elasticity is towards the lower end of the range of estimates, which in turn yields a lower S* than

would result from assuming a larger elasticity.

                 Reduction in parental labor supply

                 Housing vouchers may also affect child outcomes by reducing parental labor supply

through both income effects (given the large resource transfer) and substitution effects (from the

fact that they require families to contribute 30 percent of adjusted income towards rent). The net

effect for our Chicago sample is to reduce work rates by about 4.6 percentage points, versus a

control mean of 60 percent (Jacob and Ludwig 2012). Whether increased parental time with

children increases or decreases human capital depends on how the developmental productivity of

parental time compares with the alternative way children would have spent their time.

                 Compared to housing vouchers, other transfer programs may have different effects on

parental labor supply depending on their design. If parents combine time and market goods to

“produce” children’s human capital, as in Becker (1965), then the effect of a transfer program on

parental labor supply could change the way parents use extra cash to help their children and so

moderate the effect of any cash transfer on children’s outcomes (see Appendix C). This provides

one explanation for why the results in Duncan et al. (2011), who study the effects of welfare-to-



15
  We can calculate S* in practice with the income elasticity of housing consumption (eH,I), baseline income (I),
together with consumption patterns before and after voucher receipt (HB, CB, and CV), using the fact that:
                              !∗
       𝐶! −    𝐶! =    𝑆 ∗ −    [   ×𝑒!,! ×𝐻! ]
                               !



	                                                       11
work programs that increase parental labor supply, differ from the effects we estimate of housing

vouchers that slightly reduce parental labor supply. We return to this point in the discussion.

                        III. THE CHICAGO HOUSING VOUCHER LOTTERY

         In July 1997, Chicago Housing Authority Corporation (CHAC) opened the city’s voucher

wait list for the first time in 12 years, and received a total of 82,607 applications from income-

eligible people. CHAC hired Abt Associates to randomly assign applicants to a waiting list in

August 1997, and notified those in the top 35,000 positions of their wait list number. CHAC told

these families on the “active wait list” that they would be offered a voucher within three years.

CHAC informed the remaining applicants (lottery numbers 35,001 to 82,607) that they would

not receive vouchers.16 By May 2003, after offering vouchers to 18,110 families from this wait

list, CHAC was “over-leased,” that is, had issued as many or more vouchers than it had funding

to pay for, and essentially stopped offering any new vouchers.17

         In the analysis that follows, we define our treatment group to be families offered

vouchers by May 2003 (lottery numbers 1 to 18,110). The control group consists of applicants

with lottery numbers above 35,000 who were told that they were not on the active wait list and

would not get a voucher. We exclude families with lottery numbers between 18,110 and 35,000

from our primary sample because of their ambiguous treatment status.18

                               IV. DATA AND SUMMARY STATISTICS

         This section briefly describes the key data sources used in our analysis. For more detail


16
   Service of the July 1997 wait list was interrupted in August 1998, as CHAC was required to provide vouchers to a
set of Latino families in response to a discrimination lawsuit against the City of Chicago. CHAC began to serve the
1997 wait list again at the start of 2000.
17
   The number of families offered vouchers per year (and the voucher utilization rate) was 1,540 (50.3 percent) in
1997; 3,085 in 1998 (50.1 percent); 2,631 in 2000 (43.6 percent); 5,733 (44.5 percent) in 2001; 4,674 (49.7 percent)
in 2002; 446 (42.7 percent) in 2003.
18
   Families in this group could have been affected by the anticipation of receiving a voucher in the future, although
since CHAC stopped giving out vouchers in 2003 these families may have given up hope of getting one. Appendix
Table I shows that including this group does not change our main findings.


	                                                       12
on the data, including variable construction and matching, see Appendix D. The starting point for

constructing our sample are the application forms for the 1997 wait list, which provide baseline

information on the 82,607 adults and nearly 8,700 spouses who applied to CHAC for a housing

voucher. The baseline application forms do not include the names of other household residents,

so we use data from the Illinois Department of Human Services (IDHS) to determine who lived

with the CHAC applicants in the period immediately before the wait list was opened.

       Data on voucher utilization comes from HUD 50058 records, which families complete

annually to verify program eligibility. Several methods were used to track residential locations

for both treatment and control group families, which are then linked to census tract-level data.

       To measure behavioral outcomes, we use longitudinal administrative data from a number

of different government agencies. All of our administrative data matching uses only information

from pre-randomization sources to preserve the strength of the experimental design. From the

Chicago Public Schools (CPS) we obtained student-level school records for the academic years

1994-5 through 2010-11 that include test scores, grades, and enrollment or graduation status. We

measure labor market involvement for youth and their parents using quarterly earnings data from

the state unemployment insurance (UI) system through 2011:Q4. We measure social program

participation of youth and parents from IDHS records through 2013:Q1. We measure criminal

behavior using data from the Illinois State Police (ISP) that capture arrests through 2012:Q1.

       Finally, we measure health outcomes using Medicaid claims data from the Center for

Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) for the period from 1999:Q1 through 2008:Q4. One

limitation of the Medicaid data is that most, but not everyone, in our study sample uses

Medicaid. A second limitation is that we measure health outcomes only when a fee-for-service

claim is filed, and some children in our sample receive benefits from a managed care




	                                              13
organization (MCO) that does not generate such claims (although there is no treatment-control

difference in propensity to receive benefits from an MCO). All results derived from claims that

we present below are conditioned on being enrolled in fee-for-service care for six or more

months during the academic year. Using this definition of enrollment, approximately 75% of our

sample is ever enrolled at some point during 2000-2008, and 45% are enrolled at a point in time,

with at most a 1.4 percentage point treatment-control difference in enrollment rates as we show

below. A third limitation is that claims data could confound access to care with health outcomes;

we try to address this by focusing on conditions for which most people would seek care.

       Sample

       Table I presents summary baseline statistics for our main analysis sample—children of

CHAC applicants living in private-market housing when they applied to the voucher lottery,

separately for the 48,263 “control” children (whose families were not offered vouchers) and

18,347 “treatment” children (offered vouchers during 1997-2003) in our sample. We restrict our

attention to children who were age 0-18 at the time of the 1997 lottery, and so do not include any

children born subsequent to the lottery since fertility could be affected by voucher receipt.

       Our program population is quite disadvantaged at baseline. Almost all families are

headed by an unmarried, African-American woman, with nearly four out of five receiving some

form of social-program assistance. The year before the lottery children have an average GPA of

1.5 on a 4 point scale, and attend schools that are overwhelmingly attended by other minority

students who are eligible for free or reduced price lunch.

       Comparing the baseline average characteristics of the control group (column 1 of Table I)

with the treatment group (column 2) provides some evidence to confirm that the voucher lottery

was indeed random. A few pair-wise comparisons are statistically significant, but an omnibus




	                                               14
test of the null hypothesis that all of the treatment-control differences in baseline characteristics

are jointly zero yields a p-value of .49.19

                                         V. EMPIRICAL STRATEGY

         Given that the voucher lottery was random, a simple comparison of means between those

offered vouchers and those who were not will provide an unbiased estimate of the effects of

being offered a voucher, known as the “intention to treat” (ITT) effect. We discuss here how we

estimate the ITT and the effects of actually using a voucher, and how we handle statistical

inference with so many different outcomes.

A. The Effect of Receiving a Voucher Offer

         Our data consist of a balanced panel where the unit of observation is the child-year. To

facilitate comparison between education and crime data, we use academic years that span from

Q3 of one year to Q2 of the following year. Our analysis period runs from 1997-98 through

2010-11, the last year for which we have most of our data sources. For child i in year t, we use

OLS to estimate the ITT effect on outcome 𝑦!" as:

(1)      𝑦!" = 𝛼 + 𝛽! 𝑃𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑂𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑟!" + 𝛽! 𝑃𝑟𝑒𝑂𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑟!" + 𝑋𝛤 + 𝛾! +    𝜀!"

         PostOfferit equals 1 if the family of child i has been offered a housing voucher through

the CHAC 1997 lottery in any period up to or including t, and zero otherwise. We also control

for year effects, 𝛾! , and to increase precision we control for a set of baseline characteristics (see

Appendix D). Standard errors are clustered by household (Bertrand et al. 2004). Identification of

the ITT effect 𝛽!   comes from a within-period comparison of the average outcomes of those
19
   We use the suest command in Stata to conduct an F-test for the joint significance of the treatment indicator,
adjusting for the non-independence of baseline characteristics within households. This test essentially consists of
regressing lottery numbers against all of the baseline characteristics shown in Table I in a way that accounts for the
correlation among these baseline variables. An alternative approach is to cluster standard errors on baseline census
tract rather than household ID; when we do this, the p-value is 0.44. The set of baseline variables we examine in our
omnibus test includes indicators for whether selected baseline measures are missing; when we replicate our omnibus
tests excluding those missing indicators, the p-values (equal to 0.49 and 0.33 for clustering at the household or tract
levels, respectively) still fail to reach traditional thresholds of significance.


	                                                        15
offered vouchers versus the control group. If there is heterogeneity in the effects of a voucher

offer across people, calendar time, or duration of voucher receipt, then our ITT estimate is an

average of the ITT effects across all post-voucher-offer person-years in our panel. We also

include an indicator, PreOfferit, equal to 1 for people who were on the active wait list but had not

been offered vouchers yet by year t, and equal to 0 otherwise. The coefficient provides evidence

on whether families change their behavior in anticipation of getting a voucher. Note that this

coefficient does not serve as a “randomization check,” since it is estimated off of post-

randomization treatment-control differences (recall our panel only includes post-lottery quarters).

       The standard “education production function” in economics assumes children’s outcomes

are affected by the accumulated inputs they have experienced up to that point (see for example

Hanushek 1979), which suggests that the effects of increased household resources may

accumulate and grow over time. So also of interest for our analysis is to examine how voucher

effects might change with the duration of voucher receipt. To do this, we use OLS to estimate the

per-period ITT effect using the following event study-style specification:
                       !
(2)    𝑦!" = 𝛼 +    ! 𝐷!" 𝛿!   + 𝑋𝛤 + 𝛾! + 𝜀!" ,

       The key explanatory variables in this case are indicators (𝐷!"! ) equal to 1 if, in period t,

individual i is k years from when they were offered a voucher through the lottery (k can take on

positive and negative values). We present figures tracing out the time path of these effects below.

The ITT effect could change over time because the behavioral response to leasing up with a

voucher varies, or because the fraction or composition of families that have leased up with a

voucher changes over time, or because of changes in economic, policy, or other social

conditions. We explore some of these sources of heterogeneity below.

B. The Effects of Using a Voucher




	                                                 16
        The ITT estimate will not equal the effect of using a voucher because not all treatment-

group families who were offered a voucher used them, and a small share of controls received a

housing voucher through some other special allocation during our study period (between 5 and 8

percent, as shown below).20 Under the assumption that the voucher offer does not have an impact

on those who choose not to take it, we can use two-stage least squares with randomized voucher

offers as an instrument to estimate the effects of using a voucher with equations (3) and (4). The

dependent variable in equation (3) is an indicator for whether household i utilized a voucher

provided by any source (the CHAC lottery or some other allocation) by or in period t.21

(3)     𝐿𝑒𝑎𝑠𝑒𝑑!" = 𝛼 + 𝜃! 𝑃𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑂𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑟!" +    𝜃! 𝑃𝑟𝑒𝑂𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑟!" + 𝑋𝛤 + 𝛾! + 𝜀!"

(4)     𝑦!" = 𝜂 +    𝜋! 𝐿𝑒𝑎𝑠𝑒𝑑!" + 𝑋𝛱 +    𝜇! +    𝑣!"

        Because a small share of families assigned to the bottom of the 1997 CHAC wait list

wind up receiving vouchers through some other program during our study period, our estimate

for 𝜋! captures the local average treatment effect on those induced to use a voucher by their

CHAC wait list position (Angrist, Imbens, and Rubin 1996).22 As a benchmark for judging the

size of our IV estimates, we present what Katz, Kling, and Liebman (2001) call the control

complier mean (CCM), or the average outcome for controls who would have used vouchers had

20
   Among the other sources of housing vouchers during our study period was the HOPE VI program, through which
HUD financed CHA to demolish some of the city’s most notorious housing projects; some of the displaced families
were offered vouchers through a special allocation. Other families on the CHAC wait-list could have received
vouchers from another program because they contained a disabled member, or were at risk for having parents
separated from children without a change in housing status, or were Latino and so received vouchers as a result of
litigation by Latinos United against the CHA that interrupted service of the 1997 wait-list for several years.
21
   Under this definition a family that uses but then gives up their voucher does not become “untreated,” under the
assumption that a child’s outcomes are a function of current and past investments. In practice, over half of
households who lease up with a CHAC voucher remain leased-up after eight years (Appendix Figure I). The results
do not change much if we instead define the endogenous explanatory variable of interest as “using a housing
voucher in period t.”
22
   If voucher effects instead vary by how long a family is leased up, then π1 captures the LATE for those who lease
up for a longer period of time due to treatment group assignment, so long as we are willing to assume that control
group cross-overs would have been leased up for at least as much time had they been assigned to treatment. If we
instead calculated our IV estimate using a more conservative assumption that all treatment group voucher users lease
up for a longer period of time than if they had been assigned to the control group, our IV estimate will capture the
effects of treatment-on-the-treated (TOT).


	                                                      17
they been assigned to the treatment group. We calculate this using the formula from Heller et al.

(2013) to account for the presence of control crossovers.

         Table II shows there is a large “first-stage” relationship between being offered a housing

voucher through the CHAC lottery and whether the child’s family used a voucher. Our estimate

for 𝜃! is nonetheless less than 1; despite the long wait list for housing vouchers, many families

offered vouchers do not wind up using them. Reasons include the fact that many apartments have

rents above the FMR limit, some landlords may avoid renting to voucher families,23 and families

offered vouchers have a limited time (usually 2 to 4 months) to use the voucher to lease a unit. In

the top panel, which presents results for our full analysis sample, column 1 shows the coefficient

on the PostOffer indicator from estimating equation (3). Around 7 percent of controls used a

voucher, and assignment of a wait list number below 18,110 increased voucher lease-up rates by

48 percentage points. The F-test statistic equals 5,835. The voucher take-up rate we report here is

consistent with those reported in previous studies.24 The results are qualitatively similar if we

estimate a cross-section regression for whether a child’s family ever uses a voucher while CHAC

was issuing vouchers (1997-2003), as in column 2, or if we focus on using a voucher from the

1997 CHAC lottery specifically (columns 3 and 4).

C. Comparison to Estimated Effects of Cash Transfers

         While the ITT and TOT estimates tell us about the effects of the housing voucher

program on children’s outcomes, we are also interested in comparing our results to the broader

23
   Some landlords may avoid renting to voucher families because of the paperwork requirements, the program’s
minimum housing quality standards (which must be verified by an inspection, although failed units can be modified
and re-inspected), and a previous rule that has since been abolished that limited the ability of landlords to turn away
future voucher applicants (“take one, take all”).
24
   By comparison, Finkel and Buron (2001) study 48 public housing agencies around the country and find an overall
voucher lease-up rate of 69 percent in 2000, with lower rates in big cities such as New York (57 percent) and Los
Angeles (47 percent). In the Gautreaux mobility program in Chicago, around 19 percent of the public housing
families who signed up used a voucher (Rubinowitz and Rosenbaum 2000, p. 67). Kling, Liebman, and Katz (2007)
report that in the MTO experiment, 47 percent of families assigned to the experimental (low-poverty) voucher group
lease-up, as do 60 percent of those assigned to the regular Section 8 voucher group. See also Olsen (2003).


	                                                        18
literature on cash transfers, in which results are typically reported in terms of benefits per $1,000

of additional income. We do this under different assumptions about whether housing is as

productive for children as non-housing consumption to bound the estimated effects.

       We first assume that a dollar of housing and a dollar of non-housing consumption are

equally productive for children’s outcomes. To do this we replace Leasedit as the endogenous

explanatory variable in equations (3) and (4) with Leasedit × Si, where Si is a measure of the size

of the voucher subsidy family i was eligible for calculated using baseline (pre-lottery) data, and

shown in 2013 dollars (see Appendix E). This rescales the TOT by the average S in our sample
                        !!
($12,501), so 𝜋!"#! ≈   !
                             . Dividing the TOT by an upper bound for the plausible cash equivalent

value of a voucher provides a lower bound estimate for 𝜋!"#! .

       We then assume that housing consumption has no developmentally productive effects on

children’s human capital, so that any effect on children’s outcomes caused by the voucher

operates entirely by increasing non-housing consumption. As described above (see Figure III),

we estimate that the average cash transfer that would generate the same gain in non-housing

consumption as families in our sample experience from receipt of a housing voucher equals S* =

$6,377. Dividing the TOT by a lower bound for the plausible cash equivalent value of a voucher

yields an upper bound estimate for 𝜋!"#! . In our tables we also show an even more extreme

upper bound that assumes both that housing is unproductive for children and that the income

elasticity of housing equals zero. In this case we rescale the TOT by the increase in non-housing

consumption families experience from voucher receipt, equal on average in our sample to ΔC =

CV – CB = $5,653.

D. Multiple Hypothesis Testing




	                                                 19
         The final issue we discuss is how to account for the large number of outcomes we can

examine with our data, and how to manage the risks of both false positives and false negatives.

Our approach follows what we believe to be the “best practice” (Kling, Liebman, and Katz 2007;

Anderson 2008; Schochet et al. 2008) although, as Anderson (2008) shows, relatively few

studies in the social sciences make such adjustments.

         First, we pre-specify a limited set of outcomes and subgroups for a main, confirmatory

analysis. We focus on four outcomes: (i) high school graduation; (ii) a composite of math and

reading achievement scores; (iii) the social cost of crimes committed by youth, an “importance-

weighted” index that assigns a dollar value representing the cost to society to each youth arrest

based on estimates from the literature;25 and (iv) emergency department and inpatient hospital

admissions. Given prior evidence that social policy effects may differ by gender (Kling, Ludwig,

and Katz 2005; Kling, Liebman, and Katz 2007; Anderson 2008), we examined impacts

separately by gender. We also look separately at children 0-6 versus 6-18 years of age at the time

of the lottery, given the possibility of declining developmental plasticity by age (Shonkoff and

Phillips 2000; Knudsen et al. 2006) and the findings of Morris et al. (2004) and Duncan et al.

(2011) that income only impacts achievement in young children.

         Second, in addition to reporting per comparison p-values from standard t-tests, we also

control for the false discovery rate (FDR), or the proportion of null-hypothesis rejections that are

Type I errors or “false positives,” using the two-step procedure from Benjamini, Krieger, and



25
  We follow the approach in Kling, Ludwig, and Katz (2005), discussed further in Appendix D. In Appendix Tables
V-VIII, we conduct sensitivity analyses that examine what happens to our estimates if we trim the dollar value for
the social costs of homicide (which tends to be much higher than other offenses and so can drive estimates using this
sort of dollar-weighted index), setting its value to twice that of the next-highest crime, or set the estimated social
costs of drug possession offenses to zero. Our appendix tables also show results separately for arrests by offense
type: violent, property, drug, and other. The results for these different measures are almost never statistically
significant, with the exception of arrests to female youth aged 6-18 at baseline, for whom there is some indication
that housing voucher receipt may be associated with an increase in arrests for violent crimes.


	                                                       20
Yekutieli (2006). Because the TOT is basically just a re-scaled version of the ITT point estimate

and standard error, with a similar t-statistic, we report the FDR-adjusted p-values for the ITT.

         Since ours is a standard “multiple end points” problem that arises when comparing some

alternative program to status quo (see Benjamini and Hochberg 1995), where the decision about

which is preferable will depend on the whole set of outcomes being compared and not on the

significance of any single outcome, we think the FDR is the most appropriate adjustment for

multiple comparisons. For completeness, we also control for the family-wise error rate (FWER),

or the probability of making any Type I error, calculated using a free step-down re-sampling

method.26 The FWER is the more conservative of the two adjustments, so the fact that we find

few statistically significant impacts even with our focus on the FDR strengthens our conclusions

about the limited effect of even large resource transfers on children’s outcomes.

                                                   VI. RESULTS

         In this section, we present our findings on how housing vouchers affect child outcomes.

We then discuss how these results inform the broader literature on income transfers. Finally, we

explore a variety of mediating mechanisms through which vouchers might operate.

A. Effects of Housing Vouchers on Children’s Outcomes

         Table III presents the impact estimates for our primary outcome measures. Even if we

initially ignore multiple testing issues and focus on pairwise error rates, just one out of twelve
26
   We use a bootstrap resampling technique that simulates data under the null hypothesis (Westfall and Young 1993;
Anderson 2008). Within each permutation, we randomly re-assign treatment indicators with replacement and
estimate program impacts on all of our primary outcome measures across our different sub-groups. By repeating this
2,500 times, we create an empirical distribution of t-statistics that allows us to compare the actual set of t-statistics
we find to what we would have found by chance under the null. We maintain the original sampling frame in each
iteration, assigning the same number of pseudo-treatment and pseudo-control youth as in our original sample. This
technique preserves the correlational structure and underlying distributions of our data, providing the adjusted
probability we would observe our results by chance given our data and the number of tests we run. Rather than use a
single p-value adjustment for all the outcome measures, we use a free step-down procedure to adjust the p-value on
each outcome separately. The idea is that once a null hypothesis has been rejected, it is removed from the family of
hypotheses being tested (thus increasing the power of the remaining tests). We then calculate a new adjusted p-value
with the bootstrapped empirical distribution of t-statistics for only the remaining tests, providing a more powerful
adjustment than setting all p-values to the same minimum value.


	                                                         21
estimates is significant at the usual 5 percent threshold (social costs of crime committed by

females), and another is significant at the 10 percent cutoff (achievement test scores for males

age 0-6 at baseline). If we account for multiple testing by controlling for either the FDR or

FWER, then none of these estimates are statistically significant at conventional cutoffs.27

         Given our reliance on mostly city- or state-level administrative records, one threat to the

internal validity of our estimates comes from the possibility of differential attrition. Table IV

shows that there is no difference in the treatment versus control group in the fraction of quarters

living outside of IL between 1997 and 2005. A recent update of this data allowed us to get

information on the location of households in 2012. Again, we see no statistically significant

difference in the chance of living in Illinois; our 95 percent confidence interval lets us rule out an

ITT effect any larger than about 4 percentage points.28 This result suggests that our estimates for

the majority of our outcomes, all of which rely on state data, should not suffer from any bias.

Such outcomes include arrest records, public assistance receipt and earnings.

         However, Table V shows that younger children in our treatment group are slightly more

likely to be in the Chicago Public School (CPS) system in any given academic year. The ITT is 3

(2) percentage points for boys (girls) age 0-6 at baseline. In theory, this differential attrition

might bias our achievement estimates for the young children in our sample.29 In practice, we

think that any bias is negligible. First, even after attrition, children in the treatment and control

groups are nearly identical on the comprehensive set of baseline observables presented earlier

(see Appendix Table II). Second, because there is little difference between treatment and control

children in the rates with which they ever appear in the CPS system, we re-estimate our ITT

27
   Performing the calculation of FDR-adjusted p-values separately by gender does not affect our results.
28
   Unfortunately, we were not able to obtain address histories from 2005-2012 for this sample of households.
29
   We find that treatment children are slightly more likely to be enrolled in Medicaid over our sample period, which
is consistent with earlier evidence that the voucher offer led to a small increase in social program participation (see
Jacob and Ludwig 2012).


	                                                        22
model replacing any missing student test scores with a student’s last observed score, which

yields estimates very similar to those reported in Table III. We also calculate bounds using the

approach from Lee (2009), which suggest that our results for graduation impacts are robust to

differential attrition, although these bounds are very wide for test scores (Appendix Tables III

and IV). A final point to note is that differential treatment-control attrition is identical for boys

and girls (Table V). Yet vouchers appear to have (if anything) a more positive impact on boys, as

seen in Table III, suggesting differential attrition is unlikely to be driving the result.30

         These results appear to generalize to a broader set of outcomes as well. Appendix Tables

V to VIII show ITT and TOT estimates of a variety of additional outcome measures in each of

our domains, in the spirit of exploratory analyses. These results suggest vouchers had few

detectable impacts on children’s outcomes. Quantile regression estimates suggest that there were

no consistent and significant estimates across different parts of the ability distribution.31

         It is possible that any voucher effect increases with duration of voucher receipt, which

could be missed by our main estimates. Figure IV shows ITT estimates and confidence intervals

by time since offer for achievement test scores and social costs of crime committed by youth. We

do not see much trend over time in any of these outcomes or across analytic samples.




30
   Of course, it is possible that the attrition process operated differently across genders despite the identical rates of
attrition, though this seems unlikely.
31
   One might imagine that the intervention had different impacts across different points in the ability distribution. To
explore this possibility we estimated quantile regressions of the test score. To simplify the estimation, we collapse
the panel to a single observation per student, averaging student test scores for all post lottery periods. We then
estimate a cross-sectional regression where the key independent variable is an indicator for being in the treatment
group. We show estimates of the effect of being offered a voucher (i.e., ITT estimates) on the 10th, 25th, 50th, 75th
and 90th quantiles of the test score distribution. The results suggests that, to the extent that there is any effect on
math test scores for pre-school age boys, the results may be concentrated at the higher end of the distribution. While
the estimates are not terribly precise, we see no significant effects below the 75th percentile, where the impact is
0.0526 SD (Appendix Table IX).


	                                                         23
B. Implications for Effects of Cash Transfers and Family Income on Child Outcomes

       The results described above suggesting that even large transfers to families through

housing vouchers do not generate many detectable changes in children’s outcomes provide an

initial indication that our data do not seem consistent with recent studies suggesting large effects

of cash on children’s outcomes. This section sharpens those comparisons by using the IV

methods described above to directly compare effects on children per $1,000 of extra income.

       Table VI presents our IV estimates for the effect of an extra $1,000 (in 2013 dollars) on

each of our primary outcomes for each of our gender-age analysis samples. To help get some

initial sense for the magnitudes, control means are in column 2. Column 3 presents our lower-

bound IV estimate for the effects of each extra $1,000 in cash on children’s outcomes, assuming

that a marginal dollar spent on housing is as valuable for children’s outcomes as a marginal

dollar spent on non-housing consumption, and so re-scales our TOT estimate by the full subsidy

cost to the government ($12,501 on average). Column 4 presents one of our upper-bound

estimates, assuming that housing has no effect on children, by scaling the TOT using the value of

the cash transfer that would provide families with the same-sized increase in consumption of

non-housing goods that they get from receiving a housing voucher ($6,377 on average). Column

5 is an even higher upper-bound, and assumes that housing has no effect on children and that the

income elasticity of housing is zero. It divides the TOT by an even smaller assumed cash

equivalent to a voucher, equal to just the gain in non-housing consumption from voucher receipt

($5,653 on average).

       The results in Table VI indicate that even the top of the confidence intervals around our

upper-bound estimates are still much smaller than the impacts on children’s outcomes per $1,000

reported in the recent literature. For example, the largest estimate implied by our data for the




	                                               24
impact of an extra $1,000 on young boys’ achievement test scores is roughly .011 SD with a

standard error of .006. Our confidence intervals enable us to rule out an effect of cash on test

scores that is any larger than 0.022 SD, about one-third the estimated effect for boys from Dahl-

Lochner and one-eighth the estimated effect for boys in Milligan-Stabile (Figure V).32

         The same pattern is true if we look at other outcomes as well, such as high school

graduation rates (Figure VI). As noted above, Akee et al. (2010) use data from a casino opening

on an Indian reservation and estimate that an extra $1,000 of income increases high school

graduation rates by about 6 percentage points. Our largest IV estimates, from column 5 of Table

VI, suggest an effect per $1,000 of extra income on high school graduation rates for boys equal

to 0.6 percentage points, with a standard error of 0.4 percentage points; for girls the point

estimate and standard error both equal about 0.4 percentage points. Put differently, our estimates

let us rule out effects on high school graduation rates per thousand dollars larger than about 1.4

percentage points, or about one-quarter the size of the estimate from Akee et al. (2010).

         An alternative approach for using our data to estimate the effect of cash transfers on

children is to essentially estimate the reduced-form effect of a voucher on children’s outcomes

for the subset of families in our sample for whom receipt of a housing voucher is essentially a

cash transfer. In Table VII we present results for families whose baseline housing consumption is

so high relative to the voucher’s rent ceiling (FMR)—either within $50 per month of the FMR,

or actually greater than the FMR—that receipt of a housing voucher is unlikely to result in

additional housing consumption and therefore acts like a pure cash transfer.33



32
   Impacts for achievement test scores for girls are in Appendix Figure II; our estimate is again much smaller than
that of Dahl and Lochner, but not so different from that of Milligan and Stabile, who find little effect of cash on test
scores for girls in their paper.
33
   The key difference being that there are more bureaucratic hurdles involved in utilizing the voucher than in cashing
a check. To use a housing voucher to lease a given apartment, the unit must pass inspection by the local housing
authority and the landlord must agree to rent the unit to the voucher-holder. Continued use of a voucher requires


	                                                        25
        Table VII shows that the results for these families are qualitatively similar to the IV

estimates for the full sample we report in Table VI. For example, the estimates in column 6 of

Table VII suggest that $1,000 of additional income for young boys is associated with an increase

of 0.017 SD (standard error 0.015) on standardized achievement scores, compared to an upper-

bound IV point estimate for the full sample in Table VI of 0.011 (standard error 0.006). The 95

percent confidence interval around our estimate for these families is significantly wider than

when we use the full sample, since focusing just on those with baseline rents close to the voucher

rent cap reduces the size of the analysis sample by 90 percent. But even these less precise

estimates still let us rule out an effect on test scores any larger than about two-thirds that for boys

from Dahl-Lochner and one-fourth that of Milligan-Stabile. Similarly, the point estimate for high

school graduation for males in our infra-marginal sample in Table VII is no larger than about 0.5

percentage points per $1,000 of extra income with a standard error of 1.3, compared to an IV

estimate for the full sample that is never larger than about 0.6 percentage points with a standard

error of 0.4. These estimates let us rule out high school graduation effects larger than about one-

half the size of the estimates presented in Akee et al. (2010).

        One candidate explanation for why our estimates are so different from what we would

expect based on previous studies of the effects of cash transfers on children is that there are

families in our study sample who at baseline are homeless or doubled up, for whom receipt of a

housing voucher actually increases their out-of-pocket spending on rent and so reduces their

consumption of other (non-housing) goods. This would lead our IV estimate to understate the

true effects of cash on child outcomes, because we would be dividing the TOT estimate by too

large a number (an overstated figure for the gain in non-housing consumption). The best estimate


submitting to annual reexamination of household income and composition. Termination of a voucher may also result
in the case of drug-trafficking or violent criminal activity.


	                                                    26
we have found for the share of poor families that are doubled up is about 6 percent.34 Many of

these families may be paying housing expenses even though they are doubled up. Even if we

make the extreme assumption that all of them pay zero rent at baseline, then about 6 percent of

our sample would experience a reduction in consumption of non-housing goods equal to the

amount of the required voucher rent payment, which averages $3,800 for our study sample. This

would reduce the average gain in non-housing consumption for our study sample by just

(.06×$3,800) ≈ $230. The share of our study sample that is both doubled-up and paying little or

no rent at baseline and would need to be implausibly large in order to explain why our results are

so different from those of recent studies of cash transfer programs.

         Another reason that we might expect differences in estimates across studies involves

differences in samples and study contexts (i.e., issues of external validity). One way to assess

this possibility is to look at the non-experimental relationship between income and child

outcomes across studies. Using data from the year prior to the lottery in our study sample, we

estimate an OLS regression as close to the one in Table 2, Panel A, Column 1 of Dahl and

Lochner (2012) as we can. As shown in Figure VII, our OLS estimate of the relationship

between $1,000 of income and student achievement is if anything somewhat larger than that

reported in Dahl and Lochner (2012). If the relationship between family income and child

outcomes is non-linear, then one explanation for the difference in OLS estimates is that our

34
   The Homelessness Research Institute estimates that there are 800,000 families with incomes 125 percent of the
poverty line or less that are doubled up (http://b.3cdn.net/naeh/97569cfc8f6ecf741f_vhm6bhzcg.pdf), while the
Census Bureau estimates that in 2012 there were 12.5 million families with incomes equal to or below 125 percent
of the poverty line. These two figures together imply that about 6 percent of poor and near-poor families are doubled
up. (Presumably at least some of those families are contributing something to rent even though they are doubled up;
unfortunately we are not aware of any reliable estimates of rent contributions by this population.) While there are
higher estimates in the literature for the number of people who are doubled up in America, these higher estimates
include large numbers of adult children living with their parents, or grandparents living with their children and
grandchildren, which are not relevant for our applicant pool of low-income families with children. For example,
estimates from the Census Bureau suggest that about 19 percent of all households containing children under age 18
lived in shared households with other adults (i.e. doubled up). (Personal communication between Laryssa Mykta,
Census Bureau, and Patrick Wu, University of Chicago, July 17, 2013).


	                                                       27
sample is more disadvantaged than theirs. If this is the case, then we would expect our main

estimates that exploit the randomized experimental design of our voucher lottery to be larger

than those Dahl and Lochner present using their IV design. What we actually find is the opposite.

C. Mediating Mechanisms

       Why do such large resource transfers as generated by our housing voucher lottery not

generate larger gains in children’s test scores? One possibility is that parents dedicate additional

resources to goods other than those that are widely thought to translate into improved children’s

outcomes. Mayer (1997, p. 99) shows that, in general, when low-income families get extra

income they tend to spend it on things like food, shelter, clothes, health care, and transportation,

all of which are only weakly correlated with child outcomes. We do not have detailed

consumption or expenditure data for our specific sample of families, but with the administrative

data sources we do have available to us we can at least try to narrow down what how families are

allocating their additional resources.

       Table IV showed that families do not seem to be “spending” much of their extra income

moving to neighborhoods with features that previous research suggests may be developmentally

productive for children, such as lower rates of poverty, racial segregation, or crime. This table

reports ITT and TOT effects of voucher receipt on different measures of neighborhood of

residence for the 10 percent random sub-sample of CHAC applicants for whom we have passive

tracking address data from 1997 through 2005, and in 2012. Few of the effects are statistically

significant and the point estimates are always small in relation to the control means. In Appendix

Table X, we show the results are not qualitatively different if we focus instead on address

information captured by Illinois social program data, which provide annual address information

but at the cost of covering only those families who are receiving some form of social assistance.




	                                               28
Because neighborhood “quality” is capitalized into housing prices, our results imply that families

must be taking most of their increased housing consumption in the form of better housing units

rather than “better” neighborhoods.

       Tables VIII and IX show that families also do not seem to devote much of the additional

resources they receive from a housing voucher on improved school quality for their children or

reduced school mobility (frequent changes of a child’s school attended are a major problem in

urban districts; see NRC/IOM 2010). Of course the most obvious way for families to access

higher-quality schools is to move residences, so at some level these results may not be surprising

given our finding above that families are not spending additional resources on changing

neighborhood “types.” But because Chicago is a district with a fair amount of school choice,

families in principle could use the additional resources provided by vouchers to move their

children to higher-quality schools even without moving residences by, for example, buying a car.

       Another mechanism through which vouchers may affect children is via their involvement

in the formal labor market and participation in social programs during young adulthood. Wilson

(1996) argues that formal work can provide structure for daily routines, while Heller (2014)

argues that teen employment teaches young people social-cognitive skills. If voucher receipt

reduces youth labor supply, it could potentially offset the beneficial effects of extra income on

outcomes among the adolescents in our sample. But this explanation turns out not to be

important in practice; Appendix Tables V through VIII show no statistically significant effects of

vouchers on youth employment, as measured by quarterly UI earnings data from Illinois. There

is a small increase in participation rates in a several social programs like Food Stamps.

                                        VII. DISCUSSION




	                                              29
             The question of whether transferring additional resources to poor families beyond what is

currently provided by existing social safety net programs will help poor children is of first-order

importance for public policy, given the $411 billion the U.S. spent on safety net programs in

2012 (including $40 billion on means-tested housing programs).35 The U.S still has over 16

million children (22 percent) living in poverty.36 Theory yields an ambiguous answer about the

effects of such transfers on children’s human capital and long-term life outcomes. Credit

constraints may cause poor parents to underinvest in children’s human capital. Alternatively, the

widely documented correlation between poverty and child outcomes could reflect that whatever

limits parents’ success in the labor market may also limit the outcomes of their children.

             Identifying the causal relationship between income and children’s outcomes has proved

challenging despite a wealth of empirical work in economics and other social sciences on this

question. Our study re-examines this question using a very large, randomized housing voucher

lottery carried out in Chicago in 1997. Housing vouchers are an unusually generous social

program by American standards, and unlike most other major social programs are rationed—the

key to identification in our paper.

             We find no statistically significant impacts of receiving a housing voucher on any of the

primary children’s outcomes we examine here, once we adjust our statistical inference to account

for multiple-testing issues. Nor do we see any trends over time to suggest these impacts increase

with the duration of voucher receipt. The findings are somewhat surprising given how generous

vouchers are, but are nonetheless broadly consistent with those of Mills et al.’s (2006)

randomized trial study of providing housing vouchers to families eligible for or receiving TANF.

Their study does not find consistent effects on children’s outcomes, although they rely on parent


35
       http://www.cbpp.org/cms/?fa=view&id=1258
36
       http://www.nccp.org/topics/childpoverty.html


	                                                    30
reports on children’s outcomes (which can be error-prone), have a fairly modest sample size

(2,481 follow-up surveys were completed), and follow families for just four years. We build on

those findings by generating much more precise zeros using administrative data on 66,610

separate youth with outcomes in multiple domains—schooling, crime, health—measured over a

period of 14 years.

       The one potential source of uncertainty about the internal validity of our estimates comes

from slightly reduced rates of migration out of Chicago or Illinois by our voucher treatment

group compared to our control group. This generates missing data, since we measure outcomes

using administrative records from city and state government agencies. We do not believe that the

amount of bias caused by differential attrition is likely to be large, since the amount of extra

“missingness” for our treatment group tends to be small, just a few percentage points at most.

Further, there are no treatment-control differences in the likelihood of ever appearing in any of

our data systems during the post-lottery period, which means that fairly simple imputation

methods like using the most recent valid value for missing observations should work reasonably

well in our application. This approach yields similar results to our main findings.

       Our results, if they are correct, also imply effects of cash transfers on children’s outcomes

that are much smaller than those reported in several recent influential papers on this topic. We

recognize that housing vouchers and cash transfers are not equivalent. But we can generate an

upper bound for the effect of a cash transfer on children’s outcomes using our data by making

the extreme assumption that additional housing consumption has no effect on children’s

outcomes. In other words, we assume the only “active ingredient” for children’s outcomes from

getting a housing voucher is the reduction in out-of-pocket spending towards rent families have

to make, which on average for our sample equals $5,653—about 45 percent of the total voucher




	                                               31
subsidy cost to the government and 29 percent of average baseline income for families. Receipt

of a voucher increases non-housing consumption for our families by 59 percent.

       Our estimates let us rule out effects of cash transfers on children’s outcomes any larger

than about one-third those reported by Dahl and Lochner (2012) or about one-eighth those

reported by Milligan and Stabile (2011) for boy’s test scores, or about one-fourth those reported

by Akee et al. (2010) for high school graduation among poor families. The difference in results

does not seem to be due to the fact that we are relying on a Chicago-specific sample while these

other papers use data from other contexts; applying OLS to our data yields an estimate of the

income-student achievement relationship similar to or even slightly larger than the estimate

reported by Dahl and Lochner (2012). The results also do not seem to hinge on any of the

assumptions we make in using the voucher lottery to instrument for a cash transfer. We find

qualitatively similar results applying our “reduced form” voucher approach to infra-marginal

families whose baseline rents are close to the voucher rent ceiling, for whom receiving a housing

voucher is close to receiving a pure cash transfer. One explanation for the differences in these

results is the difference in research designs used across the different studies.

       A different explanation is required for reconciling our findings with those of Duncan et

al. (2011), who analyze data from several welfare-to-work experiments and find impacts of extra

income of similar size to those reported by Dahl and Lochner (2012). We think our results are

not in conflict with those of Duncan et al., given that they are estimated using a different

“treatment.” Housing vouchers, like any lump-sum cash transfer or social program that reduces

benefit amounts as families receive more earned income, generate some slight reduction in

parental labor supply. So our study answers the question of what happens when children receive




	                                               32
more income together with more parental time. The welfare-to-work experiments studied by

Duncan et al. (2011) provide children with more income together with less parental time.

       As we argue in Appendix C, if children’s human capital is produced through a mix of

parental time and market goods, then the effect of any transfer program on parental labor supply

is an important moderator of its effect on children’s outcomes, shaping how parents spend extra

income. For example, while Mayer (1997) finds that most low-income parents devote extra

income to things like food, shelter, clothes, health care, and transportation, Duncan et al. find in

their welfare-to-work experiments that mothers of preschool-age children, who are pushed to

work far more hours, wind up devoting a sizable share of their extra income to buying center-

based care. Support for the view comes from findings by Morris, Gennetian, and Duncan (2005),

who note that much of the relationship between income and child outcomes in the welfare-to-

work experiments is explained away after controlling for use of early childhood center care.

Additional support for our hypothesis comes from the fact that only pre-school-age children

show gains in outcomes from extra income in their study; elementary school children show few

gains while adolescents actually show a reduction in test scores when parents get more income

(Morris, Duncan, and Rodriguez 2004; Morris, Duncan, and Clark-Kauffman, 2005).

       Our results are consistent with those of Mayer (1997), who concludes there is “little

reason to expect that policies to increase the income of poor families alone will substantially

improve their children’s life chances” (p. 14). More promising may be strategies to directly

change whatever else it is about home environments that affects children’s outcomes, or perhaps

more promising still, educational interventions that provide children with whatever they are not

able to receive from their households and neighborhoods. Figure VIII, for example, compares the

effects on boy’s test scores per $1,000 cash implied by our data to the gains in test scores from




	                                               33
several leading educational interventions: Head Start; class size reduction in grades K-3 from the

Tennessee STAR experiment; and the Success for All school-reform model, all of which have

point estimates that imply larger effects per dollar than the intervention we study (recognizing

the uncertainty bands around these estimates are sometimes wide and overlapping). One general

concern with this sort of comparison is that cash transfers are what Mayer calls a “multi-

purpose” intervention that can change multiple outcomes. But our results suggest the impacts of

extra cash appear to be small across multiple key domains such as schooling, crime, and health.

       Our findings do not imply that cash transfers or other anti-poverty programs like housing

vouchers are not worth supporting. These programs surely improve the well-being of families in

a variety of critical ways. Nor do our results imply that eliminating the existing social safety net

in the US would not harm children’s outcomes, since the effects of income on children’s

outcomes are surely non-linear, and our data come from estimating the effects of adding income

supplementary to existing safety net supports. But our results do suggest, consistent with the

arguments in Currie (2006), that if the goal is to improve children’s human capital outcomes,

rather than provide families with larger cash transfers and hope those translate into what children

need, a better strategy may be to invest in interventions that provide what children need directly.




	                                               34
                                               REFERENCES

       Akee, Randall K. Q., William E. Copeland, Gordon Keeler, Adrian Angold, and E. Jane

         Costello (2010). “Parents’ Incomes and Children’s Outcomes: A Quasi-Experiment Using

         Transfer Payments from Casino Profits.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,

         2(1): 86-115.

       Almond, Douglas, and Janet M. Currie (2011). “Human Capital Development before Age Five.”

         Handbook of Labor Economics, 4: 1315-1486.

       Almond, Douglas, Hilary W. Hoynes, and Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach (2011). “Inside the

         War on Poverty: The Impact of Food Stamps on Birth Outcomes.” The Review of Economics

         and Statistics, 93(2): 387-403.

       Anderson, Michael L. (2008). “Multiple Inference and Gender Differences in the Effects of

         Early Intervention: A Reevaluation of the Abecedarian, Perry Preschool, and Early Training

         Projects.” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 103(484): 1481-95.

       Angrist, Joshua D., Guido W. Imbens, and Donald B. Rubin (1996). “Identification of Causal

         Effects Using Instrumental Variables.” Journal of the American Statistical Association,

         91(434): 444-55.

       Becker, Gary S. (1965). “A Theory of the Allocation of Time.” Economic Journal, 75(299):

         493-517.

       Becker, Gary S., and Nigel Tomes (1986). “Human capital and the rise and fall of families.”

         Journal of Labor Economics, 4(3): S1-S39.

       Benjamini, Yoav, and Yosef Hochberg (1995). "Controlling the False Discovery Rate: A

         Practical and Powerful Approach to Multiple Testing." Journal of the Royal Statistical

         Society, Series B, 57(1): 289-300.




	                                                   35
       Benjamini, Yoav, Abba M. Krieger, and Daniel Yekutieli (2006). "Adaptive linear step-up

         procedures that control the false discovery rate." Biometrika, 93(3): 491-507.

       Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan (2004). “How Much Should We

         Trust Differences-In-Differences?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(1): 249-276.

       Bipartisan Policy Center Housing Commission (2013). “Housing America’s Future: New

         Directions for National Policy.” Washington, D.C. Downloaded from

         http://bipartisanpolicy.org/sites/default/files/BPC_Housing Report_web_0.pdf.

       Black, Sandra and Paul Devereux (2011). “Recent developments in intergenerational mobility.”

         In Handbook of Labor Economics, Edited by Orley Ashenfelter and David Card. North

         Holland Press; Elsevier.

       Borman, Geoffrey D., and Gina M. Hewes (2002). “The Long-Term Effects and Cost-

         Effectiveness of Success for All.” Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 24(4): 243-

         66.

       Brooks-Gunn, Jeanne, and Greg J. Duncan (1997). "The Effects of Poverty on Children." The

         Future of Children, 7(2): 55-71.

       Collinson, Robert, and Peter Ganong (2013). “Incidence and Price Discrimination: Evidence

         from Housing Vouchers.” Working paper, W13-7. Joint Center for Housing Studies, Harvard

         University.

       Currie, Janet M. (2006). The Invisible Safety Net: Protecting the Nation’s Poor Children and

         Families. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

       Currie, Janet M., and Aaron Yelowitz (2000). “Are public housing projects good for kids?”

         Journal of Public Economics, 75(1): 99-124.

       Dahl, Gordon B., and Lance Lochner (2012). “The Impact of Family Income on Child




	                                                   36
         Achievement: Evidence from the Earned Income Tax Credit.” American Economic Review,

         102(5): 1927-56.

       Duncan, Greg J., Pamela Morris, and Chris Rodrigues (2011). “Does Money Really Matter?

         Estimating Impacts of Family Income on Young Children’s Achievement with Data from

         Random-Assignment Experiments.” Developmental Psychology, 47(5): 1263-1279.

       Falk, Gene (2012). "Low-Income Assistance Programs: Trends in Federal Spending." In

         Congressional Research Service (CRS), House Ways and Means Committee, United States

         Congress. Available at

         http://greenbook.waysandmeans.house.gov/sites/greenbook.waysandmeans.house.gov/files/20

         12/documents/RL41823_gb.pdf.

       Finkel, Meryl, and Larry Buron (2001). Study on Section 8 Voucher Success Rates: Volume I:

         Quantitative Study of Success Rates in Metropolitan Areas. Cambridge, MA: Abt Associates.

       Fisk, William J., Quanhong Lei-Gomez, and Mark J. Mendell (2007). “Meta-analyses of the

         associations of respiratory health effects with dampness and mold in homes.” Indoor Air,

         17(4): 284-96.

       Hanushek, Eric A. (1979). “Conceptual and empirical issues in the estimation of educational

         production functions.” Journal of Human Resources, 14(3): 351-88.

       Heller, Sara (2014). “The Effects of Summer Jobs on Justice-Involved Youth.” In progress.

       Heller, Sara, Harold Pollack, Roseanna Adler, and Jens Ludwig (2013). “Preventing Youth

         Violence and Dropout: A Randomized Field Experiment.” NBER Working Paper 19014.

       Jacob, Brian A., and Jens Ludwig (2012). “The Effects of Housing Assistance on Labor Supply:

         Evidence from a Voucher Lottery.” American Economic Review, 102(1): 272-304.

       Katz, Lawrence F., Jeffrey R. Kling, and Jeffrey B. Liebman (2001). “Moving to Opportunity in




	                                                  37
         Boston: Early Results of a Randomized Mobility Experiment.” Quarterly Journal of

         Economics, 116(2): 607-54.

       Kling, Jeffrey R., Jeffrey B. Liebman, and Lawrence F. Katz (2007). “Experimental Analysis of

         Neighborhood Effects.” Econometrica, 75(1): 83-119.

       Kling, Jeffrey R., Jens Ludwig, and Lawrence F. Katz (2005). “Neighborhood Effects on Crime

         for Female and Male Youth: Evidence from a Randomized Housing Voucher Experiment.”

         Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(1): 87-130.

       Knudsen, Eric I., James J. Heckman, Judy L. Cameron, and Jack P. Shonkoff (2006).

         “Economic, neurobiological, and behavioral perspectives on building America’s future

         workforce.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 103(27): 10155-62.

       Lee, David (2009). “Training, Wages, and Sample Selection: Estimating Sharp Bounds on

         Treatment Effects.” Review of Economic Studies, 76(3): 1071-1102.

       Leventhal, Tama, and Sandra Newman (2010). “Housing and child development.” Children and

         Youth Services Review, 32: 1165-74.

       Løken, Katrine V., Magne Mogstad, and Matthew Wiswall (2012). “What linear estimators

         miss: The effects of family income on child outcomes.” American Economic Journal: Applied

         Economics, 4(2): 1-35.

       Ludwig, Jens, Lisa Sanbonmatsu, Lisa A. Gennetian, Emma Adam, Greg J. Duncan, Lawrence

         F. Katz, Ronald C. Kessler, Jeffrey R. Kling, Stacy Tessler Lindau, Robert C. Whitaker, and

         Thomas W. McDade (2011). “Neighborhoods, obesity and diabetes: A randomized social

         experiment.” New England Journal of Medicine, 365(16): 1509-19.

       Ludwig, Jens, Greg J. Duncan, Lisa A. Gennetian, Lawrence F. Katz, Ronald C. Kessler,

         Jeffrey R. Kling, and Lisa Sanbonmatsu (2012). “Neighborhood effects on the long-term




	                                                  38
         well-being of low-income adults.” Science, 337(6101): 1505-10.

       Ludwig, Jens, and Deborah A. Phillips (2008). “Long-Term Effects of Head Start on Low-

         Income Children.” Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1136(1): 257-68.

       Mallach, Alan (2007). “Landlords at the Margins: Exploring the Dynamics of the One to Four

         Unit Rental Housing Industry.” Working paper, RR07-15. Joint Center for Housing Studies,

         Harvard University.

       Mayer, Susan E. (1997). What Money Can’t Buy: Family Income and Children’s Life Chances.

         Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

       Mayo, Stephen K. (1981). “Theory and estimation in the economics of housing demand.”

         Journal of Urban Economics, 10: 95-116.

       Milligan, Kevin, and Mark Stabile (2011). “Do Child Tax Benefits Affect the Well-Being of

         Children? Evidence from Canadian Child Benefit Expansions.” American Economic Journal:

         Economic Policy, 3(3): 175-205.

       Mills, Gregory, Daniel Gubits, Larry Orr, David Long, Judie Feins, Bulbul Kaul, Michelle

         Wood, Amy Jones & Associates, Cloudburst Consulting, and the QED group (2006) The

         Effects of Housing Vouchers on Welfare Families. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of

         Housing and Urban Development, Office of Policy Development and Research.

       Morris, Pamela A., Greg J. Duncan, and Christopher Rodrigues (2004). “Does Money Really

         Matter? Estimating Impacts of Family Income on Children’s Achievement with Data from

         Random-Assignment Experiments.” Working paper.

       Morris, Pamela A., Greg J. Duncan, and Elizabeth Clark-Kauffman (2005). “Child well-being

         in an era of welfare reform: The sensitivity of transitions in development to policy change.”

         Developmental Psychology, 41(6): 919-32.




	                                                   39
       Morris, Pamela A., Lisa A. Gennetian, and Greg J. Duncan (2005). “Effects of Welfare and

         Employment Policies on Young Children: New Findings on Policy Experiments Conducted in

         the Early 1990s.” Society for Research in Child Development, 19(2): 3-17.

       National Research Council and Institute of Medicine (2010). Student Mobility: Exploring the

         Impact of Frequent Moves on Achievement: Summary of a Workshop. A. Beatty, Rapporteur.

         Committee on the Impact of Mobility and Change on the Lives of Young Children, Schools,

         and Neighborhoods. Board on Children, Youth and Families, Division of Behavioral and

         Social Sciences and Education. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.

       Olsen, Edgar O. (2003). “Housing Programs for Low-Income Households.” In Means-Tested

         Transfer Programs in the United States. Ed. Robert A. Moffitt. U. Chicago Press. 365-442.

       Polinsky, A. Mitchell, and David T. Ellwood (1979). “An empirical reconciliation of micro and

         grouped estimates of the demand for housing.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 61(2):

         199-205.

       Rice, Douglas, and Barbara Sard (2009). Decade of Neglect has Weakened Federal Low-Income

         Housing Programs. Washington, DC: Center on Budget and Policy Priorities. Downloaded

         from http://www.cbpp.org/files/2-24-09hous.pdf on April 4, 2014.

       Rubinowitz, Leonard S., and James E. Rosenbaum (2000). Crossing the Class and Color Lines:

         From Public Housing to White Suburbia. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

       Sanbonmatsu, Lisa, Jeffrey R. Kling, Greg J. Duncan, and Jeanne Brooks-Gunn (2006).

         “Neighborhoods and Academic Achievement: Results from the MTO Experiment.” Journal

         of Human Resources, 41(4): 649-91.

       Sanbonmatsu, Lisa, Jens Ludwig, Lawrence F. Katz, Lisa A. Gennetian, Greg J. Duncan,

         Ronald C. Kessler, Emma Adam, Thomas W. McDade, and Stacy Tessler Lindau (2011).




	                                                  40
         Moving to Opportunity for Fair Housing Demonstration Program: Final Impacts Evaluation.

         Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, Office of Policy

         Development and Research.

       Schanzenbach, Diane W. (2007). “What Have Researchers Learned from Project STAR?”

         Brookings Papers on Education Policy, 205-228.

       Schochet, Peter Z., John Burghardt, and Sheena McConnell (2008). “Does Job Corps Work?

         Impact Findings from the National Job Corps Study.” American Economic Review, 98(5):

         1864-86.

       Sharfstein, Joshua, Megan Sandel, Robert Kahn, and Howard Bauchner (2001). “Is Child

         Health at Risk While Families Wait for Housing Vouchers?” American Journal of Public

         Health, 91(8): 1191-93.

       Shea, John (2000). “Does Parents’ Money Matter?” Journal of Public Economics, 77(2): 155-

         84.

       Shonkoff, Jack P., and Deborah A. Phillips (2000). From Neurons to Neighborhoods: The

         Science of Early Childhood Development. National Academies Press.

       Smeeding, Timothy M. (2006) “Poor people in rich nations: The United States in comparative

         perspective.” Journal of Economic Perspectives. 20(1): 69-90.

       Theunissen, Nicolet C. M., T. G. C. Vogels, H. M. Koopman, G. H. W. Verrips, K. A. H.

         Zwinderman, S. P. Verloove-Vanhorick, and J. M. Wit (1998). “The proxy problem: child

         report versus parent report in health-related quality of life research.” Qualify of Life Research,

         7(5): 387-97.

       Westfall, Peter H., and S. Stanley Young (1993). “On adjusting P-Values for multiplicity.”

         Biometrics, 49: 941-5.




	                                                     41
       Wilson, William J. (1996). When Work Disappears: The World of the New Urban Poor. New

        York, NY: Alfred A. Knopf.




	                                               42
Figure I: Budget constraint and consumption with and without housing voucher




Without a housing voucher, the family’s budget constraint is given by DJ with initial
consumption bundle B. Receipt of a housing voucher leads to new budget constraint
DUVL, where (D – CV) is the rent contribution required by the housing voucher program,
HV is essentially the maximum rent allowable under the housing voucher program (the
Fair Market Rent; in some versions of the voucher program families can lease units with
higher rents but for simplicity we assume here this is a maximum rent). V is the new
consumption bundle for a family that uses a voucher to lease a unit with rent at the
maximum allowable level, which leads to more housing consumption than a family
would choose if instead given a cash transfer with the same cost to the government (S).
Figure II: Distribution of change in housing consumption among leased-up sample




Figure shows the distribution of the change in housing consumption from receipt of a
housing voucher. Baseline rent is estimated using a special tabulation of 2000 Census
data from Chicago and assumes that families in our study sample have the same average
rents as other, demographically-similar households in the same baseline census tracts (see
Appendix D). First voucher rent is measured using HUD 50058 forms, which all families
in means-tested housing programs are required to complete each year (or whenever they
relocate). All figures converted to constant 2013 dollars.
Figure III: Calculating value of cash transfer that would lead to same change in
consumption of non-housing goods as families experience with a housing voucher




Cash transfer S* leads to same change in consumption of non-housing goods (CV – CB) as
families would experience if they receive a housing voucher worth S to the government.
One of our model specifications in the tables below assumes (conservatively) that
housing consumption has no effect on children’s outcomes, and uses an indicator for
randomly-assigned voucher offer as an instrument for non-housing consumption (S*) to
estimate the change in children’s outcomes for a $1,000 gain in family income.
Figure IV: Estimated intention to treat effects on children’s achievement test scores
and criminal activity, by year from housing voucher offer




Each panel of the figure presents the results from estimating a separate regression where
the dependent variable is either achievement test scores in math and reading from
Chicago Public School student-level records (panels A and B) or the monetized value of
the criminal activity youth commit (panels C and D). The explanatory variables of
interest are a series of indicator variables for whether a given child-year observation is (k)
years from when the child’s family is offered a housing voucher, where (k) takes on both
positive values (post-voucher offer) and negative values (pre-voucher offer). The figures
present the regression coefficients on these indicator variables, together with the 95%
confidence intervals. Note that because our dataset consists of child-year observations
that are all after the randomized housing voucher lottery occurred, the coefficients on pre-
voucher-offer years represent tests of whether there are behavioral “anticipation effects”
rather than a test of whether randomization was carried out correctly.
Figure V: Effects of Cash Transfers on Test Scores of Young Males Across Studies




Figure reports the effects on children’s achievement test scores per $1,000 change in
family income (in 2013 dollars). The estimate from Jacob, Kapustin and Ludwig is for
males 0-6 at baseline taken from Table VI, column 5, using as the dependent variable an
average of reading and math achievement test scores from Chicago Public Schools
student-level school records. The estimate from Dahl and Lochner (2012) is also for an
average of reading and math test scores, taken from their Table 6 for males (equal to
0.088 standard deviations in their paper reported in 2000 constant dollars, and equal to
0.065 when we update to 2013 dollars). Estimate from Milligan and Stabile (2011) is for
math scores for males, taken from their Table 3, equal to 0.23 standard deviations in their
paper for a $1,000 change in Canadian 2004 dollars, and equal to 0.177 when we update
to 2013 US dollars.
Figure VI: Effects of Cash Transfer on High School Graduation Rates Across
Studies




Figure reports the effects on high school graduation probabilities per $1,000 change in
family income (in 2013 dollars). The estimate from Jacob, Kapustin and Ludwig is for
males 6-18 at baseline taken from Table VI, column 5, using as the dependent variable an
indicator for whether the youth graduated from high school during our study period
according to Chicago Public Schools student-level school records. Estimate from Akee et
al. (2010) is for males is based on their Table 5, column 2; the marginal effect here
corresponds to a 32 percentage point change in high school graduation rates from a
$4,000 change in family income in 1996-2002 dollars, or 8 percentage points per $1,000.
The effect equals 5.8 percentage points per $1,000 when we update to 2013 dollars.
Figure VII: OLS Estimate of Income-Test Score Relationship Across Studies




Figure reports the cross-sectional relationship between family income, measured in
thousands of 2013 dollars, and children’s achievement test scores. The estimate from
Jacob, Kapustin and Ludwig is for a sample of all children ages 8-14 in July 1997 in
households living in private market housing at baseline that participated in the lottery
(including those from households with lottery numbers between 18,110 and 35,000). The
dependent variable is an average of reading and math achievement test scores in the
1997-8 academic school year from Chicago Public Schools student-level school records.
Family income encompasses UI earnings, tax refunds or liabilities, TANF, and food
stamp benefit levels in 1996:Q3 through 1997:Q2. Additional controls include gender;
indicators for having 1, 2, or 3+ siblings; race; age; household head’s age; and the
number of adults in the household. The resulting point estimate and standard error
clustered at the household level are 0.0063 (0.0006). This attempts to replicate as closely
as possible using our data the result in Dahl and Lochner (2012), Table 2, Column 1,
equal to 0.0047 standard deviations per $1,000 of income reported in 2000 constant
dollars, and equal to 0.0035 standard deviations when updated to 2013 dollars.
Figure VIII




Figure reports the effects on children’s achievement test scores per $1,000 (in 2013
dollars). The estimate from Jacob, Kapustin and Ludwig is for males 0-6 at baseline taken
from Table VI, column 5, using as the dependent variable an average of reading and math
achievement test scores from Chicago Public Schools student-level school records. The
Head Start estimate is the median TOT for 4-year olds from Ludwig and Phillips (2008),
Table 1 (equal to 0.164 standard deviations in their paper per $9,000 in 2006 dollars, and
to 0.0158 standard deviations per $1,000 in 2013 dollars). The K-3 class size reduction
estimate is from the analysis of the Tennessee STAR experiment and its effect on black
children in Schanzenbach (2007), Table 4 (equal to 0.242 standard deviations in the
original study per $10,120 in 2000 dollars, and to 0.018 standard deviations per $1,000 in
2013 dollars). Finally, the Success For All estimate is the effect on math scores from
Borman and Hewes (2002), Table 4 (equal to 0.036 standard deviations in their paper per
$1,000 in 2000 dollars, and to 0.027 standard deviations per $1,000 in 2013 dollars).
Table I: Baseline Characteristics of Treatment and Control Group Households and Children

                                                                        Control                             Treatment Group
                                                                        Group            All      p-value           Compliers   Non-Compliers
                                                                          (1)            (2)        (3)                (4)           (5)
Household Level
 HHH: Male                                                         0.035                0.040     0.068      *       0.024          0.062
 HHH: Black                                                        0.942                0.944     0.501              0.959          0.924
 HHH: Hispanic                                                     0.035                0.032     0.224              0.025          0.041
 HHH: White                                                        0.020                0.022     0.425              0.014          0.033
 HHH: Other race                                                   0.003                0.002     0.342              0.002          0.002
 HHH: Has spouse                                                   0.082                0.084     0.695              0.070          0.101
 # Adults in Household (Based on CHAC file)                        1.419                1.416     0.813              1.376          1.470
 # of kids 0-18 in HH (Based on CHAC file)                         2.953                2.927     0.424              2.991          2.839
 Age of HHH                                                       31.634               31.568     0.564              30.859         32.525
 Indicated interest in certificate as well as voucher program      0.799                0.801     0.786              0.799          0.803
 Reported receiving Supplemental Security Income (SSI) benefits    0.172                0.178     0.320              0.189          0.164
 Time (in days) of application since application opened            9.290                9.304     0.834              8.985          9.732
 HH total income (2013 $) 1996:III to 1997:II                   18,938.000           19,084.922   0.386            18,461.211     19,925.102
 HHH income (2013 $) 1997:II                                     1,934.589            2,007.974   0.079      *     1,718.751      2,397.575
 HHH employed 1997:II                                              0.462                0.469     0.350              0.456          0.486
 HHH receiving TANF 1997:II                                        0.625                0.606     0.007     ***      0.669          0.522
 HHH receiving TANF, Med, or FS 1997:II                            0.782                0.769     0.025      **      0.831          0.686
 HHH: # of prior violent crime arrests                             0.149                0.144     0.539              0.149          0.137
 HHH: # of prior property crime arrests                            0.271                0.228     0.011     **       0.235          0.219
 HHH: # of prior drug crime arrests                                0.128                0.126     0.793              0.124          0.129
 HHH: # of prior other crime arrests                               0.192                0.178     0.229              0.178          0.179
 Census tract % black                                              0.822                0.824     0.694              0.849          0.791
 Census tract poverty rate                                         0.302                0.301     0.499              0.310          0.288
 Property crime rate (beat-level, per 1,000) in 1997              74.401               74.642     0.651              75.087         74.008
 Violent crime rate (beat-level, per 1,000) in 1997               38.593               38.686     0.781              39.721         37.208
 Monthy rent (2013 $)                                             782.067              778.106    0.318             777.027        779.644
 Monthly fair market rent (2013 $)                               1,316.330            1,314.109   0.575            1,319.951      1,306.240

Child Level
 Male                                                                     0.500         0.505     0.234              0.506         0.504
 Black                                                                    0.942         0.945     0.340              0.959         0.926
 Hispanic                                                                 0.035         0.032     0.208              0.025         0.041
 Age                                                                      8.478         8.546     0.201              8.247         8.947
 # of prior violent crime arrests                                         0.010         0.009     0.654              0.008          0.011
 # of prior property crime arrests                                        0.005         0.005     0.895              0.004         0.005
 # of prior drug crime arrests                                            0.015         0.018     0.097      *       0.016         0.021
 # of prior other crime arrests                                           0.011         0.012     0.762              0.009         0.015
 Enrolled in the Chicago Public Schools Pre-Lottery                       0.598         0.599     0.824              0.604         0.592
 Math Test Score in Year Prior to Lottery                                -0.244        -0.215     0.068      *       -0.243        -0.177
 Reading Test Score in Year Prior to Lottery                             -0.213        -0.189     0.126              -0.198        -0.177
 GPA in Year Prior to Lottery                                             1.518         1.563     0.129              1.531         1.601
 # of Absences Prior to Lottery                                          28.921        28.622     0.666              28.774        28.437
 Fraction Black in child's school                                         0.848         0.853     0.220              0.871         0.829
 Fraction Latino in child's school                                        0.108         0.103     0.151              0.092          0.119
 Fraction eligible for free-lunch in child's school                       0.855         0.854     0.654              0.861         0.846
 Average test score in child's school                                    -0.182        -0.178     0.445              -0.187        -0.166

N (Children)                                                             48,263        18,347                        10,530         7,817
N (Households)                                                           22,447         8,560                        4,787          3,773

Joint test, all coefficients (including missing indicators)
 Chi-squared statistic (clustering at HH level)                          51.629
 p-value                                                                  0.488

Notes: Unit of analysis in the top panel is the household; in the bottom panel, the child.
  *** Significant at the 1 percent level.
  ** Significant at the 5 percent level.
  * Significant at the 10 percent level.
Table II: Housing Voucher Effect on Lease-Up

                                                              Leased Using
                                                  Any Voucher         1997 CHAC Voucher
                                              Current                 Current
                                              Period       Ever        Period     Ever
                                                (1)         (2)          (3)       (4)
Full Sample
 Treatment group                                           0.4910***                    0.5432***
                                                            (0.0064)                     (0.0062)
 Offered voucher in current or prior year    0.4774***                    0.5199***
                                              (0.0062)                     (0.0060)

 Control Mean                                  0.0705        0.0860         0.0000        0.0000
 # observations                               932,540        66,610        932,540        66,610

Males age 0-6 at baseline
 Treatment group                                           0.5090***                    0.5759***
                                                            (0.0103)                     (0.0098)
 Offered voucher in current or prior year    0.4964***                    0.5515***
                                              (0.0100)                     (0.0095)

 Control Mean                                  0.0852        0.1030         0.0000        0.0000
 # observations                               172,032        12,288        172,032        12,288

Males age 6-18 at baseline
 Treatment group                                           0.4824***                    0.5255***
                                                            (0.0087)                     (0.0083)
 Offered voucher in current or prior year    0.4692***                    0.5036***
                                              (0.0084)                     (0.0081)

 Control Mean                                  0.0625        0.0763         0.0000        0.0000
 # observations                               295,568        21,112        295,568        21,112

Females age 0-6 at baseline
 Treatment group                                           0.5088***                    0.5693***
                                                            (0.0105)                     (0.0101)
 Offered voucher in current or prior year    0.4971***                    0.5471***
                                              (0.0101)                     (0.0097)

 Control Mean                                  0.0788        0.0966         0.0000        0.0000
 # observations                               167,790        11,985        167,790        11,985

Females age 6-18 at baseline
 Treatment group                                           0.4800***                    0.5284***
                                                            (0.0087)                     (0.0083)
 Offered voucher in current or prior year    0.4645***                    0.5039***
                                              (0.0084)                     (0.0081)

 Control Mean                                  0.0653        0.0799         0.0000        0.0000
 # observations                               297,150        21,225        297,150        21,225

Notes: Columns 1 and 3 are ITT estimates from panel data observations. Columns 2 and 4 are
ITT estimates from cross-sectional observations. Standard errors are reported in parentheses and are
clustered at the household level.
   *** Significant at the 1 percent level.
   ** Significant at the 5 percent level.
   * Significant at the 10 percent level.
Table III: Housing Voucher Effects on Education, Criminal Behavior, and Health

                                                                                                                                    ITT Estimate
                                                                                                                                      Adjusted p-value
Gender Baseline Age                  Outcome              Individuals      CM            ITT           IV          CCM        p-value FWER       FDR           Obs.
                                                              (1)          (2)            (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)     (7)       (8)           (9)

Male     Age 0 to 6     Test score                           8,659        -0.3339      0.0369*       0.0634*    -0.3774        0.052     0.449      0.311     51,339
                                                                                       (0.0190)      (0.0325)
Male     Age 6 to 18    Test score                           14,348       -0.3248       0.0068        0.0126    -0.3641        0.655     0.919      0.873     68,787
                                                                                       (0.0152)      (0.0273)
Male     Age 6 to 18    High school graduation               13,183       0.3940        0.0150        0.0286    0.4124         0.109     0.650      0.328     13,183
                                                                                       (0.0094)      (0.0178)
Male     All            Soc. costs, most conservative        33,400     3,084.2100    -160.6255    -344.0462* 3,481.5526       0.102     0.650      0.328    283,091
                                                                                      (98.2894)    (206.0899)
Male     Age 0 to 6     Inpatient or emergency claim         9,538        0.2449       -0.0012       -0.0014    0.2421         0.852     0.919      0.920     52,378
                                                                                       (0.0063)      (0.0114)
Male     Age 6 to 18    Inpatient or emergency claim         12,526       0.2471       -0.0059       -0.0105    0.2547         0.324     0.896      0.556     56,480
                                                                                       (0.0060)      (0.0112)
Female   Age 0 to 6     Test score                           8,488        -0.1446       0.0019        0.0029    -0.1511        0.919     0.919      0.920     52,107
                                                                                       (0.0183)      (0.0316)
Female   Age 6 to 18    Test score                           14,855       -0.1479       0.0168        0.0300    -0.2082        0.240     0.880      0.556     73,389
                                                                                       (0.0143)      (0.0273)
Female   Age 6 to 18    High school graduation               13,792       0.5766        0.0101        0.0190    0.5846         0.279     0.892      0.556     13,792
                                                                                       (0.0094)      (0.0176)
Female   All            Soc. costs, most conservative        33,210      573.6593     60.8371**    121.0684* 634.7744          0.043     0.425      0.311    284,057
                                                                                      (30.0558)     (63.1189)
Female   Age 0 to 6     Inpatient or emergency claim         9,379        0.2119        0.0018        0.0032    0.2202         0.767     0.919      0.920     50,549
                                                                                       (0.0062)      (0.0113)
Female   Age 6 to 18    Inpatient or emergency claim         16,050       0.3702        0.0025        0.0047    0.3823         0.653     0.919      0.873     75,526
                                                                                       (0.0056)      (0.0108)

Notes: Unit of observation is the person-year for all outcomes, except high school graduation which is a person-level cross-section. CM = control mean.
ITT = intent-to-treat. IV = instrumental variables. CCM = control complier mean. See text for discussion of these estimates. FWER = family-wise error rate. FDR = false
discovery rate. Standard errors are reported in parentheses and are clustered at the household level.
   ** Significant at the 5 percent level.
   * Significant at the 10 percent level.
Table IV: Housing Voucher Effect on Geographic Outcomes (10% Sample)

                                                                     1997-2005 Addresses                                                2012 Address, 2009 Outcomes
                                           Individuals     CM          ITT        IV            CCM           Obs.       Individuals     CM        ITT          IV              CCM
                                               (1)         (2)          (3)       (4)            (5)           (6)           (7)         (8)        (9)        (10)              (11)

Has Address on File                           6,509       0.897        0.0067      0.0141        0.891      214,797         6,493        0.863        -0.0117    -0.0241        0.896
                                                                      (0.0082)    (0.0173)                                                           (0.0168)    (0.0346)
  Miles from Baseline Address                                                                                               5,437       63.243        9.1904     18.4862        34.647
                                                                                                                                                    (11.6729)   (23.5552)
  Living in IL                                6,509       0.956        0.0041      0.0085        0.972      192,862         5,586        0.862        0.0085      0.0171        0.909
                                                                      (0.0072)    (0.0151)                                                           (0.0169)    (0.0339)
  Fraction of Quarters Outside IL             6,509       0.0471      -0.0064     -0.0132       0.0307       6,509
                                                                      (0.0071)    (0.0146)
  Living in Cook County, IL                                                                                                 5,586        0.796       0.0145       0.0292        0.852
                                                                                                                                                    (0.0193)     (0.0387)
    Poverty Rate > 20%1,2                     6,433       0.655       -0.0088    -0.0184         0.712      184,355         4,461        0.688      -0.0374      -0.0698        0.703
                                                                      (0.0176)  (0.0362)                                                            (0.0248)     (0.0461)
    Poverty Rate1,2                           6,433       0.273        0.0039     0.0075         0.274      184,355         4,461        0.289      -0.0076      -0.0142        0.292
                                                                      (0.0055)   (0.0112)                                                           (0.0080)     (0.0150)
    Fraction Black1,2                         6,433       0.794        0.0012     0.0023         0.837      184,463         4,461        0.760       -0.0011     -0.0020        0.789
                                                                      (0.0084)  (0.0172)                                                            (0.0155)     (0.0290)
    Social Capital1,3                         6,038       3.495       -0.0056    -0.0109         3.501      164,284         3,659        3.776       0.0187       0.0345        3.769
                                                                      (0.0057)   (0.0114)                                                           (0.0137)     (0.0253)
    Collective Efficacy1,3                    6,038       3.761      -0.0158** -0.0312**         3.772      164,284         3,659        3.502      0.0177*      0.0326*        3.491
                                                                      (0.0078)  (0.0155)                                                            (0.0096)     (0.0177)
    Violent Crime Rate (per 1,000)4           6,038       17.633      -0.0896    -0.1920        17.865      164,277         3,658       25.142       0.1358       0.2508        24.964
                                                                      (0.3026)  (0.5998)                                                            (0.6984)     (1.2904)
    Property Crime Rate (per 1,000)4          6,038       75.479    -3.1948*** -6.2988***       77.120      164,277         3,658       60.185       0.5016       0.9263        59.530
                                                                      (0.9911)  (1.9753)                                                            (1.3479)     (2.4904)

Notes: Unit of observation in columns 1-5 (with the exception of "Fraction of Quarters Outside IL") is the person-quarter. Unit of observation in columns 7-11 is the person.
Standard errors are reported in parentheses and are clustered at the household level.
1
  Measured at the Census tract level.
2
  Data from the decennial 1990 and 2000 censuses and the American Community Surveys for 2005-9 (interpolating values for inter-censal years).
3
  Data from the Project on Human Development in Chicago Neighborhoods (PHCDN) Community Survey.
4
  Data from annual beat-level crime panel from the Chicago Police Department.
   *** Significant at the 1 percent level.
   ** Significant at the 5 percent level.
   * Significant at the 10 percent level.
Table V: Housing Voucher Effect on Enrollment in Chicago Public Schools and Medicaid

                                                              Effect of Voucher Offer (ITT)
                                                            Males                     Females
                                                      Age 0-6    Age 6-18       Age 0-6    Age 6-18
                                                        (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)

Ever Enrolled in CPS during 1998-2011                 -0.0003     -0.0003          0.0004      0.0014
                                                      (0.0017)    (0.0020)        (0.0014)    (0.0019)
                                                       [0.845]     [0.812]         [0.843]     [0.820]
                                                       12,288       21,112          11,985     21,225

Ever Left CPS (Moved or Enrolled in Private)        -0.0399***    -0.0115*       -0.0225** -0.0117**
                                                      (0.0092)    (0.0061)        (0.0095)  (0.0059)
                                                       [0.278]     [0.223]         [0.266]   [0.201]
                                                       12,288       21,112          11,985   21,225

Enrolled in CPS in Current Academic Year             0.0328***    0.0068**      0.0203*** 0.0151***
                                                      (0.0067)    (0.0032)       (0.0068)  (0.0031)
                                                       [0.505]     [0.324]        [0.509]   [0.334]
                                                      172,032      295,568       167,790   297,150

Tested in Current Academic Year                      0.0277***    0.0052*       0.0239*** 0.0130***
                                                      (0.0056)    (0.0027)       (0.0057)  (0.0027)
                                                       [0.299]     [0.235]        [0.311]   [0.250]
                                                      172,032     295,568        167,790   297,150

Ever Enrolled in Medicaid during 2000-2008             0.0008      0.0077          0.0025      0.0096
                                                      (0.0091)    (0.0076)        (0.0094)    (0.0070)
                                                       [0.776]     [0.591]         [0.783]     [0.754]
                                                       12,288       21,112          11,985     21,225

Enrolled in Medicaid in Current Academic Year          0.0108     0.0113**        0.0145*     0.0112*
                                                      (0.0086)    (0.0052)        (0.0088)    (0.0058)
                                                       [0.471]     [0.295]         [0.466]     [0.394]
                                                      110,592      190,008        107,865     191,025

Notes: Order of results: ITT estimate; standard error (parentheses); control mean (brackets); number of
observations. Standard errors are clustered at the household level.
  *** Significant at the 1 percent level.
  ** Significant at the 5 percent level.
  * Significant at the 10 percent level.
Table VI: Estimated Effects of Cash Transfers on Education, Criminal Behavior, and Health

                                                                                                      Implied Voucher Value
Gender Baseline Age                   Outcome               Individuals         CM               S             S*           ΔC
                                                                (1)             (2)             (3)            (4)          (5)

Male     Age 0 to 6      Test score                             8,659         -0.3339         0.0050*        0.0084*        0.0107*
                                                                                              (0.0026)       (0.0043)       (0.0055)
Male     Age 6 to 18     Test score                            14,348         -0.3248           0.0010        0.0019         0.0021
                                                                                              (0.0022)       (0.0042)       (0.0047)
Male     Age 6 to 18     High school graduation                13,183          0.3940           0.0029        0.0065         0.0064
                                                                                              (0.0018)       (0.0041)       (0.0040)
Male     All             Soc. costs, most conservative         33,400        3,084.2100      -27.2071*      -58.5617*      -60.4924*
                                                                                             (16.4252)      (35.5156)      (36.5396)
Male     Age 0 to 6      Inpatient or emergency claim           9,538          0.2449          -0.0001       -0.0002        -0.0003
                                                                                              (0.0009)       (0.0015)       (0.0019)
Male     Age 6 to 18     Inpatient or emergency claim          12,526          0.2471          -0.0009       -0.0017        -0.0019
                                                                                              (0.0009)       (0.0018)       (0.0020)
Female   Age 0 to 6      Test score                             8,488         -0.1446           0.0003        0.0004         0.0007
                                                                                              (0.0025)       (0.0042)       (0.0054)
Female   Age 6 to 18     Test score                            14,855         -0.1479           0.0024        0.0046         0.0052
                                                                                              (0.0021)       (0.0042)       (0.0047)
Female   Age 6 to 18     High school graduation                13,792          0.5766           0.0020        0.0045         0.0044
                                                                                              (0.0018)       (0.0042)       (0.0041)
Female   All             Soc. costs, most conservative         33,210        573.6593         9.8595**      21.5006**      22.0343**
                                                                                              (5.0053)      (10.9255)      (11.1743)
Female   Age 0 to 6      Inpatient or emergency claim           9,379          0.2119           0.0003        0.0004         0.0006
                                                                                              (0.0009)       (0.0015)       (0.0019)
Female   Age 6 to 18     Inpatient or emergency claim          16,050          0.3702           0.0004        0.0008         0.0008
                                                                                              (0.0009)       (0.0019)       (0.0019)

Notes: Unit of observation is the person-year for all outcomes, except high school graduation which is a person-level cross-section.
IV estimates shown are re-scaled by the implied value of the voucher--S, S*, or ΔC--in thousands of 2013 $. S is the total cost to the
government of the housing voucher subsidy, equal to $12,501 on average for our study sample. S* is the cash transfer that would
generate the same increase in non-housing consumption as does a housing voucher, equal to $6,377 on average for our study sample;
see text for calculation. ΔC is the increase in non-housing consumption from receiving a housing voucher, equal to $5,653 on average
for our study sample. Standard errors are reported in parentheses and are clustered at the household level.
  ** Significant at the 5 percent level.
  * Significant at the 10 percent level.
Table VII: Estimated Effects of Cash Transfers on Education, Criminal Behavior, and Health for Inframarginal Households

                                                                   Baseline Rent > FMR - $50                           Baseline Rent > FMR
Gender Baseline Age                   Outcome               Individuals       CM      Subsidy = ΔC            Individuals      CM       Subsidy = ΔC
                                                                (1)           (2)           (3)                   (4)           (5)          (6)

Male     Age 0 to 6      Test score                             490           -0.2424           0.0145            338           -0.2519          0.0166
                                                                                              (0.0116)                                         (0.0147)
Male     Age 6 to 18     Test score                             720           -0.2616          -0.0007            498           -0.2725         -0.0080
                                                                                              (0.0096)                                         (0.0109)
Male     Age 6 to 18     High school graduation                 661           0.4134            0.0013            461           0.4387           0.0050
                                                                                              (0.0101)                                         (0.0125)
Male     All             Soc. costs, most conservative         1,752        2,925.5025        -78.6808           1,221        2,859.1061     -152.7635**
                                                                                             (67.1669)                                        (69.3798)
Male     Age 0 to 6      Inpatient or emergency claim           543           0.2613           -0.0018            382           0.2676          -0.0063
                                                                                              (0.0040)                                         (0.0043)
Male     Age 6 to 18     Inpatient or emergency claim           633           0.2367            0.0008            441           0.2204           0.0075
                                                                                              (0.0035)                                         (0.0046)
Female   Age 0 to 6      Test score                             484           -0.0146          -0.0045            328           0.0490         -0.0255*
                                                                                              (0.0119)                                         (0.0143)
Female   Age 6 to 18     Test score                             755           -0.0668          -0.0158            543           -0.0849        -0.0240*
                                                                                              (0.0127)                                         (0.0144)
Female   Age 6 to 18     High school graduation                 702           0.6357           -0.0052            505           0.6589          -0.0065
                                                                                              (0.0095)                                         (0.0108)
Female   All             Soc. costs, most conservative         1,757         642.5750           5.8208           1,220         593.6785          7.3000
                                                                                             (26.5180)                                        (31.1000)
Female   Age 0 to 6      Inpatient or emergency claim           532           0.2426            0.0010            360           0.2446          -0.0007
                                                                                              (0.0035)                                         (0.0043)
Female   Age 6 to 18     Inpatient or emergency claim           776           0.3716           -0.0006            537           0.3824          -0.0069
                                                                                              (0.0043)                                         (0.0045)

Notes: Unit of observation is the person-year for all outcomes, except high school graduation which is a person-level cross-section. IV estimates shown are
re-scaled by the non-housing value of the voucher (ΔC) in thousands of 2013 $. Standard errors are reported in parentheses and are clustered at the
household level.
   ** Significant at the 5 percent level.
   * Significant at the 10 percent level.
Table VIII: Housing Voucher Effects on Child's School Characteristics

           Outcome                 Individuals     CM        ITT           IV        CCM        Obs.
                                       (1)         (2)        (3)          (4)        (5)        (6)

Males age 0-6 at baseline
 Missing school demographics         10,374       0.0159     0.0011    0.0019  0.0133          92,043
                                                           (0.0017)   (0.0030)
  Fraction black                     10,341       0.8495    0.0015     0.0028  0.8679          90,561
                                                           (0.0046)   (0.0081)
  Fraction Latino                    10,341        0.1173   -0.0002    -0.0003 0.1037          90,561
                                                           (0.0038)   (0.0066)
  Fraction with subsidized lunch     10,341       0.8698    0.0009     0.0016  0.8637          90,561
                                                           (0.0018)   (0.0031)
  Fraction special education         10,341       0.1286 -0.0028*** -0.0048*** 0.1335          90,561
                                                           (0.0010)   (0.0017)
  Total enrollment                   10,341      768.2978 17.2501** 30.8500** 744.2949         90,561
                                                           (7.0679)  (12.3332)
  Average test score                 10,341       -0.1981   0.0035     0.0062  -0.2274         90,561
                                                           (0.0058)   (0.0100)

Males age 6-18 at baseline
 Missing school demographics         17,168       0.0274     -0.0009      -0.0018  0.0267      102,794
                                                            (0.0024)     (0.0045)
  Fraction black                     17,005       0.8281     0.0005       0.0007   0.8464      99,998
                                                            (0.0043)     (0.0079)
  Fraction Latino                    17,005       0.1275     -0.0011      -0.0019   0.1181     99,998
                                                            (0.0034)     (0.0063)
  Fraction with subsidized lunch     17,005       0.8528     -0.0010      -0.0020  0.8485      99,998
                                                            (0.0019)     (0.0034)
  Fraction special education         17,005       0.1433     -0.0010      -0.0019  0.1534      99,998
                                                            (0.0012)     (0.0021)
  Total enrollment                   17,005      965.2989    2.2003       4.7429 1,004.0393    99,998
                                                            (8.4074)    (15.4892)
  Average test score                 17,005      -0.2109     0.0006       0.0019   -0.2515     99,998
                                                            (0.0052)     (0.0095)

Females age 0-6 at baseline
  Missing school demographics        10,096       0.0127     -0.0006      -0.0010    0.0119    90,004
                                                            (0.0012)     (0.0022)
  Fraction black                     10,053       0.8502     0.0075       0.0134     0.8678    88,883
                                                            (0.0048)     (0.0084)
  Fraction Latino                    10,053       0.1159     -0.0050      -0.0090    0.1012    88,883
                                                            (0.0040)     (0.0070)
  Fraction with subsidized lunch     10,053       0.8677     0.0006       0.0010     0.8609    88,883
                                                            (0.0019)     (0.0034)
  Fraction special education         10,053       0.1245     -0.0010      -0.0018    0.1282    88,883
                                                            (0.0009)     (0.0015)
  Total enrollment                   10,053      787.9906    -3.2201      -6.2892   796.8033   88,883
                                                            (7.1769)    (12.6614)
  Average test score                 10,053      -0.1800     -0.0000      -0.0002   -0.1955    88,883
                                                            (0.0061)     (0.0108)
Table VIII: Housing Voucher Effects on Child's School Characteristics

            Outcome                   Individuals      CM          ITT           IV         CCM          Obs.
                                          (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)         (5)          (6)

Females age 6-18 at baseline
  Missing school demographics           17,336       0.0159     -0.0008        -0.0017   0.0182        104,514
                                                               (0.0017)       (0.0033)
  Fraction black                        17,274        0.8281    -0.0051        -0.0100   0.8454        102,860
                                                               (0.0044)       (0.0086)
  Fraction Latino                       17,274        0.1259   0.0067*        0.0134*     0.1127       102,860
                                                               (0.0036)       (0.0070)
  Fraction with subsidized lunch        17,274        0.8564    0.0004         0.0010    0.8493        102,860
                                                               (0.0017)       (0.0034)
  Fraction special education            17,274        0.1364    0.0012         0.0023    0.1468        102,860
                                                               (0.0010)       (0.0019)
  Total enrollment                      17,274      1,005.9582 -0.6216         -1.7242 1,061.2455      102,860
                                                               (9.1214)      (17.7645)
  Average test score                    17,274        -0.1789   -0.0045        -0.0089   -0.2128       102,860
                                                               (0.0054)       (0.0105)

Notes: Unit of observation is the person-year for all outcomes. Standard errors are reported in parentheses and are clustered
at the household level.
   *** Significant at the 1 percent level.
   ** Significant at the 5 percent level.
   * Significant at the 10 percent level.
Table IX: Housing Voucher Effects on School Moving

               Outcome                      Individuals    CM        ITT          IV       CCM       Obs.
                                                (1)        (2)        (3)         (4)       (5)       (6)

Males age 0-6 at baseline
 School moves                                 9,888       0.2585     0.0074     0.0132*    0.2633   80,983
                                                                    (0.0045)    (0.0078)
  School moves (involuntary)                  9,888       0.1146     0.0014      0.0026    0.1088   80,983
                                                                    (0.0019)    (0.0033)
  School moves (voluntary)                    9,888       0.1439     0.0060      0.0105    0.1545   80,983
                                                                    (0.0040)    (0.0070)
  Miles from baseline address to school       9,730       2.9078   0.2053**    0.3609**    2.8576   86,748
                                                                    (0.0827)    (0.1437)
  Miles from current address to school        8,243       2.7543     0.1204      0.2093    2.7041   60,057
                                                                    (0.0930)    (0.1596)
  Missing school move data                    9,964       0.0223     0.0008      0.0015    0.0020   82,806
                                                                    (0.0006)    (0.0011)
  Missing baseline address to school data     10,374      0.0575     0.0015      0.0028    0.0501   92,043
                                                                    (0.0015)    (0.0027)
  Missing current address to school data      10,374      0.3414   0.0274***   0.0486***   0.3199   92,043
                                                                    (0.0099)    (0.0172)

Males age 6-18 at baseline
 School moves                                 16,710      0.2740     0.0062      0.0115    0.2874   98,682
                                                                    (0.0040)    (0.0073)
  School moves (involuntary)                  16,710      0.1289     0.0014      0.0021    0.1529   98,682
                                                                    (0.0020)    (0.0038)
  School moves (voluntary)                    16,710      0.1451     0.0048      0.0094    0.1344   98,682
                                                                    (0.0036)    (0.0066)
  Miles from baseline address to school       16,110      2.6321   0.3251***   0.5820***   2.6727   96,226
                                                                    (0.0707)    (0.1286)
  Miles from current address to school        13,197      2.2226   0.3793***   0.6959***   2.1350   68,459
                                                                    (0.0882)    (0.1634)
  Missing school move data                    16,834      0.0060     0.0001      0.0002    0.0014   99,284
                                                                    (0.0005)    (0.0010)
  Missing baseline address to school data     17,168      0.0648     0.0018      0.0033    0.0550   102,794
                                                                    (0.0022)    (0.0040)
  Missing current address to school data      17,168      0.3336     0.0080      0.0170    0.3456   102,794
                                                                    (0.0093)    (0.0169)

Females age 0-6 at baseline
  School moves                                9,575       0.2497   0.0108**    0.0196**    0.2514   79,257
                                                                    (0.0045)    (0.0079)
  School moves (involuntary)                  9,575       0.1158     -0.0004     -0.0003   0.1085   79,257
                                                                    (0.0019)    (0.0034)
  School moves (voluntary)                    9,575       0.1339   0.0112***   0.0199***   0.1429   79,257
                                                                    (0.0040)    (0.0070)
  Miles from baseline address to school       9,472       2.8560   0.2469***   0.4419***   2.9567   85,273
                                                                    (0.0789)    (0.1380)
  Miles from current address to school        8,105       2.7384    0.1675*     0.3129*    2.8259   58,877
                                                                    (0.0909)    (0.1640)
  Missing school move data                    9,648       0.0223     0.0003      0.0006    0.0046   81,055
                                                                    (0.0006)    (0.0011)
  Missing baseline address to school data     10,096      0.0541     -0.0010     -0.0017   0.0446   90,004
                                                                    (0.0009)    (0.0015)
Table IX: Housing Voucher Effects on School Moving

                Outcome                      Individuals      CM          ITT           IV         CCM          Obs.
                                                 (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)         (5)          (6)

  Missing current address to school data        10,096      0.3455       0.0081       0.0152       0.3582      90,004
                                                                        (0.0096)     (0.0170)

Females age 6-18 at baseline
  School moves                                  17,048      0.2633     0.0155***     0.0309***     0.2667      101,039
                                                                        (0.0040)      (0.0078)
  School moves (involuntary)                    17,048      0.1262       0.0021        0.0037      0.1475      101,039
                                                                        (0.0019)      (0.0038)
  School moves (voluntary)                      17,048      0.1372     0.0134***     0.0272***     0.1192      101,039
                                                                        (0.0037)      (0.0071)
  Miles from baseline address to school         16,450      2.6933     0.1637**      0.3252**      2.9493      99,203
                                                                        (0.0739)      (0.1426)
  Miles from current address to school          13,425      2.1993     0.2345***     0.4612***     2.3640      69,667
                                                                        (0.0850)      (0.1646)
  Missing school move data                      17,143      0.0053       0.0001        0.0001      0.0009      101,590
                                                                        (0.0005)      (0.0011)
  Missing baseline address to school data       17,336      0.0489       -0.0009       -0.0020     0.0651      104,514
                                                                        (0.0013)      (0.0025)
  Missing current address to school data        17,336      0.3340       -0.0047       -0.0068     0.3616      104,514
                                                                        (0.0093)      (0.0178)

Notes: Unit of observation is the person-year for all outcomes. Standard errors are reported in parentheses and are clustered
at the household level.
   *** Significant at the 1 percent level.
   ** Significant at the 5 percent level.
   * Significant at the 10 percent level.
