                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         WEAK VERSUS STRONG NET NEUTRALITY

                                            Joshua S. Gans

                                        Working Paper 20160
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20160


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2014




During the course of this research I worked at Microsoft Research. All views remain my own and
Microsoft did not have pre-approval of the publication of this paper. The views expressed herein are
those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Joshua S. Gans. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Weak Versus Strong Net Neutrality
Joshua S. Gans
NBER Working Paper No. 20160
May 2014
JEL No. D04,D42,D43,K2,L1,L12,L13

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper provides a framework to classify and evaluate the impact of net neutrality regulations on
the allocation of consumer attention and the distribution of surplus between consumers, ISPs and content
providers. While the model provided largely nests other contributions in the literature, here the focus
is on including direct payments from consumers to content providers. With this additional price it
is demonstrated that the type of net neutrality regulation (i.e., weak versus strong net neutrality) matters
for such regulations to have real effects. In addition, we provide support for the notion that strong
net neutrality may stimulate content provider investment while the model concludes that there is unlikely
to be any negative impact from such regulation on ISP investment. Counter to many claims, it is argued
here that ISP competition may not be a substitute for net neutrality regulation in bringing about these
effects


Joshua S. Gans
Rotman School of Management
University of Toronto
105 St. George Street
Toronto ON M5S 3E6
and NBER
joshua.gans@gmail.com
	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2	  


1                                                     Introduction

                                                      Net (or Network) Neutrality has been a concept discussed in the United States for
over a decade (Wu, 2003; Lee and Wu, 2009). It relates to a principle that Internet
Service Providers (ISPs) or any other network operator on the Internet should not be able
to create conditions under which consumers would be induced to favour some content
providers (CPs) over another.2 At times, this has evoked the notion that CPs should not
pay for access to consumers while at others it is that CPs should not face charges that are
discriminatory with respect to one another or related to the quality of the experience their
consumers receive. Most recently, this issue has emerged with Netflix (a streaming video
supplier) paying Comcast (a large US ISP) for a higher quality route or ‘fast lane’ to its
consumers. However, the notion of content-based price discrimination has also emerged
with respect to deals with some ISPs (especially outside of the US) to allow consumers to
access services such as Wikipedia3 or Facebook without charge on mobile devices and
AT&T considering offering that option too if a CP pays them directly.4
                                                      The debate has focussed on numerous dimensions. From the principle of
neutrality expressed above to concerns that restricting the ability of ISPs to engage in
price discrimination or offer different quality products might impact adversely on
infrastructure investment. Finally, there is a concern that ISP discrimination options may
lead to barriers to CPs themselves to invest; particularly, in new services. This may come
because of a lack of affordable access, consumers shying away from lower quality
services or from hold-up whereby ISPs increase charges as CPs become more successful.
This is of particular concern where ISPs themselves are integrated CPs perhaps in
competing non-Internet services such as cable television or media production.
                                                      This paper is designed to bring some clarity to the debate. First of all, rather than
speculate on what rules might enshrine certain principles of behaviour – namely, can we
have a commercial Internet whereby consumers do not internalise ISP pricing when
choosing how to allocate their attention? – here I evaluate these issues using economic

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
2
  Where ‘content providers’ could include websites, applications or other services that make use of the
Internet as a means of interacting and supplying consumers.
3
  http://wikimediafoundation.org/wiki/Mobile_partnerships (accessed 20 May 2014).
4
     See,     https://gigaom.com/2014/01/06/att-launches-sponsored-data-inviting-content-providers-to-pay-
consumers-mobile-data-bills/ (accessed 20 May 2014).
	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 3	  


criteria. Specifically, how do various price regulations impact on consumers’ actual
allocation of attention and its comparison to a socially optimal allocation? And how do
various regulations impact on ISP or CP investment in their activities? Thus, this paper is
as much about the effectiveness of proposed regulations as it is about their expected
impact.
                                                      Second, while there is an existing formal literature that asks questions similar to
those just specified, that literature has several difficulties that have made applying it to
this debate difficult; let alone comparing alternative claims made in those debates. For
one, the starting point for that literature is to assume that CPs do not have a direct
monetary relationship with consumers. With respect to recent streaming video issues, this
is an unreasonable assumption. Thus, here I start with the situation where CPs set prices
to consumers directly.5 In addition, that existing literature assumes that consumers do not
pay ISPs for services that involve different charges depending upon what type of content
they access. While this is an accurate depiction of the initial period of the US commercial
Internet, it is not an accurate depiction elsewhere or for the mobile Internet. While ISPs
have not engaged in content-specific charging to consumers per se, they have imposed
download caps that, for bandwidth intensive content, impact on consumer choices as to
what content to consume. Consequently, these prices now and perhaps into the future will
impact on the consumers allocation of attention. For that reason, it is explicitly
considered here.
                                                      The final aspect where the existing formal literature falls short is that it is
complex in its analysis. As is standard in industrial organisation in academic economics,
there is a push towards generality of the analysis but, despite abstracting away from
consumer charging of the forms described above, the formal models have not been
conclusive in their recommendations and, indeed, they have identified a plethora of
effects that have made building intuition difficult. This is not to say those models are
unimportant or unrealistic. Far from it. My contention here is that a simpler, less realistic
model can demonstrate some first-order insights regarding the net neutrality debate.
However, the analysis also confirms that such regulations have benefits and costs. The
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
5
 For example, in Cheng et al (2009), Choi (2010), Economides and Tag (2007), Choi and Kim (2010) and
Reggiani and Valetti (2011) there is no direct CP charging to consumers and CP earn all revenue from
other means such as advertising.
	                                                                                              4	  


aim here is to more clearly identify these rather than make a definitive policy
recommendation per se.
           To this end, this paper provides an unashamedly simple model with a single ISP,
two CPs and a consumer. There is no nuance on demand from the consumer (they can
allocate their attention to one CP or another). There is no detailed analysis of network
priority rules. And there is no close examination of alternative pricing structures and
download caps – everything is comprised of a set of simple transfers for services.
However, in the process, I believe a number of useful insights can be gathered.
           First, in this model with a flow of payments between different entities, we can
distinguish between weak net neutrality (whereby content-based price discrimination is
outlawed in single relationships) and strong net neutrality (whereby it is outlawed
altogether). In so doing, I demonstrate that only strong net neutrality leads to real effects;
in particular, over the allocation of profits between the ISP and content providers.
Moreover, it does not impact at all on the consumer allocation of attention that remains
socially optimal regardless of regulatory regime. This is because the price between CPs
and consumers mediates this and other payments ultimately do not distort it.
Consequently, neutrality regulation is itself neutral in important ways.
           Second, where there is no price between consumers and content providers, certain
forms of neutrality regulation can lead to real effects on the allocation of consumer
attention. In this case, strong net neutrality can cause consumers to choose a socially sub-
optimal allocation. This is because the socially optimal allocation includes both the
consumer’s value on the service and the CPs earns from advertising and the like. In the
absence of sufficient pricing flexibility, that latter component does not factor into
consumer choice, even indirectly, and hence, they may, under some circumstances,
choose a sub-optimal allocation. Moreover, it is shown that this reduces surplus for all
parties.
           Third, when net neutrality regulation is effective (i.e., under strong net neutrality),
then there is a transfer for surplus from the ISP to content providers and, moreover, the
surplus retained by content providers is related to their marginal value in the market.
Hence, we can expect that dynamic efficiency, in terms of content provider investment,
will be enhanced by strong net neutrality rules. At the same time, it is demonstrated that
	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 5	  


net neutrality regulation (of any form) does not impact on the incentives of ISPs to
improve network quality. Consequently, this suggests that claims that price flexibility is
required to ensure such investment takes place does not stand up in this model. Finally, it
is demonstrated that ‘fast lanes’ as a means of counteracting strong net neutrality will
only do so imperfectly. There is no first-order prediction that CPs will be unable to
capture the surplus they would if a fast lane option did not exist but, at the same time,
ISPs will be able to capture the increment from providing a higher quality service. That
said, if ISPs were to be compelled to offer fast lanes at the same price as slow lanes, there
is an increased likelihood that CPs will appropriate their full marginal value if the value
they provide to consumers is complementary with network quality (as it may be for
streaming video).
                                                      Finally, I examine what happens when there is ISP competition. Not surprisingly,
such competition allows consumers to appropriate more surplus. However, more subtly,
because consumers operate at the edge of the Internet and are, in effect, monopoly
suppliers of their own access, net neutrality regulations simply have no effect. The
consumer’s chosen ISP becomes their agent in propagating that monopoly power and so
CPs appropriate no surplus. This suggests that claims that competition amongst ISP
would eliminate the importance of the issue are more nuanced than is generally thought.


2                                                     Baseline Model

2.1                                                   Set-up

                                                      Consider a simple model with one ISP, one representative consumer and two
content providers (CP1 and CP2). The content providers give value to consumers of
  v1 > v2 . Suppose also that the content providers earn other revenue so that v1 + r1 > v2 + r2 .
Here the content providers may earn revenue from advertisers rather than Internet
consumers. We will assume content providers have no other costs related to the usage of
their service but we will consider, below, that they have fixed costs of entering or being
in business.6 Let’s suppose that the consumer chooses content from one provider only;

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
6
 With additional notion, it would be relatively straightforward to incorporate usage related content
provider costs (e.g., royalty payments to publishers and movie studios) into the analysis.
	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         6	  


perhaps because of limited attention in a given time period. We will assume the ISP costs
associated with bringing content to consumers are c regardless of which content is chosen.
Below we will consider what happens if there is a service that causes this cost to vary.

2.2                                                   Definitions

                                                      The ISP charges consumers a connection fee that can, potentially, be contingent
on the content chosen (that is, (t1, t2 ) where ti is the content associated with CPi).7
                                                      The ISP can also charge content providers an access or transit price. Once again,
this can be different from different content providers (that is, (a1, a2 ) ). Finally, content
providers can directly charge consumers for the use of their services ( p1, p2 ) . It is
assumed throughout that these prices are not regulated. The flow of payments is depicted
in Figure 1.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Figure 1: Flow of Payments




	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
7
  While there are many ways this might occur, a common practice is for ISP to charge on the basis of usage.
Thus, if CP1 is a video streaming service, t1 > t 2 may represent those additional usage fees. The
specification here allows for this and any other basis of charging consumers in a manner that causes them
to perceive a different charge associated with different content.
	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 7	  



                                                      Given this specification of prices, we can define the following.
Definition (Strong net neutrality). The ISP cannot discriminate in its pricing to either
CPs or consumers. That is, they must set t1 = t 2 = t and a1 = a2 = a .
Definition (Weak content provider net neutrality). The ISP cannot discriminate in its
price to CPs; that is, a1 = a2 = a .
Definition (Weak consumer net neutrality). The ISP cannot discriminate in its price to
consumers; that is, t1 = t 2 = t .
Definition (No regulation). The ISP can charge content-contingent prices to consumers
(t1, t2 ) and to content providers (a1, a2 ) .
To date, as mentioned in the introduction, analyses of net neutrality have not made a
distinction between strong and weak net neutrality.8 These analyses, therefore, examine
moves from weak to strong net neutrality rather than moves from no regulation to a form
of net neutrality.
                                                      Here it will be shown that the distinction matters. In particular, we will evaluate
the market outcomes under different regulations and see whether the consumer ends up
choosing the CP with the highest value. We will also examine the division of rents
between CPs and the ISP under each scenario. In each case, we assume that in the market,
the ISP sets (a1, a2 ) and (t1, t2 ) prior to the CPs setting ( p1, p2 ) .

2.3                                                   No regulation

                                                      Under no regulation, the ISP is free to engage in content-based price
discrimination as it sees fit. The following proposition characterises the equilibrium
outcome.
Proposition 1. Under no regulation, the consumer selects the socially optimal content
provider (i.e., CP1) with content providers and the consumer earning zero surplus and
the ISP earning v1 + r1 − c .

All proofs are in the appendix. Intuitively, the content providers compete for the attention
of the consumer. At that stage, the consumer will be concerned with the price charged by
the content providers and also the different charges the ISP might set depending upon
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
8
 For example, in Cheng et al (2009), Choi (2010), Economides and Tag (2007), Choi and Kim (2010) and
Reggiani and Valetti (2011) there is no direct CP charging to consumers and CP earn all revenue from
other means such as advertising.
	                                                                                        8	  


which provider is chosen. Similarly, the content providers’ prices will, in turn, depend on
the charges they must pay the ISP. The proof of the proposition demonstrates that by
setting ti + ai = vi + ri the content providers will price in such a way that the consumer

ends up choosing the content provider with the highest vi + ri and, in equilibrium, will

that value will be passed through to the ISP.

2.4    Weak net neutrality

       Now we turn to consider weak net neutrality where content-based price
discrimination is prohibited either to content providers or consumers. The following
proposition is demonstrated.
Proposition 2. Under either weak content provider net neutrality or weak consumer net
neutrality, the consumer chooses the socially optimal content provider (i.e., CP1) but the
allocation of surplus remains the same as Proposition 1.

This result says that weak net neutrality (regardless of its form) is neutral. That is, the
only thing that may change as we move from no regulation to a form of weak net
neutrality is that prices change. The payoffs to each party and the choices (in particular,
for the consumer) do not change. Thus, the precise same level of static welfare results as
the no regulation case.
       The neutrality of weak net neutrality mirrors other results in the two-sided
markets literature when there are prices set between all relevant parties and would arise in
a much more general model than that presented here (Gans and King, 2003). It implies
that weak net neutrality regulations are unlikely to be effective but also that a monopoly
ISP could choose not to engage in content-based price discrimination along a given
dimension and still achieve maximum profits. In other words, undertakings to engage in
weak net neutrality could be freely made.
       This also suggests avenues for empirical examination. For instance, it is not
unreasonable to suppose that engaging in content-based price discrimination to either
consumers or content providers involves transaction costs to the ISP. Thus, a monopoly
ISP may minimise those costs by engaging in only one type of content-based price
discrimination but that political and other pressures across different markets may
influence which side of the market is chosen. Consequently, we would expect to see
	                                                                                            9	  


content-based price discrimination related to historical norms in pricing perhaps related
to vertical integration between ISPs and content providers.


3            Non-Neutral Results

             In the previous section, we demonstrated that the outcomes under no regulation
and either form of weak net neutrality were themselves neutral. That is, while there may
be impacts of the regulation on the prices charged between ISPs, CPs and consumers, the
choices and, ultimately, the payoffs to each agent are unchanged. Here we examine
situations where, compared with no regulation, there may be non-neutral outcomes.

3.1          Strong net neutrality

             Under strong net neutrality, the ISP is not permitted to engage in content-based
discrimination of any form. Thus, a1 = a2 = a and t1 = t2 = t . The following proposition
demonstrates that regulation of this form is not neutral compared with other regulations.
Proposition 3. Under strong net neutrality, the consumer chooses the socially optimal
content provider (i.e., CP1) but earns zero surplus as does CP2. CP1 earns profits of
v1 + r1 − (v2 + r2 ) while the ISP earns profits of v2 + r2 − c .

Thus, while (static) efficiency is maintained under strong net neutrality, the ISPs profits
fall to min{v1 + r1 ,v2 + r2 }− c while the chosen CP’s profits, say, CP1, becomes

       p1 + r1 − a = v1 + r1 − (v2 + r2 ) . In this set-up, consumer surplus remains at zero.
Consequently, a move from no regulation (or weak net neutrality) to strong net neutrality
does not change overall (static) surplus generated but it does shift the appropriation of
that surplus, in part, from ISPs to CPs.
             Another way of seeing this is to note that the profits of CP1 are:
                             p1 + r1 − a1 = v1 − v2 − (t1 − t 2 ) + a2 − r2 + r1 − a1
If these are to be zero that implies that:
                                   a1 + t1 − (a2 + t 2 ) = v1 + r1 − (v2 + r2 )
Thus, you can see that when the ISP can flexibly choose all of its prices or, at the very
least, control the sums ai + ti , as it can under weak net neutrality, it is possible the ISP to
extract all of the content provider profits. By contrast, under strong net neutrality
	                                                                                           10	  


  a1 + t1 = a2 + t 2 so that CP1’s profits must be equal to v1 + r1 − (v2 + r2 ) . Thus, the
difference, a1 + t1 − (a2 + t 2 ) is a proxy for the expected transfer resulting from strong net
neutrality.
         Strong net neutrality is effective in the sense that it can change outcomes in the
market. In the simple model here, it serves to shift surplus from the ISP to the content
provider. Below, we see how this impacts on investments that each may make ex ante.
However, intuitively, the content provider chosen by the consumer would not retain
surplus under no regulation because the ISP could price in such a way that that surplus
was extracted; effectively treating that content provider as higher cost than its rival.
Under strong net neutrality, that extraction becomes impossible because the playing field
between content providers is level. This allows the superior content provider to
appropriate its marginal contribution to the market.

3.2      Outcomes with a missing price

         Thusfar, we have assumed that consumers pay content providers directly to access
their services. Of course, much of the Internet does not rely on that model and the
services are free to consumers. Consequently, it is instructive to analyse the case where
CPs do not charge consumers; i.e., p1 = p2 = 0 . They instead rely exclusively on ri for
revenue or other benefits. This also corresponds to the case where consumers cannot
charge CPs to give their attention. In this case, the consumer will choose CP1 over CP2
if:
                                        v1 − t1 ≥ v2 − t2

and there is no separate bidding from CPs for consumers. Importantly, as is demonstrated
here, consumers do not themselves care about ri in making their choices which gives rise
to the possibility of distortions.
         In this setting, we can demonstrate the following:
Proposition 4. Suppose that v1 + r1 > v2 + r2 . Then, if v1 ≥ v2 then, regardless of regulatory
regime, the consumer chooses the socially optimal content provider (i.e., CP1) and the
ISP earns v1 + r1 − c . However, if v1 < v2 then, under no regulation or weak content
provider net neutrality, the same outcome results while, under weak consumer net
neutrality or strong net neutrality, the consumer chooses CP2 and the ISP earns
v2 + r2 − c .
	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 11	  



When there is a missing price (in this case, the price between content providers and
consumers), preventing content-based price discrimination in the charges paid by
consumers to the ISP, has real effects (regardless of the regulations on the content
provider fees to the ISP). Put simply, under weak consumer net neutrality and strong net
neutrality, the ISP cannot use pricing to guide the consumer’s choice of content provider
– either directly or indirectly (through access fees paid by the content provider). The
absence of that pricing signal means that consumers only choose their content provider
on the basis of their own value and not any additional returns (i.e., advertising) made by
the content provider. If consumer value and those additional returns are positively
correlated, the consumer will choose the socially optimal content regardless of regulatory
regime. However, if they are negatively correlated, this will not happen. In this case, the
ISPs returns will be reduced but, as the proposition demonstrates, there is no
corresponding transfer of surplus to content providers. Thus, net neutrality regulations are
Pareto sub-optimal.
                                                      It is this possibility that suggests that net neutrality regulations are not innocuous
in terms of allocative efficiency. When there is already a missing price in the market,
further suppression of price signals can be welfare reducing. This might also arise if, for
some reason, content from different content providers had different costs to the ISP in
delivering that content to consumers. That is, for the same attention allocation of the
consumer, some content may be more bandwidth intensive than others. Note, however,
that for this to arise, the business model of content providers must not include direct
charging to consumers. Consequently, the impact of net neutrality regulations is not
independent of assumptions on business model type opening up an avenue for further
empirical investigation of the welfare impacts of such regulations.9




	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
9
 Choi, Jeon and Kim (2013) also identify content provider business model as interacting in important ways
with net neutrality regulations. However, they examine different dimensions of business models than the
ones discussed here.
	                                                                                              12	  


4        Dynamic Consequences

         Thusfar, the model has analysed static considerations centred around the
consumers’ choice of content provider. However, many of the discussions with regard to
the impact of net neutrality have been on the investments that are made by content
providers and ISPs. Here we examine those dynamic issues.

4.1      Content Provider Investments

         The previous analysis demonstrated that when content providers can charge
consumers directly, the only regulation that results in a change in their payoffs is strong
net neutrality. Thus, moving from any other regime to strong net neutrality, increases the
profits of the content provider that attracts consumer attention, say CP1, from 0 to
  v1 + r1 − ( v2 + r2 ) ; their marginal contribution to surplus. This is precisely the payoff that

would normally be associated with a competitive content provider market. By contrast, in
the absence of strong net neutrality, that marginal surplus is appropriated by the ISP.
Hence, it is clear that if stimulating content provider investments is desirable then so is
strong net neutrality.
         When there is a missing price, the analysis becomes more complex. If revenue
from other sources (e.g., advertising) is positively correlated with consumer value for the
content of each content provider, then regardless of the regime, the ISP appropriates all
surplus and the CPs earn 0. Thus, in this case, net neutrality regulation would not be
effective in assisting content provider investments. If revenue from other sources is
negatively correlated with consumer value, then weak consumer net neutrality and strong
net neutrality can have real effects. However, there is no corresponding transfer of rents
from the ISP to CPs. Hence, there is no expected impact on content provider investments.

4.2      Network quality

         The main argument raised as to why net neutrality regulation of any form would
be a poor outcome is that it would deter incentives for ISPs to invest in capacity and
improve network quality. As already demonstrated, only if there is strong net neutrality is
there an impact on ISP payoffs and thus, other forms of regulation would be neutral in
	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 13	  


this regard. The question is whether the impact on payoffs also has a corresponding
impact on ISP incentives to invest in network quality.
                                                      We consider a simple representation of such investment. Suppose that, at a sunk
cost of C > 0, the ISP can improve network quality and hence, consumer value realised
by Δ. We will assume that such investment is socially desirable with Δ > C.
                                                      When the content provider can charge consumers directly, under no regulation
and weak net neutrality, the ISP’s profits are v1 + r1 − c without an investment in network
quality and v1 + Δ + r1 − c − C with that investment. Thus, they appropriate the full social
returns from that investment and would be expected to undertake it. By contrast, under
strong net neutrality, ISP profits are v2 + r2 − c without and v2 + Δ + r2 − c − C with the
investment. Consequently, it can be seen that there is no change in the ISPs incentives to
invest in network quality as a result of a change in regulatory regime. A similar outcome
can be demonstrated for the case where there is a missing price as, in that case, even if
the consumer chooses the non-welfare maximising content, the ISP appropriates the
increment to consumer value from its investment in quality by an increase in charges to
consumers.

4.3                                                   Fast lanes

                                                      A recent form of investment or, specifically, product introduction from ISPs are
so-called ‘fast lanes.’ These are products available to content providers to speed up their
service to the ISP’s customers. Concerns have been raised that such products are a way of
circumventing pricing regulation rules for ISPs with respect to content providers – that is,
circumventing the effects of weak content provider net neutrality or strong net neutrality.
Here I evaluate those claims.
                                                      Suppose that the ISP offers a fast lane to content providers at a fee of A and a
slow lane to them at a fee of a. Note that the fees, A and a, are not contingent on content.
If CPi chooses a fast lane, the value to consumers is Δi greater than if they choose a slow
lane.10 It is assumed that Δ1 > Δ2. It is also assumed that, if a fast lane is used, it costs the
ISP C rather than c.
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
10
  Choi and Kim (2010) provide a detailed model of how these different qualities may arise using network
prioritization rules.
	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 14	  


                                                      The timeline is only changed slightly with this set-up. First, the ISP announces the
consumer and content provider fees (for both lanes). Then the consumer chooses an ISP.
Then the content providers simultaneously announce their prices to consumers and
whether they have chosen a fast or slow lane. Finally, consumers choose their content
provider.
                                                      Given this, we can prove the following result:
Proposition 5. Under weak content provider net neutrality, the consumer selects the
socially optimal content (CP1) and there is an equilibrium where CP1 chooses a fast lane.
Neither the consumer nor the content providers earn any surplus while the ISP earns
v1 + Δ1 + r1 − C . Under strong net neutrality, the consumer selects the socially optimal
content (CP1) while CP1 chooses a fast lane. Neither the consumer nor CP2 earn any
surplus while the ISP earns v2 + Δ1 + r2 − C and CP1 earns v1 + r1 − (v2 + r2 ) .

With regard to weak content provider net neutrality, the result in the proposition is not
too surprising. Put simply, content-based fees from the ISP at the consumer level can do
the work of the regulation at the content provider level (as in Proposition 2).
                                                      The strong net neutrality result shows that, while the fast lane does not change
surplus appropriated by CP1, the increased value from the fast lane itself is appropriated
by the ISP. As in the result in the previous section, this demonstrates that strong net
neutrality will not change the ISP’s incentives to invest in higher quality broadband.
However, here we have assumed that some the benefit to the consumer that comes from
higher quality broadband is complementary with the content provider (i.e., that Δ1 > Δ 2 ).
This means that there is no incentive for the content provider to invest in content that will
exploit the fast lane, if it is provided.
                                                      Alternatively, what would happen if the ISP was compelled to offer a single lane.
In this situation, it can be easily shown that while nothing changes under weak net
neutrality, under strong net neutrality the ISP earns v2 + Δ 2 + r2 − C while CP1 earns
  v1 + Δ1 + r1 − (v2 + Δ 2 + r2 ) . Thus, the content provider’s incentives are aligned with their
marginal impact on surplus but the ISP only cares about investing in quality to the extent
that it improves quality across a variety of content providers. It is not difficult to imagine
situations where this may be socially more or less efficient.11

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
11
             Some of these trade-offs are analysed by Choi and Kim (2010). See also Hermalin and Katz (2007).
	                                                                                                   15	  


5             Competition amongst ISPs

              As a final exercise, it is instructive to consider the role of the monopoly ISP here.
What happens if there is ISP competition? Specifically, suppose there are two identical
ISPs who announce their charges to consumers and content providers prior to the
consumers choosing their ISP and, subsequently, their content.
              First, observe that the price structure of the content providers would not change as
a result of this and, in particular, in the unregulated case, if an ISP managed to sign up a
consumer, then the net cost of serving a consumer that chose CPi would be c − ai . Thus,
the higher an ISP can make each ai, the lower those costs can be; something that will
matter with ISP competition.
              Second, this suggests that if ai were equal to vi + ri , there would be potential for
the ISP to transfer surplus from either CP to the consumer. As a CP’s profits are
       pi + ri − ai then this outcome could only arise if pi = vi . The problem is that the CPs
compete for the consumer but also set the price to the consumer. For CP2, as the inferior
provider, this means that the lowest they can set their price is p2 = a2 − r2 . Thus, an ISP
could set a2 = v2 + r2 resulting in p2 = v2 ; interestingly, the ISP is motivated, in order to
compete for the consumer, to create conditions whereby the competition between CPs is
softened.
              Given this, in competition for the consumer, CP1 sets its price at
       p1 = v1 − v2 − (t1 − t 2 ) + p2 = v1 − (t1 − t 2 ) . Thus, the surplus accruing to the consumer is
  v1 − t1 − p1 = −t 2 . So, by setting t1 = t 2 = c − a1 = c − r1 − v1 , an ISP will potentially be able
to bid successfully for a consumer with the consumer appropriating the total surplus
generated.
              As would be expected, consumers appropriate all of the surplus when there is ISP
competition. The reason that content providers appropriate none of the surplus is that it is
the consumer that chooses the ISP and the content provider is forced to accept the terms
of that ISP in accessing the consumer. Importantly, it can readily be seen that net
neutrality regulations would not change this outcome – at least for this specialised model.
It is already the case that, under no regulation, the ISP implements weak consumer net
neutrality.
	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        16	  


                                                      What about strong net neutrality? If this were required, it is easy to demonstrate
that the ISP could simply set a = a1 = a2 = v1 + r1 and the same outcome would result. To
see this, note that, in this case, p1 = v1 − v2 − (t1 − t 2 ) + v1 + r1 − r2 with surplus to the
consumer of v1 − t1 − p1 = −v1 − r1 + v2 + r2 − t 2 . For this surplus to be v1 + r1 − c , we must

have t2 = −2v1 − 2r1 + c + v2 + r2 . Thus, t = t1 = t2 = −2v1 − 2r1 + c + v2 + r2 . So we have

       p1 = 2v1 − v2 + r1 − r2 , p2 = v1 + r1 − r2 so that t + p1 = −r1 + c . In this case, the consumer

appropriates the entire surplus of v1 + r1 − c .12
                                                      It is interesting that having ISP competition does not, in fact, result in either more
surplus to content providers or to some effectiveness of net neutrality regulations. In
reality, this result is strong because of the special nature of the model. Here the ISP
controls terms on both sides of the market – consumer and content provider. Thus,
because the consumer chooses one ISP, the ISP has a monopoly over access to that
consumer. Moreover, the ISP chooses to exercise that monopoly power by softening
competition amongst CPs and extracting rents. In competition, those monopoly rents are
passed to the consumer in the firm of negative consumer access fees for broadband. Net
neutrality regulations only mean that those consumer access fees are more negative but
otherwise the allocation of surplus in the market is unchanged.
                                                      While it is possible to conceive of negative consumer fees for broadband as
rebates for signing on to an ISP, many might consider this outcome unrealistic. Thus, it is
instructive to consider what happens if we assume that all prices must be positive and so
t1 and t2 must be at least 0. Suppose, therefore, that t1 is 0. Then, the profits of CP1 would
be p1 + r1 − a1 = v1 − v2 − (0 − t 2 ) + a2 − r2 + r1 − a1 . Can it be the case that, like the situation
with                                               negative                                                                         prices,                                                            the                         profits   of   CP1   can   be   0?   This   implies   that
  a1 − (a2 + t 2 ) = v1 + r1 − (v2 + r2 ) . However, if a1 = v1 + r1 and a2 + t 2 = v2 + r2 , then p1 = v1
and consumer surplus would be 0. An ISP would be able to compete for a consumer by
instead ensuring that p1 were as low as possible. This implies setting a2 = r2 so that
       p2 = 0 and also t2 as low as possible (i.e., 0). Thus, p1 = v1 − v2 leaving CP1 with profit

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
12
  This provides some support for Becker, Carlton and Sider’s (2010) conjecture that ISP competition
makes net neutrality regulation ineffective. However, below if prices are constrained to be non-negative,
then some net neutrality regulation is effective.
	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 17	  


  v1 − v2 + r1 − a1 and consumer surplus of v2. So the consumer is indifferent as to the level
of a1 and so the ISP can set a1 = v1 + r1 − v2 and earn a profit. Thus, as in the flexible price
case, the non-negative price case leaves content providers with no surplus.
                                                      In this situation, what is the impact of net neutrality regulations? First of all, note
that weak consumer net neutrality is implemented in equilibrium regardless. Second, if
the price charged by the ISP to content providers must be equal, then a = a1 = a2 = r2 .
Thus, under both weak content provider net neutrality and strong net neutrality, CP1
receives profit of v1 − v2 + r1 − r2 while the ‘winning’ ISP receives profit of r2 − c and the
consumer receives surplus of v2. Thus, compared with the monopoly ISP case, when there
are non-negative prices, a broader range of net neutrality regulations are potentially
effective in transferring surplus from ISPs to content providers.
                                                      As noted above, what drives some of these results is that the ISP controls both
sides of the market. Alternatively, what if the content provider had its own ISP? In this
case, that ISP might charge the content provider to access the Internet as a whole.
However, between the two ISPs, they will negotiate the link between the consumer and
the content provider. This is the interconnection fee that the content provider’s ISP will
pay the consumer’s ISP for transit. In this situation, if there is competition between ISPs
on both sides of the market, we would expect that some surplus would accrue to the
consumer while others would accrue to the content provider. 13 In either case, net
neutrality regulations would likely not change the outcomes here.


6                                                     Conclusions

                                                      The economics of net neutrality is subtle. The existence of a network of pricing
relationship means that regulating any one set of prices may not have real effects.
Consequently, the form and extent of net neutrality regulation matters in terms of what
might be effective in reallocating surplus or changing the allocation of attention of
consumers. This paper has provided a simple model to illustrate effects, some of whom
were already present in the literature, but to place them in a broader pricing context.


	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
13
             Choi, Jeon and Kim (2013) explore interconnected and competing ISPs.
	                                                                                      18	  


       That said, the simplicity of the model no doubt abstracts away from other
mechanisms. My claim here is that the ones identified in this paper will remain first order.
In particular, when it is effective net neutrality can shift surplus from ISPs to content
providers with consequent impact on content provider investments. By contrast, it is
difficult to find a mechanism in the paper whereby net neutrality regulation would have
an adverse impact on ISP investment. While other papers have found an impact this has
been in the context of mitigating effects that have been largely supressed here.
       The hope now is that by providing a complete framework to analyse the impact of
net neutrality, empirical researchers may be able to find experiments and other
opportunities to measure and predict the likely impact of such regulations.
	  
	                                                                                               19	  


7       Appendix: Proof of Propositions

7.1     Proof of Proposition 1

Working backwards, given (t1, t2 ) , the consumer will choose CP1 over CP2 if:
                                  v1 − t1 − p1 ≥ v2 − t2 − p2

The CPs will set their consumer prices, in effect, to bid for the consumer’s single unit of
attention. Consequently:
    • If v1 + r1 − t1 − a1 ≥ v2 + r2 − t2 − a2 , p2 = a2 − r2 and p1 = v1 − v2 − r2 − (t1 − t2 ) + a2
        (CP1 is used)
    • If v1 + r1 − t1 − a1 ≤ v2 + r2 − t2 − a2 , p1 = a1 − r1 and p2 = v2 − v1 − r1 − (t2 − t1 ) + a1
        (CP2 is used)
Thus, there are two cases:
   • If v1 + r1 − t1 − a1 ≥ v2 + r2 − t2 − a2 , then the ISP’s profits are t1 + a1 − c . If it wants
       to achieve this outcome, then t1 + a1 ≤ v1 − v2 + (r1 − r2 ) + t2 + a2 ; which also implies
       that      p1 + r1 ≥ a1 .     For     the     consumer      to     participate,      however,
        v1 − t1 − p1 ≥ 0 ⇒ v2 + r2 ≥ t2 + a2 . Thus, the ISP sets t2 + a2 = v2 + r2 and
        t1 + a1 = v1 + r1 and earns profit of v1 + r1 − c . Both consumer and CP surpluses are
       zero.
   • If v1 + r1 − t1 − a1 ≤ v2 + r2 − t2 − a2 , the same prices t2 + a2 = v2 + r2 and
        t1 + a1 = v1 + r1 maximise ISP profits.

Notice that, in each case, pi = ai − ri while the sum of consumer and CP access charges
are constant. However, (static) social welfare is maximized as the ISP wants to structure
prices at the point of indifference to maximise vi + ri − c . To see this, given pi, the
consumer will choose CP1 over CP2 if:
                            v1 − t1 − a1 + r1 ≥ v2 − t 2 − a2 + r2 or

                               v1 + r1 − ( v2 + r2 ) ≥ t1 + a1 − ( t 2 + a2 )

Thus, if t2 + a2 = v2 + r2 and t1 + a1 = v1 + r1 , the consumer’s choice will align with the
(static) socially optimal outcome.

7.2     Proof of Proposition 2

We begin with content provider net neutrality. In this case, the ISP can set a single access
price, a, to each CP. Note that since it was ai + ti that mattered for everything under no
regulation, then regardless of a, the ISP will choose (t1, t2 ) to achieve the same outcome
as above. That is, the prices charged by the CPs to the consumers will be determined by:
    • If v1 + r1 − t1 − a ≥ v2 + r2 − t 2 − a , p2 = a − r2 and p1 = v1 − v2 − r2 − (t1 − t 2 ) + a
        (CP1 is used)
	                                                                                                      20	  


          •   If v1 + r1 − t1 − a ≤ v2 + r2 − t 2 − a , p1 = a − r1 and p2 = v2 − v1 − r1 − (t 2 − t1 ) + a
              (CP2 is used)
Again, there are two cases:
   • If v1 + r1 − t1 ≥ v2 + r2 − t 2 , then the ISP’s profits are t1 + a − c . If it wants to
       achieve this outcome, then t1 ≤ v1 − v2 + (r1 − r2 ) + t 2 ; which also implies that
        p1 + r1 ≥ a     .    For         the    consumer       to      participate,     however,
        v1 − t1 − p1 ≥ 0 ⇒ v2 + r2 ≥ t 2 + a . Thus, it sets t 2 + a = v2 + r2 and t1 + a = v1 + r1
       and earns profit of v1 + r1 − c . Both consumer and CP surpluses remain at zero.
   • If v1 + r1 − t1 ≤ v2 + r2 − t 2 , the same prices t 2 + a = v2 + r2 and t1 + a = v1 + r1
       maximise ISP profits.
Thus, the ISP profits are exactly the same as would arise under no regulation as are
consumer and CP surplus that remain at zero.

For the case of consumer net neutrality, the outcome is the same and for the same reasons.
In this case, the ISP price to consumers had to be non-discriminatory (i.e., t1 = t 2 = t ),
then if (a1, a2 ) could be chosen freely, the same outcome as under no regulation would
emerge as the prices that maximise ISP profits are t + a2 = v2 + r2 and t + a1 = v1 + r1 .

7.3           Proof of Proposition 3

Given this, in bidding for the consumer’s attention:
   • If v1 + r1 − t − a ≥ v2 + r2 − t − a , p2 = a − r2 and p1 = v1 − v2 − r2 + a (CP1 is used)
   • If v1 + r1 − t − a ≤ v2 + r2 − t − a , p1 = a − r1 and p2 = v2 − v1 − r1 + a (CP2 is used)

Note that, in this case, consumers are not induced to choose one content provider over the
other on the basis of any price directly under the control of the ISP. By contrast, under
weak net neutrality, there was always a way for the ISP to charge content-based prices to
impact on the consumer’s choice.

This means that ISP profits are t + a − c and it sets t + a = min{v1 + r1 ,v2 + r2 } to
maximise those profits. This is because if v1 + r1 ≥ v2 + r2 , p2 = a − r2 and
       p1 = v1 − v2 − r2 + a . Thus, if the ISP sets t + a = v1 + r1 , if the consumer chooses CP1, then
the consumer receives v1 − p1 − t = v2 + r2 − a − t whereas if the consumer chooses CP2, it
receives v2 − p2 − t = v2 + r2 − a − t . In either case, because v1 + r1 ≥ v2 + r2 , the
consumer’s surplus is negative. Thus, it can be seen that the maximum price the ISP can
set is t + a = v2 + r2 .

7.4           Proof of Proposition 4

We begin by not making any assumption regarding the comparison between v1 and v2.
Under no regulation, ISP profits are maximised by setting charges to consumers and
	                                                                                              21	  


content providers so that consumers make the socially optimal decision. It is readily
apparent that this is achieved with ti = vi and ai = ri . Thus, profits are the same as in the
no regulation case above.

Under weak content provider net neutrality, a1 = a2 = a , the ISP can set ti = vi so that the
consumer chooses the optimal CP. To see this, suppose that v1 + r1 > v2 + r2 . Then if
  r1 ≥ r2 by setting a = r1 and t1 = v1 − ε , t2 = v2 where ε is arbitrarily small the ISP will
receive the maximum profits of v1 + r1 − c . However, if r1 < r2 , then, with these same
prices, the ISP can receive maximum profits as it can guide the consumer towards CP1
and extract the other rents from CP1. Thus, the same outcome as no regulation occurs.

Now suppose that v1 ≥ v2 . Under weak consumer net neutrality, when t is non-
discriminatory, as it is under strong net neutrality, the ISP cannot guide the consumer at
all. In this case, the consumer chooses CP1 and so the ISP sets t = v1 and ai = ri . It
should be readily apparent that this same outcome will arise under strong net neutrality
with t = v1 and a = r1 .

If v1 < v2 then, so long as it can set different prices to consumers, the ISP can set
t1 = v1 − ε , t2 = v2 to guide the consumer to the correct CP leaving a little surplus with the
consumer for choosing CP1. Thus, under no regulation and under weak content provider
net neutrality, the socially optimal outcome arises.

By contrast, under weak consumer net neutrality or strong net neutrality, the ISP has no
mechanism by which it can guide the consumer to choose CP1. The consumer will
always choose CP2 and so the ISP maximises profits by charging t = v2 and a = r2 .

7.5           Proof of Proposition 5

Under weak content provider net neutrality, suppose that the ISP sets ti + a = vi + ri and
ti + A = vi + Δ i + ri . This implies that A – a is a constant. In addition, suppose that
A − a = Δ1 . This implies that CP2 will never choose the fast lane. Consequently,
       p2 = a − r2 and p1 = v1 + Δ1 − v2 − r2 − (t1 − t2 ) + a so that the consumer chooses CP1. In
this case, p1 = v1 + Δ1 − t1 = A − r1 so that CP1 earns zero surplus. Note that CP1 gains no
advantage if it chooses the slow lane and thus, this is an equilibrium outcome.
Under strong net neutrality, content-based price discrimination is not possible in any
form. In this case, suppose that, as in Proposition 4, the ISP sets t + a = v2 + r2 and,
therefore, that t + A = v2 + Δ1 + r2 . Consequently, CP2 will never choose the fast lane and
  p2 = a − r2 and p1 = v1 + Δ1 − t          .   In    this     case, the     consumer     receives
  v1 + Δ1 − p1 − t = v2 − t = a − r2 = 0        .            However,        CP1          receives
	                                                                                            22	  


 p1 + r1 − A = v1 + Δ1 − t + r1 − A = v1 + r1 − (v2 + r2 ) and would no more if it did not choose
the fast lane. Finally, the ISP receives v2 + Δ1 + r2 − C .

	  
	                                                                                     23	  


8      References

Becker, G.S., D.W. Carlton and H.S. Sider (2010), “Net Neutrality and Consumer
       Welfare,” Journal of Competition Law and Economics, 6 (3), pp.497-519.

Cheng, H.K., S. Bandyopadhyay and H. Guo (2009), “The Debate on Net Neutrality: A
      Policy Perspective.” Information Systems Research.

Choi, J.P. (2010), “Optimal Tariffs and the Choice of Technology: Discriminatory Tariffs
        vs. The ‘Most Favored Nation’ Clause.” Journal of International Economics, Vol.
        58, pp.560–579.

Choi, J.P., D-S. Jeon and B.C. Kim (2013), “Net Neutrality, Business Models and
       Internet Interconnection,” mimeo., UNSW.

Choi, J.P. and B.C. Kim (2010), “Net Neutrality and Investment Incentives,” RAND
       Journal of Economics, 41, pp.446–471.

Economides, N. (2008), “Net Neutrality, Non-Discrimination and Digital Distribution of
      Content through the Internet,” A Journal of Law and Policy for the Information
      Society, 4, pp.209–233. 

Economides, N. And B. Hermalin (2012), “The economics of network neutrality,” RAND
      Journal of Economics, 43 (4), pp.602-629.

Economides, N. and J. Tag (2012), “Network Neutrality on the Internet: A Two-Sided
      Market Analysis,” Information Economics and Policy, 24 (2), pp.91-104.

Gans, J.S. and S.P. King (2003), “The Neutrality of Interchange Fees in Payment
      Systems,” Topics in Economic Analysis and Policy, 3 (1), Article 1.

Hermalin, B.E. and M.L. Katz (2007), “The Economics of Product-Line Restrictions with
      an Application to the Network Neutrality Debate.” Information Economics and
      Policy, 19, pp. 215–248.

Lee, R. S. and T. Wu (2009), “Subsidizing creativity through network design: Zero-
       pricing and net neutrality,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 23, 61–76.

Reggiani, C. and T. Valletti (2011), “Net neutrality and innovation at the core and at the
      edge,” mimeo., Imperial.

Wu, T. (2003), “Network Neutrality, Broadband Discrimination.” Journal on
     Telecommunications and High Technology Law, 2, pp.141–178.
