                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              THE CAREER PROSPECTS OF OVEREDUCATED AMERICANS

                                             Brian Clark
                                           Clément Joubert
                                           Arnaud Maurel

                                        Working Paper 20167
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20167


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2014




Clement Joubert and Arnaud Maurel gratefully acknowledge financial support from the W.E. Up-john
Institute for Employment Research through the Early Career Research Grant No. 13-141-02B. We
thank Peter Arcidiacono, Pat Bayer, Donna Gilleskie, Joop Hartog, Lisa Kahn, Francis Kramarz,
SangYoon (Tim) Lee, Brian McManus, Hessel Oosterbeek, Seth Sanders, Ken Wolpin, Shintaro
Yamaguchiand the attendees of the 2013 North American Summer Meeting of the Econometric
Society (Los Angeles),the workshop "Empirical Research in the Economics of Education'' (Rovira
iVirgili University, Oct.2013),the workshop"Skill Mismatch: Microeconomic Evidence and
MacroeconomicRelevance'' (Mannheim,April 2014), and seminar participants at Duke, John Hopkins
and UNC - Chapel Hill for useful commentsand suggestions. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflectthe views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Brian Clark, Clément Joubert, and Arnaud Maurel. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Career Prospects of Overeducated Americans
Brian Clark, Clément Joubert, and Arnaud Maurel
NBER Working Paper No. 20167
May 2014
JEL No. J24,J31,J62

                                           ABSTRACT

In this paper we analyze career dynamics for the large share of U.S. workers who have more schooling
than their peers in the same occupation. We use data from the NLSY79 combined with the CPS to
analyze transitions into and out of overeducated employment, together with the corresponding effects
on wages. Overeducation is a fairly persistent phenomenon at the aggregate and individual levels,
with 66% of workers remaining overeducated after one year. Overeducation is not only more common,
but also more persistent among blacks and low-AFQT individuals. Further, the hazard rate out of
overeducation drops by about 60% during the first 5 years spent overeducated. However, the estimation
of a mixed proportional hazard model suggests that this is attributable to selection on unobservables
rather than true duration dependence. Finally, overeducation is associated with lower current as well
as future wages, which points to the existence of scarring effects.


Brian Clark                                       Arnaud Maurel
Department of Economics                           Department of Economics
Duke University                                   Duke University
213 Social Sciences Building                      213 Social Sciences Building
Box 90097                                         Box 90097
Durham, NC 27708                                  Durham, NC 27708
brian.c.clark@duke.edu                            and NBER
                                                  apm16@duke.edu
Clément Joubert
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
joubertc@email.unc.edu
1       Introduction
As American students accumulate college loan debt (1.08 trillion dollars as of December
31, 2013, Source: NY Fed), there is a growing concern that expensive skills acquired
in college may be underutilized in low-paying jobs. Existing cross-sectional studies es-
timate that around a third of American workers are “overeducated”, i.e. have more
schooling than necessary for their job (see Leuven & Oosterbeek, 2011). To the extent
that these workers earn substantially less than their matched peers (returns to surplus
schooling average 4.3%, or about half of the returns to required schooling), overedu-
cation may account for a sizeable portion of within-schooling level wage dispersion.1
At the aggregate level, overeducation could reflect skill mismatch, and be inefficient
relative to an allocation of workers to jobs that require their actual level of education.2

In order to understand how much of a problem overeducation really is, it is crucial
to go beyond the cross-sectional stylized facts and investigate longitudinal patterns.
This paper provides the first analysis of the career dynamics of overeducated U.S work-
ers. Specifically, we use the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979 (NLSY79),
combined with the pooled 1989-1991 waves of the Current Population Survey (CPS), to
analyze (1) the determinants of overeducation, (2) how overeducation incidence changes
along the career, and (3) how wages differ across overeducated, matched or underedu-
cated employment, and as a function of previous overeducated employment spells.
    1
     These returns to surplus schooling are obtained by Leuven & Oosterbeek (2011) by averaging
estimates from 151 studies.
   2
     Throughout the paper, we use “matched” as a shorthand for being neither in an overeducated or
in an undereducated employment spell. Overeducated (undereducated) employment spells correspond
to situations where individuals have more (less) schooling than “required” for their job (see page
5 for a discussion of the notion of required education). In this paper we use “overeducation” or
“overeducated employment” in place of the more accurate “employment spell in which a worker is
currently overeducated”. While our analysis primarily focuses on overeducation, it is worth noting
that undereducation is also relatively common, in particular among individuals who have completed
14 years of education, and, as such, has the potential to account for some of the wage dispersion within
this schooling category.


                                                   2
While the literature has paid relatively little attention to the longitudinal dimension,
analyzing transitions into and out of overeducated employment, together with their
effects on wages, is key to disentangling the role played by labor market frictions versus
other factors such as selection on ability, compensating differentials and career mobility
prospects.3 For example, if overeducation was due only to search frictions, one would
expect this type of mismatch to be transitory and concentrated early in the career. Con-
versely, selection on ability, compensating wage differentials or career mobility motives
would generate persistence in the overeducation patterns.4 The individual persistence
and duration dependence of overeducated employment, together with the wage penal-
ties associated with it, are also important for the design of unemployment insurance
and training programs. For instance, encouraging early exit from unemployment may
push more workers into overeducated work with potentially negative long-term effects
on earnings.5

The question of overeducation was first brought to the attention of economists and
policy-makers by Freeman (1976), who argued that excess supply of college graduates
was causing the decline in the college wage premium observed in the U.S. during the
1970’s. While the cross-sectional properties of overeducation are well-studied (see, e.g.,
Verdugo & Verdugo, 1989; Alba-Ramirez, 1993; Kiker et al., 1997; Hartog, 2000), still
little is known about the evolution of overeducation over the life cycle, although, as
argued above, dynamics are of clear interest in this context. U.S. evidence is particularly
   3
      The career mobility factor was initially investigated by Sicherman & Galor (1990). The general
idea is that high-skilled workers may face higher promotion probabilities in low-skilled jobs. It follows
that forward-looking individuals may choose to become overeducated.
    4
      See Gottschalk & Hansen (2003) who show that, in a model with two sectors, two skills (college and
non-college) and heterogeneous preferences for each sector, some college workers may choose to work
in the non-college sector. Uncertainty in returns to schooling is another channel which could generate
persistence in overeducation, since some individuals may find it ex post optimal to be overeducated
(see Lee et al., 2014).
    5
      In a recent paper, Baert et al. (2013) show that accepting an overeducated job, versus staying
unemployed, has the effect of postponing access to a matched job for a sample of Flemish youth.


                                                   3
scarce.6 A notable exception is Rubb (2003) who provides evidence from the CPS
that overeducation displays a substantial degree of persistence, with around 30% of
the individuals overeducated in year t switching to a job which matches their level of
education in year t + 1. While duration dependence and dynamic selection effects imply
that these transition rates are likely to decrease over the length of the spell, the CPS
panels are too short to address this question adequately.

It is worth pointing out that while we borrow the wording “required level of education”
from the existing literature, defining and measuring that concept is not a trivial task.
In this paper we use a statistical measure, in a similar spirit as, e.g., Verdugo & Verdugo
(1989) and Kiker et al. (1997). Namely, we compute the mode of the distribution of
schooling in the 1989-1991 CPS for each occupation in the 1980 3-digit Census Occu-
pation classification. We also restrict the CPS sample used to compute the mode to
individuals in the same birth cohorts as the NLSY79 respondents. The required levels
of education are then defined as those within 15 percentage points of the schooling
mode.7 The typical overeducated worker in our sample has two or four years of college
education, but is working as a secretary or a cashier, say, among a majority of high
school graduates. Relative to alternative approaches in the literature, and in particular
those measuring the required levels of education with the General Educational Develop-
ment (GED) scale provided by the Dictionary of Occupational Titles (see, e.g., Hartog,
1980, and Rumberger, 1987), this approach is arguably more transparent and has the
benefit of directly generating requirements in terms of years of education. As such,
   6
     A few studies have used German, British, Canadian or Australian data to estimate panel wage
regressions (Bauer, 2002; Frenette, 2004), dynamic random effect models of overeducation exit (Mavro-
maras et al., 2013) or simply document overeducation status transitions (Dolton & Vignoles, 2000).
   7
     Using this type of conservative measure of mismatch allows us to mitigate the risk of misclassifi-
cation, which could arise if two or more occupations with different required levels of education were
aggregated up at the 3-digit level. Depending on the aggregation level used for the educational at-
tainment, our measure of overeducation yields incidence levels of between 18% and 25% among all
workers, and as much as about 40% among college graduates.


                                                  4
while our required schooling variable should be a pretty good indicator of the amount
of schooling needed to perform well in an occupation, it is most cleanly interpreted as
the schooling attainment of a typical worker in one’s occupation.

We document longitudinal patterns of overeducation for the NLSY79 cohort up to 12
years after labor market entry. Overeducation incidence within the cohort decreases
as workers progress through their careers, but remains sizeable 12 years after the first
job. This suggests that, while frictions are likely to play a role, we need to bring other
economic mechanisms into the fold to explain this long-term persistence. Overeducation
is also a fairly persistent phenomenon at the individual level, with around 66% of
overeducated workers remaining in overeducated employment after one year. We find
that blacks and low cognitive ability workers (as measured by their AFQT scores) are
not only more likely to be overeducated, but also less likely to switch into matched
jobs. That is, the longitudinal dimension magnifies the cross-sectional black-white and
cognitive ability gaps.

The hazard rate out of overeducated work is also strongly decreasing in overeducation
duration, and drops by about 60% after five years. We estimate a mixed propor-
tional hazard model (Elbers & Ridder, 1982) of overeducated employment duration to
investigate whether this decreasing hazard rate reflects selection on unobservables or
true duration dependence. While composition effects based on observable characteris-
tics explain away some of the duration dependence, further controlling for unobserved
heterogeneity largely wipes it out. In other words, the duration of the overeducated
employment spell does not have a significant impact on the probability to exit overe-
ducation. Instead, we identify large unobservable differences in the hazard rate: while
overeducation is found to be very persistent for 30% of the sample, the rest is much
more likely to exit quickly, consistent with a frictional view of overeducation.



                                            5
We then revisit the classical augmented wage regression used in the overeducation liter-
ature.8 In particular, we stratify the estimation based on the unobserved heterogeneity
types identified in the duration model. We show that individuals with lower propensities
to exit overeducated employment also exhibit lower returns to schooling. Importantly,
we also find that past overeducation entails a sizeable wage penalty of between 2.6%
and 4.2%, which persists over four years. Past overeducation is also associated with
lower returns to tenure in future matched employment spells. This provides a likely
candidate mechanism behind the negative wage effects of graduating during a recession
recently discussed in the literature (Kahn, 2010, Liu et al., 2012, Oreopoulos et al.,
2012, and Altonji et al., 2013), since overeducation is likely to be more frequent during
recessions, consistent with the cyclical upgrading literature (Bils & McLaughlin, 2001).

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the data used in
the analysis and the construction of the required schooling measure. Section 3 discusses
the determinants of overeducation in our sample. Section 4 documents the longitudinal
patterns in the incidence of overeducated employment along the career. Section 5
estimates a mixed proportional hazard model of overeducated employment duration
allowing us to separate true duration dependence from dynamic selection on observed
and unobserved worker attributes. Section 6 presents results pertaining to the effect of
overeducation on wages, and Section 7 concludes. All tables and figures are collected
in the Appendix.
   8
    Augmented wage regressions, pioneered by Duncan & Hoffman (1981) replace the usual years-of-
education regressor with three terms: years of required education in the current occupation, years
of education in excess of that required level and years of education below that required level. The
corresponding coefficients are interpreted as returns to required education, returns to overeducation
and returns to undereducation.




                                                 6
2       Data
Our main data source is the NLSY79 which is a nationally representative sample of
12,686 young men and women who were 14-22 years old when they were first surveyed
in 1979.9 We pool the observations for the 6,111 individuals that comprise the core
civilian cross section of the NLSY79, from the 1982 to the 1994 rounds, which results in
79,443 person-year observations.10 Then we cut 5,947 person-year observations with a
level of education that was unreported or less than 12 years; 22,272 where the individual
had not entered the labor market permanently; and 6,228 that were non-interviews.11
After making these cuts, we are left with a total of 44,996 observations corresponding
to 4,895 distinct individuals.

The main variables of interest are the highest level of completed education, the oc-
cupation (measured using the 1980 3-digit Census code) and the hourly wage at the
time of each interview.12 Besides these, the variables used in our analysis include age,
minority status, gender and place of birth, cognitive and non-cognitive skill measures,
    9
     Of the 12,686 individuals interviewed in the initial 1979 wave, these data provide information for
respondents on a yearly basis from 1979 to 1994 and biyearly afterwards.The initial wave is comprised
of a core civilian cross-section of 6,111 and an oversample of 5,295 black, Hispanic, and economically
disadvantaged individuals born between January 1, 1957 and Dec. 31 1964. This is further supple-
mented by a military sample of 1,280 individuals born in the same period. We only keep the core
cross-sectional sample of the NLSY79 in order to maintain a consistent sample between the NLSY79
and the CPS.
  10
     We restrict our sample to these years because it is the largest contiguous period where the NLSY79
reports the 1980 Census Occupation codes on an annual basis. We use the 1980 codes because they
better reflect the set of occupations available over the period of interest than the 1970 codes.
  11
     We define the date of entry as the first survey year where (1) the individual is employed in the
civilian labor force, (2) works more than 26 weeks out of the year, (3) is not enrolled in school as of
May 1st of the survey year, and (4) has reached her highest level of education over the sample period
1982-1994.
  12
     In practice, we use the occupation and hourly wage corresponding to the current or most recent
job at the time of the interview. When individuals hold multiple jobs at the same time, we use the
occupation and wage corresponding to the job in which the respondent worked the most hours. We
adjust for inflation by reporting all wages in constant dollars and then drop the top and bottom 2.5%
of the reported person-year wages for every survey wave.



                                                  7
geographical location and the corresponding local unemployment rate, family charac-
teristics, a measure of hazards associated with the current occupation and employment
history (see Table 1).


2.1     Measuring required schooling

The NLSY79 does not have direct measures of required schooling in the job occupied
by the respondent. In this paper, we use a statistical measure for the required level
of education, in a similar spirit as, e.g., Verdugo & Verdugo (1989) and Kiker et al.
(1997). Namely, for each given occupation in the 1980 3-digit Census Occupation
classification, we compute the required level of education from the pooled monthly
samples of the 1989-1991 waves of the CPS.13 In order to obtain a sample that matches
the NLSY79 sample, we restrict the age range within each year of the CPS to that
of the NLSY79 cohorts at that time (see Appendix A for additional details on the
CPS sample used in the analysis). Required schooling in a given occupation code
is then defined as the mode of the distribution of the levels of education among the
individuals working in that occupation.14 For occupations such that the frequencies of
two or more schooling levels are within 15 percentage points of each other, we choose to
use a more conservative definition of over (and under)-education. Specifically, workers
whose schooling attainments fall within the range defined by these schooling levels are
classified as matched, while those with a higher (lower) level of education are defined
as overeducated (undereducated). It is important to note that our results are robust
  13
     See Yamaguchi (2012), who provides evidence based on task complexity that using occupations at
the 3-digit level is key to properly capture the heterogeneity of jobs.
  14
     Finite sample variability should not be a major concern here given the large number of observations
(on average above 1,000) which are used to estimate the mode of each occupation. See, e.g., Dutta
& Goswami (2010), who show that, for a Bernoulli distribution with sample size larger than 100, the
mode of the empirical distribution matches the population mode with a probability close to 0.9.




                                                   8
to the choice of other cutoffs.15 In order to mitigate concerns with classification error
on attained schooling, we collapse our years of education variable into four categories:
12-13 years, 14-15, 16-17, and over 18 years of completed education. This classification
is natural since each category, simply referred to as 12, 14, 16 and 18 years of schooling
in the rest of the paper, corresponds to high school graduates, two-year and four-year
college graduates, and graduate school.16
A clear advantage of this method is that it generates requirements directly in terms of
years of education. This is in contrast to a common approach in the literature which
maps occupations into skills first, and then skills into years of education (using, for
example, the GED scale). In practice the latter approach is problematic, in particular
since there is no clear consensus on the mapping between the skill content of occupa-
tions, as measured by the GED scale, and years of schooling (Leuven & Oosterbeek,
2011). On the other hand, one limitation of our measure of required schooling is that it
is based on the distribution of schooling attainment among workers employed in a given
occupation, which is an equilibrium outcome of labor supply and demand decisions.17
Ultimately, one can simply think about the workers we identify as overeducated as those
who have more schooling than their peers, in the sense of having more schooling than
the modal worker in their current occupation.
  15
     Specifically, we considered four alternative definitions of over (and under)-education, using (i) the
mode only (i.e. no cutoff), (ii) a 5% cutoff, (iii) a 10% cutoff and (iv) a 20% cutoff. Our results were
overall very similar to those obtained using our baseline definition.
  16
     It is also possible that errors in the occupation codes recorded in each interview of the NLSY79
could generate artificial transitions between overeducation statuses. In that case, our estimates of
overeducation persistence could still be interpreted as lower bounds.
  17
     It follows that fluctuations in demand and supply will affect that distribution even if the actual
skills required to perform the job have not changed.




                                                    9
2.2    Summary statistics

Table 1 presents summary statistics for the NLSY79 variables used in our analysis. Of
the 44,996 observations in our final sample, 84.7% are employed, 10.6% are out of the
labor force, and 4.8% are unemployed. 66.1% are high school graduates, 12.9% have
two years and 14.8% have four years of college education, and 6.3% have some graduate
school experience.

Figure 1 shows the distribution of years of overeducation, generated by subtracting an
individual’s observed highest level of completed education, from the level of education
required by their occupation. More than half of all observations have a perfect match of
observed and required education, while progressively smaller fractions exhibit 1 or more
years of education level mismatch. Comparing the two panels shows that collapsing
schooling attainment into four categories preserves the shape of the distribution. It also
mitigates the concern that small errors in the measure of years of schooling attainment
will generate overeducation status misclassification.

In Table 2, we further break down overeducation status by our categorical measure
of attained schooling. It is apparent that overeducation is mechanically absent from
the lowest schooling level (12 years of education) while undereducation is absent from
the highest schooling level (18 years of education). Consistent with the existence of
a relatively small number of jobs requiring 14 or 18 years of education, a very large
fraction of the observations corresponding to those schooling levels exhibit education
level mismatch. Although a larger share of jobs require 16 years of education, it is
interesting to note that 37.4% of college graduates are overeducated, typically working
in a job requiring 12 years of education. Table 3 lists the 10 occupations accounting for
the most number of observations in overeducated employment. Secretaries and Sales
workers account for the largest numbers of overeducated workers. For most of the


                                           10
occupations in the table the modal worker has 12 years of schooling, and the typical
overeducated worker has two or four years of college education. One notable exception
is teachers, which typically have 16 years of schooling in the CPS.



3      The determinants of overeducation
Before moving on to the analysis of the career dynamics of overeducated workers, we
start by documenting the cross-sectional determinants of overeducation in our sam-
ple. We report in Table 4 the estimation results from a Probit model, which allows
the probability of overeducation to depend on a set of socio-demographic characteris-
tics, ability measures, family characteristics, a measure of hazards associated with the
current occupation and employment history.18 We stratify the regression by school-
ing level, consistent with our focus throughout the paper on overeducation as a labor
market, rather than educational, phenomenon.

AFQT scores exhibit a negative and significant relationship with overeducation at all
schooling attainments. This negative relationship between cognitive ability and the
likelihood of overeducation, which is in line with prior findings in the literature (see,
e.g., Allen & Van der Velden, 2001 and Chevalier & Lindley, 2009), is consistent with
ability and schooling attainment being labor market substitutes.

Also in accordance with existing studies, females are about 5 to 13% more likely to be
overeducated than males. Women may place more value on non-pecuniary character-
istics associated with low-requirement jobs, such as flexibility in hours worked or their
proximity to the family house, making it easier to combine work and home produc-
tion activities. Alternatively, this could reflect discrimination on the part of employers.
  18
    In practice we use a partial maximum likelihood estimator, clustering standard errors at the
individual level. The resulting inference is robust to serial correlation in the unobserved determinants
of overeducation.

                                                  11
At any rate, given the existence of a substantial and persistent wage penalty of being
overeducated (discussed in Section 6), this result implies that overeducation is an im-
portant aspect of the gender wage gap, which is absent from most of the literature on
this question.19

Noteworthy, there is also a strong positive correlation between minority status and
overeducation at the 14 years of schooling level. Blacks and Hispanics are 15.9% and
12.2%, respectively, likelier than whites to be overeducated among that group. Among
college graduates and above, the relationship becomes insignificant, which is possibly a
result of a strong selection into college based on unobservable skills that are negatively
correlated with overeducation.

Lastly, the evidence regarding the theory that overeducated workers accept lower wages
in exchange for better non-pecuniary job characteristics is mixed. Workers in hazardous
jobs are actually more likely to be overeducated at all three levels of schooling. On the
other hand, overeducated workers are more likely to hold several jobs (except for those
with 18 or more years of schooling), which possibly reflects a higher flexibility for these
overeducated jobs. These results complement previous studies that have interpreted
a negative correlation between overeducation and job satisfaction as evidence against
the compensating wage differential model of overeducation (see, e.g., Hersch, 1991, and
Korpi & Tåhlin, 2009).



4       The dynamics of overeducation
Figure 2 displays the aggregate incidence of overeducated employment over the first 12
years of work for the NLSY79 cohort, for workers with at least some college. Overall,
the incidence of overeducation decreases by about 12 percentage points, from 62.3% to
 19
      One notable exception is the early analysis by Frank (1978).


                                                  12
50.4%, over the first 12 years of respondents’ careers.20 While the decline in aggregate
overeducation rates as the career progresses does suggest that overeducation is in part
frictional, the most striking feature of this graph is that the incidence of overeducation
remains very high more than 10 years after labor market entry. Overall, this is a clear
indication that overeducation is a persistent phenomenon.

In Figure 3, we further disaggregate this graph along several observable characteristics.
Blacks do not exhibit the same reduction in overeducation as whites (Panels 1 and 2).
Similarly, Panels 3 and 4 show that overeducation among females decreases much less
than among males. Lastly, individuals at higher AFQT quartiles see a larger decline
in overeducation incidence than those at lower quartiles (Panels 5 through 8). Overall,
these results suggest that overeducated black, female and low-AFQT workers are less
likely to receive and/or accept offers from matched jobs. These dynamic patterns
therefore accentuate their already higher propensity to be overeducated.

Individuals patterns point to a similar story. Table 5 presents the fractions of individuals
who are non-employed (defined as unemployed or out of the labor force), undereducated,
overeducated or matched at interview time, conditional on the status reported during
the interview one year before, for workers with at least some postsecondary education.
Overeducation is also persistent at the individual level, with 65.9% of workers remaining
overeducated after one year. This fraction is 20 points higher than the unconditional
overeducation rate (46.3%). By comparison, non-employed individuals have a smaller
49.0% chance of remaining in that state.21

Transition rates are further broken down by gender and race in Tables 6 and 7. Men are
  20
     Using a self-reported measure of overeducation, Dolton & Vignoles (2000) also find that its inci-
dence among a 1980 cohort of U.K. university graduates decreased over time, from 38% to 30% 6 years
after graduating.
  21
     With a different measure of overeducation and using CPS data, Rubb (2003) obtains a level of
persistence for overeducated individuals of 73%.



                                                 13
slightly more likely than women to remain in an overeducated job but also more likely
to transition into matched jobs. Differences by race are sizeable: i) overeducation is
more persistent among blacks relative to whites, ii) overeducated blacks are much less
likely than whites to transition to a matched job, and iii) these matched spells are less
persistent for blacks than for whites. Finally, as illustrated in Table 8, the persistence
of overeducation decreases monotonically with AFQT scores. All of these patterns in
individual transitions confirm that the aggregate persistence described earlier does not
result from cancelling flows in and out of overeducation.

Table 5 also shows that transitions into overeducation are equally likely among work-
ers who were undereducated, matched or non-employed in the previous year. Among
males, however, non-employed workers are much likelier to transition into overeduca-
tion than matched or undereducated workers (Table 6). Across all categories of workers,
but especially for black and low-AFQT workers, the non-employed are more likely to
transition into overeducation than into matched jobs (Table 7 and 8). In addition,
transitions into matched jobs are more common among the overeducated than the non-
employed. Taken together, these patterns suggest that for some workers overeducation
is a pathway from non-employment into matched employment.

Finally, the NLSY79 data allows us to go beyond annual transitions, and report the
hazard rates out of overeducated employment as a function of the duration of overed-
ucation (see Figure 4).22 After 3 years being overeducated, the probability of exiting
that state, defined as starting a new matched or undereducated employment spell, drops
from 39% to only 20%. This number further drops to 15% and 10% after 5 and 10 years
respectively. Overall, while this pattern is consistent with a negative duration depen-
dence associated with overeducated employment, it could also result from compositional
  22
    For any given year t, these hazard rates are computed as the number of individuals leaving overe-
ducated employment in year t, divided by the number of individuals who are still overeducated at the
beginning of year t.

                                                 14
effects (permanent heterogeneity correlated with the hazard rate out of overeducated
employment). We attempt to tell these two effects apart in the next section.



5      Duration dependence versus dynamic selection
The results discussed so far provide some suggestive evidence of duration dependence
in overeducation status, with a strongly decreasing hazard rate out of overeducation.
However, in order to establish the role played by true, rather than spurious duration
dependence, we need to control for dynamic selection on worker attributes.

Specifically, we assume that the duration of the first spell of overeducated employment is
determined by a mixed proportional hazard model, where the baseline duration follows
a Weibull distribution.23 The probability distribution function (pdf.) and cumulative
distribution function (cdf.) of the duration of the overeducation spell, conditional on
the set of observed individual characteristics xi and the unobserved heterogeneity νi ,
are respectively given by:24




                  f (t|xi , νi , α, θ) = exp (xi θ) αtα−1 νi exp [− exp (xi θ) tα νi ] ,         (5.1)

                 F (t|xi , νi , α, θ) = 1 − exp [− exp (xi θ) tα νi ] .                          (5.2)


Following Heckman & Singer (1984), we assume that the unobserved heterogeneity
follows a discrete distribution with R points of support. The parameters (α, θ) and
the unobserved heterogeneity distribution are then estimated by maximizing the log-
  23
     By definition, this model is estimated on individuals who have at least one overeducated spell,
which mechanically excludes individuals with only 12 years of schooling.
  24
     While using a parametric specification allows us to get more precise estimates, it is important to
note that the mixed proportional hazard model is identified nonparametrically from single-spell data
(see Elbers & Ridder, 1982).


                                                   15
likelihood of the data, which is given by:



                  N
                  X
             `=         [di log f (ti |xi , α, θ) + (1 − di ) log [1 − F (Ti |xi , α, θ)]]
                  i=1


where N is the number of individuals in the sample with at least one overeducated
spell, di = 1 if individual i leaves the overeducated state before the end of the survey
(0 otherwise), ti is the duration of the first overeducation spell (observed if di = 1)
and Ti is the length of time to the end of the survey. The pdf. of the overeducation
spell duration is given by f (t|xi , α, θ) = Eν (f (t|xi , νi , α, θ)) and the cdf. is given by
F (t|xi , α, θ) = Eν (F (t|xi , νi , α, θ)), where Eν (.) denotes the expectation operator with
respect to the distribution of ν. Throughout our analysis, we consider that an overed-
ucation spell ends when the individual starts a new employment spell in an occupation
which does not require less than his level of schooling.25
It is interesting to compare the estimates for R = 1 (i.e., without unobserved hetero-
geneity) and R = 2 (i.e., with two unobserved heterogeneity types).26 Columns 2,4
and 6 of Table 9 report the estimation results corresponding to the case without un-
observed heterogeneity with alternative sets of individual controls. The estimated α is
well below one (between 0.77 and 0.84 depending on the specification), which means
that the hazard out of overeducation is strongly decreasing in the duration of overedu-
cation even after controlling for observed heterogeneity. In other words, while part of
  25
      The NLSY79 allows us to compute the required level of education only for the current or most
recent job at the time of each interview (the “CPS job”). To keep the exposition simple, the duration
model we present in the text ignores the existence of job spells that might have occurred in between
two interviews. We also estimated a model that explicitly takes into account these between-interview
employment spells, treating the corresponding overeducation status as missing, which resulted in neg-
ligible differences in the estimation results (available upon request).
   26
      We estimated the model with more than two types, but including these additional types did not
significantly improve the fit of the model. It resulted in higher BIC criteria than the model with two
types while attributing similar values for the key parameters.



                                                     16
this negative duration dependence is attributable to selection on observables, as shown
by the increase in the estimated α parameter going from specification (3) to (1), the
exit rate is still declining with the duration of the overeducation spell after controlling
for an extensive set of observed characteristics.

By contrast, once we allow for unobserved heterogeneity, we obtain values for α that
are very close to one, signifying the absence of true duration dependence (Table 9,
columns 1, 3, and 5). In other words, the duration of the first overeducated em-
ployment spell does not seem to have a significant impact on the probability to exit
overeducation. The estimation results point to the existence of two groups of individu-
als with markedly different dynamics: the first group has a low hazard (type 1, 28.9%
of the ever-overeducated in the sample) while the second group is much more likely to
exit overeducation quickly (type 2, 71.1%). As type 2s exit the pool of overeducated
individuals, the probability that a random individual exits overeducation declines, as
she is more and more likely to be a low-hazard, type 1 individual.
                                                                        V1
The ratio between the two unobserved heterogeneity parameters is        V2
                                                                             = 0.11, which
implies that type 2s exit overeducation almost 10 times as fast as type 1s. Interestingly,
the stark difference in hazard rates between the two unobserved groups suggests that
overeducation follows different mechanisms in each case. The high exit rate in group
2 is consistent with a frictional view of overeducation. For the remaining, low-hazard
third of the sample, it could be that their aptitude (after controlling for AFQT) is not
sufficient for jobs that match their level of formal schooling. Alternatively, they may
have preferences for non-pecuniary, unobserved job characteristics found in some of the
jobs that require less schooling, thus translating into highly persistent overeducation.
In the next section we explore these ideas further as we examine whether the two types
differ in the wage patterns they exhibit.



                                            17
The coefficients on observable characteristics allow us to complement and refine the
analysis of the raw transition dynamics presented in Section 4. The negative coefficient
on blacks in all specifications of the duration model implies that the lower exit rates out
of overeducation for that group are robust to controlling for observable and unobserv-
able heterogeneity. Similarly, the positive effect of AFQT scores on overeducation exit
also carries over from the raw transitions into the mixed proportional hazard model.
The coefficient for women is also significantly negative when the full set of observable
characteristics is included in the proportional hazard model. However once unobserved
heterogeneity is taken into account, being female no longer has a direct effect on the
probability of exiting overeducation. This runs against the notion that discrimination
would keep women in jobs where they are overeducated.

Lastly, an interesting finding is that time spent unemployed in the past has a negative
effect on overeducation exit. This result complements a previous finding in the literature
that longer time spent unemployed reduces the probability of finding a job (see e.g.
Kroft et al., 2013). It also suggests that higher overeducation persistence is one of the
mechanisms through which past unemployment affects future wages (see e.g. Schmieder
et al., 2013).



6     Effects of overeducation on wages

6.1    Wage dynamics

While the regressions found in the literature focus on the cross-sectional correlation
between current overeducation and wages, we examine whether initial overeducation
is also associated with lower wages later in the career. Figure 5 describes the median
hourly wage among workers with 14, 16 and 18 years of education as they progress


                                            18
through their career, both unconditional and conditional on their overeducation status.
The striking result here is that the penalties from overeducation at the start of the
career appear very persistent over time for the first two schooling categories (14 and
16 years). Notably, this feature is consistent with the existence of long-lasting scarring
effects of being overeducated at the start of the career. In the following sections, we
provide additional evidence of these effects by showing that the negative association
between past overeducated employment and wages still holds after controlling for ob-
served heterogeneity (including AFQT scores and measures of non-cognitive skills), and
for the unobserved heterogeneity types identified in the duration analysis.


6.2    Augmented wage regressions

The impact of overeducation on wages has been measured in the literature by applying
OLS to the following log-wage equation introduced by Duncan & Hoffman (1981):


                      log wit = αr Sitr + αo Sito + αu Situ + Xit0 β + εit


where, for any given individual i in year t, Sitr , Sito and Situ denote respectively the number
of years of required schooling, years of overeducation (years of schooling above the
required level) and years of undereducation (years of schooling below the required level),
Xit a vector of controls (including ability measures, socio-demographic background
characteristics, labor market experience and experience squared) and εit an idiosyncratic
productivity shock. This model, which nests the standard Mincerian wage regression
(αr = αo = −αu ), allows for the estimation of separate wage returns to the (i) required
years of schooling, (ii) years of overeducation, and (iii) years of undereducation.

Table 10, Panel 1, presents the pooled OLS parameter estimates for this model using



                                                 19
our data.27 Unlike for the rest of our analysis, individuals with 12 years of schooling
are part of the estimation sample. While none of these individuals are overeducated,
including them helps identify the returns to the required years of schooling, years of
overeducation and undereducation. The results from our sample are broadly consistent
with prior existing studies. Namely, we see a return of 9.6% for each additional year of
education, less than half the rate of return (3.8%) for additional years of education over
the required level, and substantial wage penalties for years of undereducation (-6.9%
for each additional year of undereducation).

These estimates also reveal a number of expected results. In particular, we see a gen-
der wage gap of 15.5%, and a significant compensating wage differential for hazardous
occupations. We also find significant wage premia relative to the North Central region
of 9.7% and 6.9% for Northeast and West, respectively, consistent with higher aver-
age costs of living in these regions. Lastly, measures for labor market experience all
have the expected sign. Those with greater occupation-specific tenure, and total la-
bor market experience have higher wages. Conversely, those with frequent and/or long
unemployment spells (as measured by total unemployment experience in weeks), and
those frequently switching jobs during the year have lower wage rates, all else equal.

Following-up on the dynamic patters discussed in Section 6.1, we report in Panel 2 of
Table 10 the estimation results from a log-wage regression which is further augmented
with four lags in overeducation status. We also include interactions between lagged
overeducation status and an indicator for the fact that the overeducation spell is ongo-
ing. This disentangles the effect of past completed overeducation spells on wages when
  27
    For the occupations such that the discrepancy between the frequency of the mode and the second
most frequent schooling level is less than 15 percentage points, individuals whose schooling level falls
with the range defined by the two most frequent schooling levels are assumed to be matched, and
years of required schooling is set equal to their actual level of education. Individuals whose schooling
level is higher (lower) than the upper (lower) bound of the aforementioned range are assumed to be
overeducated (undereducated), and years of required schooling is set equal to that upper (lower) bound.


                                                  20
an individual is currently matched or undereducated, from the effect of the duration of
an ongoing overeducated spell on current wages if an individual is still overeducated.
Notably, we find wage penalties of 2.6-4.2% per year associated with up to four lags of
overeducation. Those effects are both statistically and economically significant.28 It is
interesting to compare the magnitude of these scarring effects with those generated by
past unemployment. While the penalty associated with the first lag of unemployment is
found to be sizeably stronger than that associated with overeducation (7.6% vs. 3.9%),
the penalty associated with past unemployment is also less persistent as further lags
do not significantly affect wages.
These results show that the overeducation scarring effects suggested by the raw wage
data remain after including a rich set of controls, including measures of cognitive and
non-cognitive ability. To the extent that, consistent with the cyclical upgrading litera-
ture (see, e.g., Bils & McLaughlin, 2001), overeducated employment is likely to be more
frequent during recessions, it follows that overeducation is a likely candidate mecha-
nism behind the negative and persistent wage effects of graduating during a recession
recently uncovered in the literature (Kahn, 2010, Liu et al., Oreopoulos et al., 2012,
and Altonji et al., 2013).

Finally, Table 11 reports estimates from our log-wage regression model augmented
with one lag in overeducation status, interacted with occupation-specific tenure.29 The
coefficient in front of the interaction term is estimated to be negative and significant,
both statistically and economically. Interestingly, this implies that returns to tenure
are lower for workers who have been previously overeducated. This result, along with
the scarring effects discussed above, is suggestive of an adverse effect of overeducation
  28
      Older lags, on the other hand, do not generate significant additional penalties (results available
from the authors upon request).
   29
      We only report the results from a regression with one lag in overeducation status since specifications
with more lags yielded imprecise estimates.



                                                    21
not only on the level, but also on the on the growth of future wages.


6.3     Accounting for heterogeneity types

Next, we run our augmented wage regressions separately for each of the unobserved
types identified from the mixed proportional hazard model.30 This approach com-
plements the characterization of the two unobserved types discussed in Section 5, by
allowing the types to have different returns to required schooling, years of over and
undereducation. Stratifying the regressions by heterogeneity types also mitigates the
endogeneity biases that may affect the estimated returns to schooling, to the extent
that the types overlap with unobserved differences in productivity.31 A limitation to
keep in mind before interpreting the estimates is that they are obtained with the same
sample used for the mixed proportional hazard model, which is comprised of individuals
with at least one overeducation spell.
Estimation results, with and without lagged overeducation regressors, are reported in
Table 12. In both specifications, individuals with a low propensity to exit overeducation
(Type 1) have returns to required schooling that are below their high propensity coun-
terparts. This result is consistent with these individuals being of lower ability than type
2 individuals. It is also interesting to note that the returns to required schooling are
overall lower than in the non-stratified regressions discussed earlier. This is consistent
  30
      We predict the type of each individual in the sample using the posterior type probabilities implied
by the estimated likelihood and that individual’s characteristics. Specifically, we consider that the
individual is of a given heterogeneity type if the posterior probability of being of this type is larger
than 0.5.
   31
      The instrumental variables approach is especially challenging in this context since a valid instru-
ment must be provided for required schooling in addition to the usual instrument for schooling. The
fixed effect approach can also be problematic. In this setting, the returns to schooling are identified off
individuals changing jobs with different required schooling levels, and, in particular, switching across
matched, undereducated and overeducated jobs. These transitions are likely to be correlated with
changes in unobserved wage determinants. Besides, the fixed effect estimates may not be generalizable
to those who never switch overeducation status or intensity.



                                                    22
with overeducation being negatively correlated with ability, since the sample used for
the stratified regressions is composed of individuals with at least one reported overed-
ucation spell. In both the specification with lags and without them, both types exhibit
a similar pattern whereby returns to overeducation are much lower than returns to re-
quired schooling. The fact that all of these individuals decided to go to college in spite
of the high probability of being overeducated and receiving relatively small monetary
benefits to college education is consistent with the existence of a positive consump-
tion value of college attendance (see, e.g., Carneiro et al., 2003 and D’Haultfoeuille &
Maurel, 2013).

Lastly, the stratification by types does not remove the penalty for having been overe-
ducated in the past. In particular, the coefficients associated with all four lags in
overeducation status are negative and significant for type 1 individuals. This suggests
that these penalties are not driven by unobserved ability differences between those who
have and have not been previously overeducated. Overall, this strengthens our previous
finding that overeducation produces scarring effects which are reminiscent of what has
been identified in the case of long-term unemployment.



7    Conclusion
Although economists and policy-makers have long been concerned about the determi-
nants and wage effects of overeducation, little is still known about its dynamics along the
career. This paper combines data from the NLSY79 and CPS to provide the first analy-
sis of the career dynamics of overeducated U.S. workers. Overall, we find overeducation
to be a persistent phenomenon, particularly for blacks and low-ability workers, with
sizeable and lasting negative effects on wages. These wage penalties bear similarities
with the scarring effects that have been found to accompany prolonged unemployment


                                            23
spells.

Controlling for dynamic selection on unobservable characteristics is key in this context.
While the exit rate from overeducation decreases quickly over the duration of an overe-
ducation spell, the estimation of a mixed proportional hazard model suggests that, after
controlling for both observed and unobserved heterogeneity, true duration dependence
is not strong. Rather, the propensity to exit overeducated employment appears to be
very heterogeneous among workers.

We find that past unemployment increases the duration of future overeducation spells,
thus indicating that overeducation is likely to be one the mechanisms through which
the scarring effects on earnings associated with unemployment spells operate (see e.g.
Schmieder et al., 2013). The scarring effects associated with overeducation could also
account for some of the negative wage effects of graduating during a recession which
have been recently uncovered in the literature (Kahn, 2010, Liu et al., 2012, Oreopoulos
et al., 2012, and Altonji et al., 2013).

From a policy standpoint, since both overeducation and unemployment (see, e.g.,
Saporta-Eksten, 2014) are associated with negative and persistent wage shocks, a rele-
vant question becomes whether a marginal increase in unemployment duration is more
or less harmful, in terms of lifetime earnings, than entering an overeducation spell.
The answer has bearing on the design of unemployment insurance - should early exit
be encouraged at the cost of more mismatch? - and the appropriate evaluation of the
performance of employment agencies.

In sum, our results suggest that overeducation is a complex phenomenon that involves a
number of the classical ingredients of labor economics: human capital, search frictions,
ability differences and, perhaps, compensating wage differentials. In order to quantify
the importance of each mechanism and explore the effects of unemployment insurance


                                           24
or schooling subsidy programs, a promising avenue would be to estimate a dynamic
structural model of schooling and occupational choice that would nest these different
channels, while allowing for correlated unobserved heterogeneity in job mobility and
productivity.




                                         25
A      CPS data
The 1989-1991 monthly CPS survey has a sample target of 50,000 households split
into eight representative subsamples, each of which is interviewed for the first and
last four months of a 16-month period. In any given month, a new sample of 6,250
households is surveyed for the first time. As a result, the pooled monthly CPS data
from January of 1989 through December of 1991 contain 268,750 unique households.
From these pooled cross-sections we keep only observations in the age range spanned
by the NLSY79 cohort, which leaves 795,631 observations. Then we drop observations
where an individual is unemployed, does not report a Census occupation code, has a
missing level of education, did not complete the reported level of education, or is enrolled
in college. After making these cuts, we are left with a sample of 506,930 occupation and
education level pairs, where the education level is defined as the highest grade achieved
by the surveyed individual.
From this sample we estimate the required level of education for each occupation identi-
fied by its 3-digit Census occupation code. The required level of education is defined as
the sample mode of the distribution of education levels among workers in the occupa-
tion. Then we match observed occupations in the NLSY79 to a required level of educa-
tion based on their 3-digit occupation code. 125 out of 488 occupations are observed less
than 100 times in our CPS pooled sample. In order to reduce the sampling variance of
the corresponding required levels of education, we collapse these low-frequency occupa-
tions using two-digit codes rather than three-digit codes before applying the procedure
described above. Less than 2% of our NLSY79 observations are in such occupations.




                                            26
B   Tables and Figures

     Table 1: Summary statistics for pooled cross section (1982-1994)

                        Variable         Mean              (Std. Dev.)        N1
              Required Education (Yrs.)  12.871               (1.751)        34,535
              Overeducation (Yrs.)        0.365               (1.635)        37,087
              Age                        27.503               (3.904)        44,996
              Black                       0.112               (0.315)        44,996
              Hispanic                    0.058               (0.233)        44,996
              Female                      0.514               (0.5)          44,996
              Born in The United States   0.963               (0.189)        44,996
              AFQT                        0.503               (0.274)        43,052
              Rotter Scale in 1979        8.44                (2.371)        44,669
              Sociability in 1985         2.894               (0.669)        43,897
              12 Years of Education       0.661               (0.474)        44,996
              14 Years of Education       0.129               (0.335)        44,996
              16 Years of Education       0.148               (0.355)        44,996
              18 Years of Education       0.063               (0.242)        44,996
              GED (No HS Diploma)         0.09                (0.286)        44,996
              Northeast                   0.194               (0.395)        44,748
              South                       0.331               (0.471)        44,748
              West                        0.171               (0.377)        44,748
              Urban                       0.785               (0.411)        43,828
              Unemployment Rate (in %)    6.814               (1.374)        44,748
              HH in SMSA                  0.767               (0.423)        42,708
              Mother’s Edu. (Yrs., 1979) 11.965               (3.387)        41,395
              Father’s Edu. (Yrs., 1979) 11.714               (2.557)        43,102
              Lived With Both Parents     0.673               (0.469)        44,996
              Employed                    0.847               (0.36)         44,996
              Out of Labor Force          0.106               (0.307)        44,996
              Unemployed                  0.048               (0.213)        44,996
              Tenure (1k Wks.)            0.17                (0.173)        41,782
              Number of Jobs              1.407               (0.867)        44,996
              Work Experience (1k Hrs.) 17.222                (8.800)        29,743
              Weeks Unemployed            2.291               (7.991)        44,275
              Hourly Wage                12.717               (6.158)        38,717
              Occupational Hazards       −0.138               (0.952)        37,889
              Unemployment Rate (by Region) corresponds to the annual unemploy-
             ment rate for each Census region (BLS Local Area Unemployment Statis-
             tics data). The measure of occupational hazards is drawn from a sample of
             the 1970 Census which included occupational characteristics from the Dic-
             tionary of Occupational Titles (DOT). An indicator for a DOT occupation
             having hazards was averaged within each 1980 Census occupation code; we
             then convert this percentage measure to a Z-score. Tenure is defined as
             the total number of weeks an individual has worked in a given occupation
             across all employers. The total number of jobs is measured since the last
             interview. Wages are measured in constant dollars.
              1
                Person-year observations
   Table 2: Overeducation status proportions by education level

                     Yearly                      Categories
                                 All        12      14      16           18
Undereducated        15.9% 14.1% 4.7% 16.3%     2%
     Matched         59.5%   68% 95.3% 18.1% 60.5% 28.7%
 Overeducated        24.6% 17.9%       65.7% 37.4% 71.3%
Sample excludes individuals that have completed less than 12 years of education.




                                       28
                    Table 3: 10 most frequent occupations among overeducated workers

 1980 Census                                                                        Required Edu.       Observations
    Code                                   Occupation                               Min.   Max.         OE Total
 313              Secretaries                                                          12          12   420      1,525
 274              Sales workers, other commodities                                     12          12   394        960
 243              Supervisors and Proprietors, Sales Occupations                       12          12   323        772
 337              Bookkeepers, accounting, and auditing clerks                         12          12   243        649
 19               Managers and administrators, n.e.c                                   12          16   223      2,290
 156              Teachers, elementary school                                          16          16   197        318
 389              Administrative support occupations, n.e.c.                           12          12   163        415
 276              Cashiers                                                             12          12   121        675
 433              Supervisors, food preparation and service occupations                12          12   117        254
 376              Investigators and adjusters, except insurance                        12          12   113        243
 The columns for required education correspond to the lowest (Min.) and highest (Max.) levels of required education that
we calculate from the CPS. Note that these values will differ if the mode and second largest observed levels of education
are separated by fewer than 15 percentage points, as in occupation 19, Managers and administrators.
                                 Table 4: Probit model of overeducation status

                                  14 Years                              16 Years                    18 Years
 Black                       0.159∗∗∗    (0.0555)                  0.035       (0.0673)         0.107     (0.1045)
                                   ∗
 Hispanic                    0.122       (0.0628)                 −0.081       (0.0697)        −0.023     (0.0866)
 Female                      0.055       (0.0392)                  0.125∗∗∗    (0.0290)         0.105∗∗∗ (0.0374)
                                   ∗∗
 Born in The United States   0.206       (0.0838)                 −0.016       (0.0624)         0.021     (0.0926)
                                   ∗∗∗                                  ∗∗                           ∗
 AFQT†                      −0.132       (0.0511)                 −0.148       (0.0622)        −0.187     (0.0995)
 Rotter Scale in 1979        0.010       (0.0076)                  0.006       (0.0065)        −0.003     (0.0077)
 Sociability in 1985        −0.036       (0.0256)                 −0.028       (0.0218)         0.018     (0.0285)
 GED (No HS Diploma)        −0.051       (0.0829)                 −0.282       (0.2360)        −0.095     (0.2206)
 Northeast                  −0.027       (0.0522)                  0.002       (0.0355)        −0.005     (0.0529)
 South                      −0.011       (0.0416)                  0.007       (0.0370)        −0.008     (0.0452)
 West                       −0.003       (0.0520)                  0.006       (0.0426)        −0.021     (0.0492)
                                   ∗                                                                 ∗
 Unemployment Rate           0.016       (0.0093)                  0.003       (0.0078)        −0.019     (0.0099)
 HH in SMSA                 −0.077       (0.0541)                 −0.006       (0.0428)         0.032     (0.0504)
 Tenure (1k Wks.)            0.078       (0.0976)                 −0.056       (0.1017)         0.396∗∗∗ (0.1176)
                                                                        ∗∗∗
 Work Experience (1k Hrs.) −0.005        (0.0062)                 −0.018       (0.0056)         0.014∗    (0.0073)
 Work Experience2 (1k Hrs.)  0.003       (0.0022)                  0.003       (0.0019)        −0.006∗∗   (0.0028)
                                   ∗                                    ∗∗∗                          ∗
 Number of Jobs              0.031       (0.0161)                  0.053       (0.0140)        −0.031     (0.0175)
                                   ∗∗∗
 Total Unemp. (Wks.)         0.002       (0.0006)                  0.000       (0.0008)         0.002     (0.0014)
 Occupational Hazards        0.130∗∗∗    (0.0328)                  0.279∗∗∗    (0.0414)         0.223∗∗   (0.0897)
   2
 χ                                         201.92                                377.69                     160.54
 LL                                     -1,737.63                             -2,235.03                    -816.98
 Observations                               3,125                                 4,064                      1,763
 Model also includes controls for industry, age, mother and father’s education level in 1979, a dummy for living with both
parents in 1979, and a dummy for living in an urban area at the time of interview. Unemployment Rate (by Region)
corresponds to the annual unemployment rate for each Census region (BLS Local Area Unemployment Statistics data).
Entries correspond to marginal effects (standard errors in parentheses).
 † Values converted to Z-scores
 ∗
   p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01




                                                           30
                Table 5: Transition matrix

                                       t
      t−1            OE        UE     Matched     Non-emp.
  Overeducated      65.9% 4.2%           25.1%          4.8%
 Undereducated      29.0% 44.9%          20.8%          5.4%
      Matched       28.5% 3.9%           64.1%          3.6%
 Non-employed       30.8% 4.7%           15.5%         49.0%
         Total      46.3% 7.5%           37.6%          8.6%
Sample has entered the labor market and has a schooling attain-
ment of 14 years or more.




                              31
          Table 6: Transition matrix by gender

     (Male)                            t
      t−1            OE        UE     Matched     Non-emp.
  Overeducated      66.3% 3.7%           26.5%          3.5%
 Undereducated      28.9% 49.0%          18.8%          3.4%
      Matched       29.5% 3.0%           65.2%          2.2%
 Non-employed       49.2% 7.0%           18.8%         25.0%
         Total      48.7% 6.7%           40.4%          4.2%
    (Female)                           t
      t−1            OE        UE     Matched     Non-emp.
  Overeducated      65.5% 4.7%           23.8%          6.0%
 Undereducated      29.0% 42.3%          22.0%          6.6%
      Matched       27.3% 4.7%           63.0%          5.0%
 Non-employed       23.5% 3.7%           14.2%         58.5%
         Total      44.1% 8.2%           35.0%         12.6%
Sample has entered the labor market and has a schooling attain-
ment of 14 years or more.




                              32
            Table 7: Transition matrix by race

     (White)                           t
      t−1            OE        UE     Matched     Non-emp.
  Overeducated      65.4% 3.9%           26.0%          4.6%
 Undereducated      27.4% 44.4%          22.6%          5.6%
      Matched       27.9% 3.7%           64.8%          3.6%
 Non-employed       29.4% 4.6%           16.8%         49.2%
         Total      45.5% 7.1%           39.0%          8.5%
     (Black)                           t
      t−1            OE        UE     Matched     Non-emp.
  Overeducated      70.1% 6.8%           17.2%          5.9%
 Undereducated      40.0% 48.0%           8.0%          4.0%
      Matched       35.8% 6.4%           54.1%          3.7%
 Non-employed       40.4% 5.3%            7.0%         47.4%
         Total      54.2% 11.2%          24.0%         10.5%
Sample has entered the labor market and has a schooling attain-
ment of 14 years or more.




                              33
      Table 8: Transition matrix by AFQT quartile

    (Lowest)                           t
      t−1            OE        UE     Matched     Non-emp.
  Overeducated      72.8% 6.2%           15.4%          5.6%
 Undereducated      42.1% 42.1%           5.3%         10.5%
      Matched       37.1% 9.7%           50.0%          3.2%
 Non-employed       44.7% 2.6%            0.0%         52.6%
         Total      58.0% 11.0%          19.3%         11.7%
      (2nd)                            t
      t−1            OE        UE     Matched     Non-emp.
  Overeducated      71.5% 6.3%           16.9%          5.3%
 Undereducated      46.0% 34.9%          12.7%          6.3%
      Matched       31.7% 1.8%           58.7%          7.8%
 Non-employed       30.8% 0.0%           15.4%         53.8%
         Total      52.9% 6.7%           28.5%         12.0%
      (3rd)                            t
      t−1            OE        UE     Matched     Non-emp.
  Overeducated      66.3% 4.1%           24.7%          5.0%
 Undereducated      26.7% 45.9%          20.7%          6.7%
      Matched       30.5% 4.4%           61.4%          3.6%
 Non-employed       32.4% 9.4%           17.3%         41.0%
         Total      46.9% 8.7%           36.3%          8.2%
    (Highest)                          t
      t−1            OE        UE     Matched     Non-emp.
  Overeducated      62.4% 2.9%           30.5%          4.2%
 Undereducated      21.8% 46.5%          28.9%          2.8%
      Matched       25.6% 3.8%           68.0%          2.5%
 Non-employed       23.8% 4.2%           19.0%         53.0%
         Total      41.7% 6.4%           44.5%          7.4%
Sample has entered the labor market and has a schooling attain-
ment of 14 years or more.




                              34
                                                               Table 9: Duration models (first overeducation spell)

                                                 (1)                                                             (2)                                       (3)
                                      MPH                   PH                                        MPH                    PH                 MPH                   PH
 α                              1.031    (0.0459)    0.836∗∗∗ (0.0262)                          0.989    (0.0347)    0.822∗∗∗ (0.0261)    1.115∗∗∗ (0.0404)    0.768∗∗∗ (0.0261)
 P (V1 )                        0.289∗∗∗ (0.0803)                                               0.218∗∗∗ (0.0565)                         0.472∗∗∗ (0.0440)
                                                                                                     ∗∗∗
 P (V2 )                        0.711∗∗∗ (0.0803)                                               0.782    (0.0565)                         0.528∗∗∗ (0.0440)
                                                                                                     ∗∗∗
 V1                             0.153∗∗∗ (0.0615)                                               0.094    (0.0557)                         0.142∗∗∗ (0.0243)
                                                                                                     ∗∗∗
 V2                             1.344∗∗∗ (0.1167)                                               1.253    (0.0740)                         1.768∗∗∗ (0.1202)
                                                                                                     ∗∗∗                  ∗∗∗
 Constant                      −3.432∗∗∗ (0.3097) −3.092∗∗∗ (0.2324)                           −3.024    (0.3293) −2.723        (0.2041) −4.086∗∗∗ (0.1095) −3.339∗∗∗ (0.0880)
                                                                                                     ∗                    ∗∗
 Black                         −0.313∗   (0.1860) −0.265∗∗     (0.1344)                        −0.288    (0.1653) −0.287        (0.1265)
 Hispanic                       0.136    (0.2694)    0.015     (0.1665)                         0.261    (0.3226)    0.015      (0.1610)
 Female                         0.002    (0.0977) −0.176∗∗∗ (0.0664)                            0.102    (0.0908) −0.078        (0.0633)
 Born in The United States     −0.294    (0.2541) −0.150       (0.1884)                        −0.318    (0.3206) −0.198        (0.1869)
 AFQT†                          0.149∗∗∗ (0.0547)    0.101∗∗∗ (0.0390)                          0.150∗∗∗ (0.0522)    0.104∗∗∗ (0.0370)
 Rotter Scale in 1979†          0.026    (0.0463)    0.027     (0.0324)                         0.016    (0.0447)    0.022      (0.0319)
 Sociability in 1985†          −0.026    (0.0526)    0.010     (0.0319)                        −0.012    (0.0513)    0.019      (0.0321)
 14 Years of Edu.              −0.733∗∗∗ (0.1071) −0.587∗∗∗ (0.0769)                           −0.829∗∗∗ (0.1053) −0.692∗∗∗ (0.0739)
 18 Years of Edu.              −1.706∗∗∗ (0.1297) −1.388∗∗∗ (0.0969)                           −1.560∗∗∗ (0.1269) −1.290∗∗∗ (0.0951)
 GED (No HS Diploma)            0.257    (0.3226)    0.153     (0.2489)                         0.211    (0.3194)    0.102      (0.2463)
 Northeast                      0.035    (0.1185) −0.002       (0.0943)
 South                          0.346∗∗  (0.1453)    0.223∗∗∗ (0.0822)
 West                           0.035    (0.1407)    0.004     (0.1012)
 Unemployment Rate†            −0.073    (0.0510) −0.066∗      (0.0368)
 HH in SMSA                     0.088    (0.1465)    0.101     (0.1087)
 Tenure (1k Wks.)              −0.230    (0.4995) −0.010       (0.3710)
 Work Experience (1k Hrs.)†    −0.050    (0.0675) −0.031       (0.0519)
 Work Experience SQ (1k Hrs.)† −0.036    (0.0527) −0.017       (0.0305)
 Number of Jobs†               −0.025    (0.0488)    0.016     (0.0333)
 Total Unemp. (Wks.)†          −0.166∗∗∗ (0.0579) −0.133∗∗∗ (0.0467)
 Occupational Hazards          −0.207∗∗∗ (0.0728) −0.191∗∗∗ (0.0465)
 LL                                       5,321.9               5,348.6                                        5,344.9                    5,374.8                    5,442.7                    5,501.3
 Observations                               1,648                 1,648                                          1,648                      1,648                      1,648                      1,648
 Model also includes controls for age, mother and father’s education level in 1979, a dummy for living with both parents in 1979, and a dummy for living in an urban area at the time of interview. Models
estimated on the first overeducation spells of individuals with at least one overeducation spell. Unemployment Rate (by Region) corresponds to the annual unemployment rate for each Census region (BLS
Local Area Unemployment Statistics data). Standard errors in parentheses.
 † Values converted to Z-scores
 * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01
                       Table 10: Augmented log-wage regressions

                                                      (1)                         (2)
                                              ln (HourlyW age)            ln (HourlyW age)
 Required Education (Yrs.)                    0.096∗∗∗ (0.0046)           0.108∗∗∗ (0.0051)
 Schooling Above Required (Yrs.)              0.038∗∗∗ (0.0055)           0.066∗∗∗ (0.0065)
 Schooling Below Required (Yrs.)             −0.069∗∗∗ (0.0065)          −0.080∗∗∗ (0.0069)
 Black                                        0.007       (0.0253)        0.003       (0.0256)
 Hispanic                                     0.041       (0.0339)        0.046       (0.0338)
 Female                                      −0.155∗∗∗ (0.0148)          −0.148∗∗∗ (0.0147)
 Born in The United States                   −0.049       (0.0390)       −0.049       (0.0389)
 AFQT†                                        0.110∗∗∗ (0.0126)           0.111∗∗∗ (0.0128)
 Rotter Scale in 1979                        −0.004       (0.0029)       −0.004       (0.0029)
 Sociability in 1985                          0.006       (0.0104)        0.005       (0.0104)
 GED (No HS Diploma)                          0.001       (0.0256)       −0.010       (0.0254)
                                                   ∗∗∗                         ∗∗∗
 Northeast                                    0.097       (0.0191)        0.101       (0.0190)
 South                                       −0.027       (0.0167)       −0.022       (0.0167)
                                                    ∗∗∗                         ∗∗∗
 West                                         0.069       (0.0213)        0.076       (0.0213)
 Unemployment Rate                            0.001       (0.0032)        0.000       (0.0032)
 HH in SMSA                                   0.129∗∗∗ (0.0185)           0.131∗∗∗ (0.0186)
 Tenure (1k Wks.)                             0.250∗∗∗ (0.0356)           0.264∗∗∗ (0.0353)
 Work Experience (1k Hrs.)                    0.035∗∗∗ (0.0030)           0.036∗∗∗ (0.0030)
 Work Experience2 (1k Hrs.)                  −0.008∗∗∗ (0.0010)          −0.008∗∗∗ (0.0010)
 Number of Jobs                              −0.060∗∗∗ (0.0069)          −0.059∗∗∗ (0.0069)
 Total Unemp. (Wks.)                         −0.001∗∗∗ (0.0002)
 Occupational Hazards                         0.045∗∗∗ (0.0066)           0.044∗∗∗      (0.0066)
 Constant                                     1.052∗∗∗ (0.1028)           0.962∗∗∗      (0.1068)
 Unemployed (t-1)                                                        −0.076∗∗∗      (0.0239)
 Unemployed (t-2)                                                        −0.028         (0.0182)
 Unemployed (t-3)                                                        −0.003         (0.0158)
 Unemployed (t-4)                                                        −0.038∗        (0.0219)
 Overeducated (t-1)                                                      −0.039∗∗∗      (0.0129)
 Overeducated (t-2)                                                      −0.042∗∗∗      (0.0105)
 Overeducated (t-3)                                                      −0.039∗∗∗      (0.0114)
 Overeducated (t-4)                                                      −0.026∗∗       (0.0127)
 Overeducated (t-1), Spell Ongoing                                        0.013         (0.0182)
 Overeducated (t-2), Spell Ongoing                                        0.021         (0.0279)
 Overeducated (t-3), Spell Ongoing                                        0.007         (0.0386)
 Overeducated (t-4), Spell Ongoing                                       −0.007         (0.0589)
 Adjusted R2                                                    0.372                      0.375
 F                                                              112.6                       79.9
 Observations                                                  12,775                     12,775
 Model also includes controls for age, mother and father’s education level in 1979, a dummy for
living with both parents in 1979, and a dummy for living in an urban area at the time of interview.
Model estimated on individuals with 12 years of schooling or higher, at least four years after labor
market entry. Unemployment Rate (by Region) corresponds to the annual unemployment rate for
each Census region (BLS Local Area Unemployment Statistics data). Standard errors are clustered
at the individual level.
 † Values converted to Z-scores
 ∗
   p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01
Table 11: Augmented log-wage regression (returns to tenure as a func-
tion of past overeducation)

                                              ln (HourlyW age)
  Required Education (Yrs.)                   0.094∗∗∗ (0.0041)
  Schooling Above Required (Yrs.)             0.053∗∗∗ (0.0047)
  Schooling Below Required (Yrs.)            −0.067∗∗∗ (0.0060)
  Black                                       0.008     (0.0223)
  Hispanic                                    0.037     (0.0286)
  Female                                     −0.139∗∗∗ (0.0126)
  Born in The United States                  −0.041     (0.0324)
  AFQT†                                       0.110∗∗∗ (0.0108)
  Rotter Scale in 1979                       −0.004     (0.0025)
  Sociability in 1985                         0.003     (0.0089)
  GED (No HS Diploma)                         0.004     (0.0209)
                                                    ∗∗∗
  Northeast                                   0.088     (0.0164)
  South                                      −0.019     (0.0145)
                                                   ∗∗∗
  West                                        0.088     (0.0181)
  Unemployment Rate                          −0.003     (0.0025)
                                                   ∗∗∗
  HH in SMSA                                  0.129     (0.0161)
  Tenure (1k Wks.)                            0.321∗∗∗ (0.0356)
  Work Experience (1k Hrs.)                   0.033∗∗∗ (0.0020)
                    2
  Work Experience (1k Hrs.)                  −0.008∗∗∗ (0.0007)
  Number of Jobs                             −0.057∗∗∗ (0.0053)
  Occupational Hazards                        0.041∗∗∗ (0.0056)
  Overeducated (t-1)                         −0.047∗∗∗ (0.0168)
  Overeducated (t-1), Spell Ongoing           0.022     (0.0317)
  Overeducated (t-1) x Tenure                −0.169∗∗∗ (0.0638)
  Overeducated (t-1), Spell Ongoing x Tenure −0.030     (0.1086)
  Unemployed (t-1)                           −0.071∗∗∗ (0.0174)
  Constant                                    1.104∗∗∗ (0.0911)
              2
  Adjusted R                                               0.379
  F                                                        142.5
  Observations                                            18,950
  Model also includes controls for age, mother and father’s education level in 1979,
 a dummy for living with both parents in 1979, and a dummy for living in an urban
 area at the time of interview. Model estimated on individuals with 12 years of
 schooling or higher, at least 1 year after labor market entry. Unemployment Rate
 (by Region) corresponds to the annual unemployment rate for each Census region
 (BLS Local Area Unemployment Statistics data). Standard errors are clustered at
 the individual level.
  † Values converted to Z-scores
  ∗
    p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01
                                                      Table 12: Augmented log-wage regressions stratified by types

                                                 Type 1                     Type 2                       All                     Type 1                     Type 2                       All
                                            ln (HourlyW age)           ln (HourlyW age)          ln (HourlyW age)           ln (HourlyW age)           ln (HourlyW age)          ln (HourlyW age)
 Required Education (Yrs.)                  0.071∗∗∗ (0.0127)          0.084∗∗∗ (0.0131)         0.077∗∗∗ (0.0088)          0.071∗∗∗ (0.0123)          0.083∗∗∗ (0.0128)         0.077∗∗∗ (0.0086)
 Schooling Above Required (Yrs.)            0.020     (0.0146)         0.016     (0.0131)        0.019∗      (0.0097)       0.033∗∗   (0.0143)         0.025∗    (0.0139)        0.033∗∗∗ (0.0098)
 Schooling Below Required (Yrs.)           −0.067∗∗∗ (0.0189)         −0.052     (0.0315)       −0.063∗∗∗ (0.0170)         −0.068∗∗∗ (0.0188)         −0.055∗    (0.0308)       −0.066∗∗∗ (0.0168)
 Black                                      0.019     (0.0558)         0.069     (0.0663)        0.046       (0.0418)       0.009     (0.0538)         0.063     (0.0649)        0.035       (0.0420)
 Hispanic                                   0.042     (0.0664)         0.051     (0.1030)        0.026       (0.0560)       0.028     (0.0639)         0.067     (0.1050)        0.030       (0.0554)
 Female                                    −0.081∗∗∗ (0.0294)         −0.134∗∗∗ (0.0371)        −0.104∗∗∗ (0.0235)         −0.076∗∗∗ (0.0286)         −0.135∗∗∗ (0.0379)        −0.102∗∗∗ (0.0233)
 Born in The United States                 −0.062     (0.0642)        −0.219∗∗   (0.1035)       −0.114∗∗     (0.0538)      −0.071     (0.0606)        −0.219∗∗   (0.1010)       −0.114∗∗     (0.0510)
 AFQT†                                      0.188∗∗∗ (0.0437)          0.200∗∗∗ (0.0637)         0.190∗∗∗ (0.0367)          0.183∗∗∗ (0.0421)          0.197∗∗∗ (0.0629)         0.180∗∗∗ (0.0355)
 Rotter Scale in 1979                      −0.003     (0.0068)        −0.009     (0.0080)       −0.006       (0.0051)      −0.001     (0.0066)        −0.010     (0.0081)       −0.006       (0.0051)
 Sociability in 1985                        0.004     (0.0234)         0.014     (0.0287)        0.006       (0.0181)      −0.002     (0.0230)         0.013     (0.0286)        0.003       (0.0179)
 GED (No HS Diploma)                       −0.086     (0.0786)         0.359∗    (0.1828)        0.026       (0.0845)      −0.092     (0.0778)         0.357∗∗   (0.1681)        0.015       (0.0856)
 Northeast                                  0.134∗∗∗ (0.0393)          0.117∗∗   (0.0529)        0.132∗∗∗ (0.0316)          0.138∗∗∗ (0.0384)          0.121∗∗   (0.0532)        0.137∗∗∗ (0.0313)
 South                                     −0.006     (0.0362)         0.023     (0.0460)        0.006       (0.0287)       0.004     (0.0352)         0.022     (0.0459)        0.010       (0.0285)
 West                                       0.001     (0.0449)         0.108∗∗   (0.0514)        0.053       (0.0339)       0.009     (0.0435)         0.110∗∗   (0.0516)        0.061∗      (0.0336)
 Unemployment Rate                          0.004     (0.0078)         0.010     (0.0103)        0.007       (0.0062)       0.005     (0.0077)         0.010     (0.0103)        0.008       (0.0061)
 HH in SMSA                                 0.114∗∗   (0.0455)         0.098∗    (0.0507)        0.107∗∗∗ (0.0337)          0.125∗∗∗ (0.0420)          0.098∗    (0.0546)        0.111∗∗∗ (0.0340)
 Tenure (1k Wks.)                           0.177∗∗   (0.0785)         0.144     (0.1025)        0.148∗∗     (0.0627)       0.216∗∗∗ (0.0756)          0.141     (0.1007)        0.173∗∗∗ (0.0616)
 Work Experience (1k Hrs.)                  0.035∗∗∗ (0.0080)          0.044∗∗∗ (0.0126)         0.041∗∗∗ (0.0074)          0.039∗∗∗ (0.0079)          0.047∗∗∗ (0.0128)         0.044∗∗∗ (0.0073)
 Work Experience2 (1k Hrs.)                −0.010∗∗∗ (0.0024)         −0.014∗∗∗ (0.0042)        −0.012∗∗∗ (0.0023)         −0.011∗∗∗ (0.0025)         −0.015∗∗∗ (0.0043)        −0.013∗∗∗ (0.0024)
 Number of Jobs                            −0.038∗∗   (0.0167)        −0.096∗∗∗ (0.0182)        −0.064∗∗∗ (0.0123)         −0.038∗∗   (0.0167)        −0.093∗∗∗ (0.0186)        −0.062∗∗∗ (0.0123)
 Total Unemp. (Wks.)                       −0.002∗∗   (0.0007)        −0.001     (0.0007)       −0.001∗∗∗ (0.0005)
 Occupational Hazards                       0.023     (0.0180)         0.075∗∗∗ (0.0184)         0.048∗∗∗ (0.0141)          0.020         (0.0186)     0.072∗∗∗     (0.0181)     0.047∗∗∗      (0.0141)
 Constant                                   1.177∗∗∗ (0.2908)          0.942∗∗∗ (0.3077)         1.106∗∗∗ (0.2130)          1.450∗∗∗      (0.2942)     1.042∗∗∗     (0.3031)     1.281∗∗∗      (0.2120)
 Unemployed (t-1)                                                                                                          −0.130         (0.0789)    −0.071        (0.0730)    −0.111∗∗       (0.0560)
 Unemployed (t-2)                                                                                                          −0.038         (0.0579)    −0.050        (0.0544)    −0.051         (0.0403)
 Unemployed (t-3)                                                                                                           0.013         (0.0519)    −0.019        (0.0517)    −0.017         (0.0366)
 Unemployed (t-4)                                                                                                          −0.059         (0.0647)    −0.005        (0.0581)    −0.037         (0.0452)
 Overeducated (t-1)                                                                                                        −0.054∗∗∗      (0.0145)    −0.071∗∗      (0.0301)    −0.058∗∗∗      (0.0129)
 Overeducated (t-2)                                                                                                        −0.064∗∗∗      (0.0128)    −0.036        (0.0282)    −0.053∗∗∗      (0.0113)
 Overeducated (t-3)                                                                                                        −0.075∗∗∗      (0.0133)     0.016        (0.0276)    −0.048∗∗∗      (0.0119)
 Overeducated (t-4)                                                                                                        −0.046∗∗∗      (0.0156)    −0.025        (0.0271)    −0.036∗∗∗      (0.0135)
 Overeducated (t-1), Spell Ongoing                                                                                          0.018         (0.0250)     0.026        (0.0279)     0.028         (0.0188)
 Overeducated (t-2), Spell Ongoing                                                                                         −0.020         (0.0390)     0.057        (0.0377)     0.013         (0.0277)
 Overeducated (t-3), Spell Ongoing                                                                                         −0.005         (0.0586)     0.000        (0.0454)     0.018         (0.0381)
 Overeducated (t-4), Spell Ongoing                                                                                          0.039         (0.0915)    −0.035        (0.0690)     0.006         (0.0567)
 Adjusted R2                                                 0.240                      0.354                     0.281                      0.267                     0.355                      0.295
 F                                                            13.1                       17.2                      25.2                       10.6                      13.0                       19.1
 Observations                                                2,527                      1,379                     3,906                      2,527                     1,379                      3,906
 Model also includes controls for age, mother and father’s education level in 1979, a dummy for living with both parents in 1979, and a dummy for living in an urban area at the time of interview. Model
estimated on individuals with at least one overeducated spell, at least four years after labor market entry. Types imputed based on the posterior type probabilities from the MPH model. Unemployment Rate
(by Region) corresponds to the annual unemployment rate for each Census region (BLS Local Area Unemployment Statistics data). Standard errors are clustered at the individual level.
 † Values converted to Z-scores
 ∗
   p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01
Figure 1: Distribution of overeducation




                  39
Figure 2: Composition of overeducation (fraction of respondents)




                              40
Figure 3: Composition of overeducation (over 14 years of education)
Figure 4: Hazard out of overeducation




                 42
Figure 5: Path of median hourly wage




                43
References
Alba-Ramirez, A. (1993), ‘Mismatch in the Spanish labor market: Overeducation?’,
  Journal of Human Resources 28(2), 259–278.

Allen, J. & Van der Velden, R. (2001), ‘Educational mismatches versus skill mismatches:
  Effects on wages, job satisfaction, and on-the-job search’, Oxford Economic Papers
  53(3), 434.

Altonji, J., Kahn, L. & Speer, J. (2013), Cashier or consultant? Entry labor market
  conditions, field of study, and career success. Unpublished manuscript.

Baert, S., Cockx, B. & Verhaest, D. (2013), ‘Overeducation at the start of the career:
  Stepping stone or trap?’, Labour Economics 25, 123–140.

Bauer, T. K. (2002), ‘Educational mismatch and wages: A panel analysis’, Economics
  of Education Review 21(3), 221–229.

Bils, M. & McLaughlin, K. (2001), ‘Interindustry mobility and the cyclical upgrading
  of labor’, Journal of Labor Economics 19(1), 94–135.

Carneiro, P., Hansen, K. & Heckman, J. J. (2003), ‘Estimating distributions of treat-
  ment effects with an application to the returns to schooling and measurement of the
  effects of uncertainty on college choice’, International Economic Review 44, 361–422.

Chevalier, A. & Lindley, J. (2009), ‘Overeducation and the skills of UK graduates’,
  Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series A 172, 307–337.

D’Haultfoeuille, X. & Maurel, A. (2013), ‘Inference on an extended Roy model, with an
  application to schooling decisions in France’, Journal of Econometrics 174, 95–106.



                                          44
Dolton, P. & Vignoles, A. (2000), ‘The incidence and effects of overeducation in the
  UK graduate labour market’, Economics of Education Review 19(2), 179–198.

Duncan, J. & Hoffman, S. (1981), ‘The incidence and effects of overeducation’, Eco-
  nomics of Education Review 1, 75–86.

Dutta, S. & Goswami, A. (2010), ‘Mode estimation for discrete distributions’, Mathe-
  matical Methods of Statistics 19(4), 374–384.

Elbers, C. & Ridder, G. (1982), ‘True and spurious duration dependence: The identifi-
  ability of the proportional hazard model’, Review of Economic Studies 49, 403–409.

Frank, R. (1978), ‘Why women earn less: The theory and estimation of differential
  overqualification’, American Economic Review 68, 360–373.

Freeman, R. (1976), The Overeducated American, New York: Academic Press.

Frenette, M. (2004), ‘The overqualified Canadian graduate: The role of the academic
  program in the incidence, persistence, and economic returns to overqualification’,
  Economics of Education Review 23(1), 29–45.

Gottschalk, P. & Hansen, M. (2003), ‘Is the proportion of college workers in noncollege
  jobs increasing?’, Journal of Labor Economics 21(2), 449–471.

Hartog, J. (1980), ‘Earnings and capability requirements’, Review of Economics and
  Statistics 62, 230–240.

Hartog, J. (2000), ‘Over-education and earnings: Where are we, where should we go?’,
  Economics of Education Review 19(2), 131–147.

Heckman, J. & Singer, B. (1984), ‘A method for minimizing the impact of distributional
  assumptions in econometric models for duration data’, Econometrica 52, 271–320.

                                          45
Hersch, J. (1991), ‘Education match and job match’, Review of Economics and Statistics
  pp. 140–144.

Kahn, L. B. (2010), ‘The long-term labor market consequences of graduating from
  college in a bad economy’, Labour Economics 17(2), 303–316.

Kiker, B., Santos, M. & De Oliveira, M. (1997), ‘Overeducation and undereducation:
  evidence for Portugal’, Economics of Education Review 16(2), 111–125.

Korpi, T. & Tåhlin, M. (2009), ‘Educational mismatch, wages, and wage growth: Overe-
  ducation in Sweden, 1974–2000’, Labour Economics 16(2), 183–193.

Kroft, K., Lange, F. & Notowidigdo, M. J. (2013), ‘Duration dependence and labor mar-
  ket conditions: Evidence from a field experiment’, Quarterly Journal of Economics
  128(3), 1123–1167.

Lee, D., Lee, T. & Shin, Y. (2014), The option value of human capital. Unpublished
  manuscript.

Leuven, E. & Oosterbeek, H. (2011), Overeducation and mismatch in the labor market,
  in E. Hanushek, S. Machin & L.Woessmann, eds, ‘Handbook of the Economics of
  Education’, Vol. 4, Elsevier.

Liu, K., Salvanes, K. & Sorensen, E. (2012), ‘Good skills in bad times: Cyclical skill
  mismatch and the long-term effects of graduating in a recession’, IZA Discussion
  Paper No. 6820 .

Mavromaras, K., Mahuteau, S., Sloane, P. & Wei, Z. (2013), ‘The effect of overskilling
  dynamics on wages’, Education Economics 21(3), 281–303.




                                         46
Oreopoulos, P., von Wachter, T. & Heisz, A. (2012), ‘The short- and long-term career
  effects of graduating in a recession’, American Economic Journal: Applied Economics
  4, 1–29.

Rubb, S. (2003), ‘Overeducation: A short or long run phenomenon for individuals?’,
  Economics of Education Review 22(4), 389–394.

Rumberger, R. (1987), ‘The impact of surplus schooling on productivity and earnings’,
  Journal of Human Resources 22, 24–50.

Saporta-Eksten, I. (2014), Job loss, consumption and unemployment insurance. Un-
  published manuscript.

Schmieder, J., von Wachter, T. & Bender, S. (2013), ‘The causal effect of unemploy-
  ment duration on wages: Evidence from unemployment insurance extensions’, NBER
  Working Paper No. 19772 .

Sicherman, N. & Galor, O. (1990), ‘A theory of career mobility’, Journal of Political
  Economy 98(1), 169–192.

Verdugo, R. & Verdugo, N. (1989), ‘The impact of surplus schooling on earnings: Some
  additional findings’, Journal of Human Resources 24(4), 629–643.

Yamaguchi, S. (2012), ‘Tasks and heterogeneous human capital’, Journal of Labor Eco-
  nomics 30, 1–53.




                                         47
