                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               INFLATION ANNOUNCEMENTS AND SOCIAL DYNAMICS

                                        Kinda Hachem
                                       Jing Cynthia Wu

                                     Working Paper 20161
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w20161


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                           May 2014, Revised April 2017




We thank Veronica Guerrieri, Anil Kashyap, and Randy Kroszner for helpful suggestions. We
have also benefited from the comments of Craig Burnside, Jon S. Cohen, Steve Davis, Jim
Hamilton, Chris Hansen, Narayana Kocherlakota, Jim Pesando, Ricardo Reis, Ken West, Michael
Woodford, two anonymous referees, and seminar participants at the Federal Reserve Board,
Chicago Booth, UBC, FRB New York, FRB Chicago, Duke, SED 2013, the 2013 NBER Summer
Institute EFSF Workshop, ASSA 2014, and the Minneapolis Fed Inflation Expectations
Symposium (March 2015). Both authors gratefully acknowledge financial support from the
University of Chicago Booth School of Business. Cynthia Wu also gratefully acknowledges
financial support from the IBM Faculty Research Fund at the University of Chicago Booth
School of Business. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2014 by Kinda Hachem and Jing Cynthia Wu. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Inflation Announcements and Social Dynamics
Kinda Hachem and Jing Cynthia Wu
NBER Working Paper No. 20161
May 2014, Revised April 2017
JEL No. E17,E3,E58

                                         ABSTRACT

We propose a new framework for understanding the effectiveness of central bank announcements
when firms have heterogeneous inflation expectations. Expectations are updated through social
dynamics and, with heterogeneity, not all firms choose to operate, putting downward pressure on
realized inflation. Our model rationalizes why countries stuck at the zero lower bound have had a
hard time increasing inflation without being aggressive. The same model also predicts that
announcing an abrupt target to disinflate will cause inflation to undershoot the target whereas
announcing gradual targets will not. We present new empirical evidence that corroborates this
prediction.


Kinda Hachem
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
kinda.hachem@chicagobooth.edu

Jing Cynthia Wu
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
cynthia.wu@chicagobooth.edu
1     Introduction

Communication has become an important part of the monetary policy toolkit. Central
banks operating in a zero lower bound environment use communication about the future to
influence expectations and stimulate the economy (e.g., Bernanke (2004) and Yellen (2013)).
Flexible inflation targeters have also relied on transparent communication to anchor inflation
expectations over various horizons (e.g., Carney (2012)) and transparency is now a more
general trend in central banking (e.g., Woodford (2005) and Blinder et al. (2008)). However,
heterogeneity in inflation expectations exists despite transparency (e.g. Mankiw et al. (2004))
and prominent policy-makers have called for new models of the expectation formation process
to better understand the transmission from communication to economic outcomes (e.g. King
(2005), Boivin (2011), and Kroszner (2012)). Our paper takes a step in this direction and
proposes a new framework for understanding the effectiveness of central bank announcements
when heterogeneity is present.
    We construct a model of inflation determination that is tractable and preserves its orig-
inal non-linearities. A continuum of monopolistically competitive firms make pricing and
production decisions before the aggregate price level is known, introducing a need for infla-
tion forecasts. We consider two forecasting rules. One rule (Random Walking) is based on
last period’s inflation. The other rule (Fed Following) is based on central bank announce-
ments about the current period. We also allow for heterogeneity within each rule. In other
words, heterogeneity is present both within and across rules.
    We discipline our model so that each rule is individually mean rational – that is, each rule
yields unbiased forecasts of inflation when adopted by all firms. If all firms are Fed Followers,
then firm decisions should be such that the central bank’s announcement is in fact realized. If
all firms are Random Walkers, then firm decisions should be such that last period’s inflation
persists. Such discipline helps rationalize why either rule could be viable in the long-run.
However, as we show, the mean rational property is not trivial when there is heterogeneity
within rules: the dispersion of inflation expectations introduces pricing non-linearities which


                                               2
put upward pressure on realized inflation relative to the mean expectation. We establish that
a fixed cost of production – which generates exit among firms who expect to be unprofitable
net of this cost – offsets the pricing non-linearities and supports two individually mean
rational rules without assuming away in-rule heterogeneity. We then establish that this exit
channel causes realized inflation to undershoot a target announced by the central bank if
there is a sufficiently interior mixture of the Fed Following and Random Walking rules when
the mean expectation reaches the target. In contrast, if the vast majority of firms use the
Fed Following rule, the mean rational property implies convergence to the target.
   The fraction of Fed Followers is thus a crucial variable in our model. It also summarizes
the credibility of the central bank. Credibility is earned, not endowed, so we must endogenize
how this happens. We use social dynamics to model the evolution of credibility. In particular,
once inflation has been realized, firms can meet and potentially switch forecasting rules based
on relative performance. A small and/or temporary divergence of realized inflation from
the central bank’s announcements may not have enough momentum to significantly affect
credibility. However, prolonged divergence may convince many firms to abandon the central
bank’s cues in favor of more successful forecasting rules, limiting the extent to which future
announcements will be realized.
   Combining our model of inflation determination with social dynamics, we investigate how
announcements can be tailored to limit divergence and build credibility.1 We show that a
period of gradual announcements helps build credibility when social dynamics are at play.
Neither this result nor the result that the central bank needs to be highly credible to avoid
undershooting its announcements depends on whether the central bank wants to increase or
decrease inflation.
   In contrast, the direction that the central bank would like to move in does affect how
useful a period of aggressive announcements will be. The downward pressure from the exit
channel can make increasing inflation difficult. This result is consistent with the observation
   1
     Notice that we are defining the central bank’s problem in terms of announcements, not conventional
policy tools such as a short-term nominal interest rate. This has precedent in Reis (2011).



                                                  3
that countries stuck at the zero lower bound since the recent financial crisis have had a hard
time increasing inflation. Our model suggests that it may be useful to pursue an aggressive
strategy, wherein the central bank sets short-run targets above the long-run goal, before
moving to a period of gradual announcements. With high short-run targets, many Fed
Followers will set high prices because they expect high prices, leading to higher inflation.
   On the other hand, aggressive strategies do not work as well when trying to decrease
inflation. If the central bank’s target is much lower than current inflation, then Fed Followers
will tend to exit rather than set low prices and, once the majority of them have exited,
there are no gains to an even lower target. Our model thus supports gradualism during
disinflations. We present new empirical evidence that corroborates our predictions. In
particular, we establish that countries which disinflated with gradual targets rather than
abrupt targets were more successful in the sense of not undershooting their long-run goals.
   To the best of our knowledge, our paper is the first to (i) empirically connect undershoot-
ing with abrupt disinflation targets and (ii) show that a new model with social dynamics
rationalizes the empirics while still prescribing aggressive announcements at the zero lower
bound. In-rule heterogeneity, social dynamics, and the economic model all play important
roles in getting these results. Without in-rule heterogeneity, all Fed Followers and all Ran-
dom Walkers would have the same expectation once inflation reaches the central bank’s goal.
There would be no exit channel and hence no undershooting. Social dynamics provides a
natural way to simulate rule selection when performance is not homogeneous within rules.
Moreover, the benefit of developing our own economic model rather than using a workhorse
(e.g., New Keynesian) model is that we can introduce new non-linearities in a tractable way
and see how they interact with social dynamics. Our exit channel and its implications for
undershooting are examples of this interaction.
   The rest of the paper proceeds as follows: Subsection 1.1 discusses related literature; Sec-
tion 2 explains the evolution of credibility through social dynamics in our paper; Section 3
builds a model of inflation determination and introduces the exit channel; Section 4 presents
the simulation results for increasing inflation and discusses how our framework can be ex-

                                               4
tended to think about communications surrounding major initiatives such as Quantitative
Easing; Section 5 presents the simulation results for decreasing inflation along with new em-
pirical evidence that links undershooting with abruptness; Section 6 discusses the key roles
played by exit and social dynamics in our results; Section 7 establishes the robustness of our
results to alternative parameterizations; and Section 8 concludes. All proofs are collected in
the Appendix.


1.1       Related Literature

Our paper is related to several literatures. First is the literature on central bank communica-
tion. Many of the insights in this literature depend on information asymmetries between the
central bank and the public (e.g. Cukierman and Meltzer (1986), Stein (1989), Eggertsson
and Pugsley (2006), Melosi (2012)) and/or representative learning by the public to overcome
such asymmetries (e.g., Orphanides and Williams (2005), Berardi and Duffy (2007), Eusepi
and Preston (2010), Branch and Evans (2011)). In contrast, our paper studies what happens
when central bank announcements are fully transparent but their credibility must be estab-
lished through social networks. In this regard, we also differ from Arifovic et al. (2010) who
allow the central bank to choose both the inflation announcement and the realized value of
inflation in a cheap talk economy with social learning.
       Our paper is also more broadly related to work on heterogeneous agents and behavioral
expectations. This is in contrast to workhorse models of monetary policy where expectations
are assumed to be homogeneous and rational.2 A common building block in the behavioral
literature is the use of rule-based agents.3 Applied to expectations formation, agents select
from a discrete number of forecasting rules and the popularity of each rule is determined
by a heuristic. There are two main approaches to modeling the selection heuristic in the
literature. The first approach follows Brock and Hommes (1997) in that the popularity of a
   2
      See, for example, Clarida et al. (1999), Woodford (2003), Smets and Wouters (2003), and Christiano et
al. (2005).
    3
      Ellison and Fudenberg (1993) show that even naive rules-of-thumb can achieve fairly efficient outcomes
so rule-based agents have become a convenient way to bridge tractability and realism.



                                                     5
given rule is performance-based and there is no heterogeneity within each rule. Recent papers
that use this approach include Anufriev et al. (2013b), Cornea et al. (2013), Hommes (2013),
and Hommes et al. (2015). See also Brazier et al. (2008) and DeGrauwe (2010) for agents
that select specifically between a constant inflation target and past inflation. The second
approach is social dynamics. Agents can be heterogeneous within rules and the popularity of
a given rule is determined by genetic algorithms (e.g., mutation and tournament selection) at
the individual level. Tournaments can be either performance-based or epidemiological and
the structure of meetings can be varied to analyze different modes of interaction. Versions
of the approach appear in Carroll (2003a), Acemoglu et al. (2010), Arifovic et al. (2010),
and Burnside et al. (2013) among others.4 For an application of social dynamics to the New
Keynesian context, see Arifovic et al. (2013).
    Our paper also connects to work on heterogeneous expectations as a source of macroeco-
nomic persistence (e.g., Milani (2007), Fuhrer (2015a), Fuhrer (2015b)). In our framework,
inflation is persistent in the sense that it does not immediately converge to newly-announced
central bank targets. This is because credibility has to be established via social dynamics.
The more stubborn are beliefs, the longer it will take for credibility to accumulate and the
slower convergence will be. Our framework allows us to explore how the central bank can
exploit social dynamics and build credibility by varying announcements over time.5
    Finally, some of our results are relevant to the literature on positive expectations feedback.
In Haltiwanger and Waldman (1985) and Heemeijer et al. (2009), strategic complementarities
increase the impact of irrational expectations on realized inflation and impede convergence.
See also Anufriev et al. (2013a) and Pfajfar and Zakelj (forthcoming). Our model is set
up so that each forecasting rule is individually mean rational. The exit channel plays an
important role in offsetting other non-linearities and getting the mean rational property to
co-exist with in-rule heterogeneity. As a result, neither rule is destabilizing or intrinsically
    4
      For more general discussions of agent-based models, see LeBaron (2001), Judd and Tesfatsion (2006),
Colander et al. (2008), Ashraf and Howitt (2008), and Page (2012).
    5
      This focus also clearly differs from the large literature on the extent to which macroeconomic persistence
is driven by costly price adjustment at the microeconomic level (see Caballero and Engel (2007) for a survey).



                                                       6
more irrational than the other.6



2         Expectation Formation via Social Dynamics

Consider a continuum of agents i ∈ [0, 1]. At the beginning of date t, agent i expects an
               bit . This expectation is drawn from a forecasting rule and social dynamics is
inflation rate π
the process through which agents select their rules. To illustrate how social dynamics work,
we will consider two individually mean rational rules (i.e., the mean expectation is realized
whenever all agents use the same forecasting rule, regardless of which rule it is). In the
short-run, selection between competing alternatives is the core of social dynamics so having
at least two rules is important. In the long-run, selection algorithms typically converge to
one alternative so focusing on mean rationality ensures convergence to an unbiased rule.


2.1        Forecasting Rules

Central bank announcements and random walk forecasts are natural candidates for our two
forecasting rules: Atkeson and Ohanian (2001) find that random walk forecasts of inflation
perform very well against more sophisticated statistical models, Faust and Wright (2012)
find that the Fed’s Greenbook forecasts are difficult to beat, and Gurkaynak et al. (2005)
and Campbell et al. (2012) find that markets do indeed view FOMC statements as a source of
new and reliable information about future economic conditions. While the viability of each
rule will be determined endogenously, emergence of these rules in the real world motivates
their inclusion in the option set.
        Our two rules also find support in the Survey of Professional Forecasters (SPF). A spe-
cial question on the 2012Q2 survey asked respondents whether their point forecasts were
consistent with the Fed’s inflation target. Forecasters who self-identified as consistent were
distributed around the Fed’s target. The remaining forecasters were instead distributed
    6
    For another context where a new channel introduces non-monotonicity into an environment that could
otherwise be prone to the problems of strategic complementarities, see Hachem (2014).



                                                  7
around prevailing inflation, consistent with a random walk model. The distribution of the
remaining forecasters was also wider than the distribution of the Fed-consistent group, sug-
gesting more heterogeneity within random walk forecasts.7
       To formalize our two forecasting rules, let π t denote the central bank’s date t announce-
ment and let π ∗t−1 denote realized inflation at the end of date t − 1. The rules are then:

                                                         bit ∼ N (π t , σ 2F )
Definition 1 Agent i is a Fed Follower (FF) at date t if π

                                                          bit ∼ N π ∗t−1 , σ 2R
                                                                                            
Definition 2 Agent i is a Random Walker (RW) at date t if π

where the standard deviations satisfy σ F < σ R and will later be parameterized to make
each rule individually mean rational. In our definitions, N (π t , σ 2F ) and N π ∗t−1 , σ 2R are not
                                                                                             

                                                   bit . The universe of FF forecasts then looks
priors. Instead, each agent i has a point forecast π
normal with mean π t and variance σ 2F while the universe of RW forecasts looks normal with
mean π ∗t−1 and variance σ 2R . Notice that σ F < σ R incorporates the SPF feature of lower
heterogeneity among Fed-consistent forecasts. The rationale is two-fold. First, there is some
pass-through from professional forecasts to individual expectations (e.g., Carroll (2003b)).8
Second, our random walking rule is a stand-in for statistical models more generally. Agents
who use such models can disagree about which variables to include, leading to more varied
forecasts. In contrast, Fed Followers are the set of agents who agree that the most important
variable is the central bank’s announcement.
       Let ξ t ∈ [0, 1] denote the fraction of Fed Followers. If ξ t = 1, then everyone adopts the FF
rule in Definition 1 and mean rationality implies π ∗t = π t . In other words, the central bank
can achieve inflation goals using only communication. We thus interpret ξ t as a measure
of central bank credibility. To endogenize the evolution of ξ t , we posit that agents whose
forecasts are consistently outperformed by their peers will want to change how they forecast.
Social dynamics then provides a useful approach to modeling how an agent discovers he is
   7
     Raw data is available at www.phil.frb.org/research-and-data/real-time-center/survey-of-professional-
forecasters/2012/survq212.cfm
   8
     We emphasize the partial nature of this pass-through because firms and households do more than just
outsource their inflation expectations (e.g., Bryan et al. (2014) and Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2015)).
The existence of professional forecasts thus does not negate the need for a model of expectation formation.

                                                    8
being outperformed and how much of this outperformance he attributes to one-time shocks
rather than fundamentals. Initializing ξ 1 = 0, we let ξ t+1 evolve via tournament selection
and mutation, as described next.


2.2     Social Dynamics and the Evolution of Forecasts

Tournament selection simulates information transmission in a complex world. Our tourna-
ments favor agents who are endogenously more successful. This is in line with Arifovic et al.
(2013). Our tournaments will also permit success to be judged over multiple observations.
   To be more precise, agents meet in pairs and compare forecast errors after the realization
of π ∗t . Consider a meeting between agents i and j. Agent i counts one strike against his
                                                bjt − π ∗t < π
forecasting rule if j used a different rule and π            bit − π ∗t . When ξ t is sufficiently
high, π ∗t will be close to π t so |π t − π ∗t−1 |  0 would allow Fed Followers to outperform
Random Walkers in many meetings. Strikes would thus tend to be counted against the RW
rule, suggesting ξ t+1 ≥ ξ t . In contrast, when ξ t is sufficiently low, π ∗t will be close to π ∗t−1 so
|π t − π ∗t−1 |  0 would instead allow Random Walkers to outperform Fed Followers in many
meetings. Strikes would thus tend to be counted against the FF rule, suggesting ξ t+1 ≤ ξ t .
This is the sense in which success is endogenous.
   How quickly do strikes lead to ξ t+1 6= ξ t ? Experimental evidence suggests that agents are
very reluctant to contradict their own information, even when Bayesian updating suggests
they should (e.g., Weizsäcker (2010) and Andreoni and Mylovanov (2012)). We thus allow
agents to accumulate several strikes before deciding to switch forecasting rules. This is the
sense in which success is judged over multiple observations.
   We use S to denote the number of strikes needed for a switch: after S strikes, agent i
switches forecasting rules and begins counting strikes against his new rule. Strikes do not
have to be consecutive to trigger a switch.
   The accumulation of strikes occurs across meetings and periods so we must also specify
how pairwise meetings come about. In our baseline specification, pairs are drawn randomly



                                                   9
with replacement from the entire population. Drawing with replacement means that each
agent can have zero to many meetings in a given period. Drawing from the full population
ensures that even agents who do not participate in economic activity are represented in
tournaments. This is appealing since participation decisions are driven by expectations.
        Going forward, we will also refer to S as stubbornness, with higher S implying more
stubborn beliefs. To gauge the importance of stubbornness and better understand what
it might represent, the robustness analysis in Section 7 will consider different values of S
along with different specifications for how firms meet and accumulate strikes. As we will see,
higher values of S can be interpreted as a stand-in for more localized interactions.9
        Finally, to capture the fact that some changes may not be performance-driven, we incor-
porate mutations: at the beginning of date t + 1, a very small fraction θ ∈ (0, 1) of agents
randomly switches rules regardless of strikes.
        The timing of our social forces can now be summarized as follows: (i) mutation turns the
fraction of FFs into e ξ t = (1 − θ) ξ t + θ (1 − ξ t ) if t ≥ 2; (ii) each agent i draws expectation
bit from his forecasting rule; (iii) the set of expectations π
                                                                 i
π                                                                 bt | i ∈ [0, 1] determines π ∗t as per
the model developed next in Section 3; (iv) tournament selection transforms ξ t into ξ t+1 if
          ξ t into ξ t+1 if t ≥ 2.
t = 1 and e



3         An Expectations-Based Model of Inflation

We now present a formal model to map inflation expectations into realized inflation. Interpret
the continuum of agents in Section 2 as a continuum of firms, each producing a different
                                                                                         1
                                                                                     Pt 1−ρ
perishable good i ∈ [0, 1]. The demand for good i at date t is of the form Dit = γ t pit     ,
where pit is the price charged by firm i, Pt is an aggregate price level, γ t ∈ [1 − ε, 1 + ε] is an
exogenous and independently distributed aggregate taste shock, and ρ ∈ (0, 1) is a constant.
                                                                       pit
        The demand for good i is decreasing in the relative price      Pt
                                                                             rather than just the absolute
    9
     Regardless of whether our meetings are random or local, the probability that any one agent connects
with any other agent (possibly through multiple links) is positive. The assumptions in Acemoglu et al. (2010)
for a strongly connected graph are therefore satisfied.



                                                     10
price pit . This creates a role for inflation expectations. In particular, firms have to make
pricing and production decisions before Pt and γ t are realized – that is, before they know
the actual demand for their products. At the beginning of date t, each firm i forecasts an
                                    π it )Pt−1
aggregate price level of Pbti ≡ exp(b       ∗            ∗
                                               , where Pt−1 is last period’s realized price level and
bit is the firm’s inflation expectation for the current period. Firm i will ultimately draw π
π                                                                                           bit
from one of the two forecasting rules described in Section 2 but, for now, we can imagine
a generic set of inflation expectations. To simplify the exposition and remain focused on
inflation expectations, assume that all firms also forecast a taste shock of one. In other
words, the forecasting rule for γ t is simply the mean of the shock.10
       The supply of good i is given by the production function F (`it ) = `αit , where α ∈ (0, 1)
is a constant and `it is the labor input used by firm i. The aggregate stock of labor is
normalized to one and inelastically available at unit wage wt . In order to produce at date t,
firm i must also pay a fixed cost. The fixed cost has a constant real value U > 0 which is
paid in nominal terms (Pt∗ U ) at the end of the period. A firm is said to operate at date t if
and only if it expects profit net of the nominal fixed cost to be positive. When expectations
are heterogeneous, the fixed cost gives rise to an exit channel which, as we will see later,
plays an important role in our paper.


3.1       Equilibrium

Individual Decisions Conditional on its forecast Pbti and the prevailing wage wt , firm i
chooses pit and `it to solve a static profit maximization problem. Charging pit for good i
                                       1
                                bi  1−ρ                                     1
                                                                     bi  α(1−ρ)
                                 Pt                                  Pt
yields an expected demand of pit          which in turn necessitates pit          units of labor.
Firm i’s problem is thus:

                                1                     1
                                                 bi  α(1−ρ)         
                                   Pbti 1−ρ      Pt                i
                       max max pit pit      − wt pit          − Pbt U , 0
                                pit

  10
    The role of γ t is purely technical (as we will explain in more detail at the end of Subsection 3.1) so the
forecasting rule for γ t is just a formality.




                                                      11
From the inner maximization problem, the pricing decision of an operating firm is:

                                              α(1−ρ)
                                                   1−αρ
                                                              1−α
                                                           1−αρ
                                          i    wt           i
                                 p wt ; Pt = αρ
                                        b                 Pt
                                                          b                                                           (1)


From the outer maximization problem, the set of operating firms is then:

                                                                                1−αρ
                                                                                    αρ
                                                                                                
                              Ot (wt ) =       i|   Pbti   ≥    1
                                                               αρ
                                                                           U
                                                                          1−αρ
                                                                                           wt                         (2)
                                                                                     
     / Ot (wt ), then the firm’s labor demand is ` wt ; Pbti
If i ∈                                                                                    = 0. Otherwise, the first order
condition from the inner problem yields:

                                                           1
                                                   bi  1−αρ
                                               i     Pt
                                      ` wt ; Pt = αρ wt
                                             b                                                                        (3)

Notice that operating firms with higher price expectations charge higher prices. They also
hire more labor, resulting in more output. For any given wage, firms with higher expectations
are also more likely to operate. The higher the wage though, the smaller the set of operating
firms, the lower the output of each operating firm, and the higher the prices charged.


Wage Determination Given the individual decisions above, the wage is set to clear the
                                                                                       
labor market. More precisely, an auctioneer chooses wt∗ to solve            ` wt∗ ; Pbti di = 1, with
                                                                     R
                                                                  Ot (wt∗ )
                       
Ot (wt ) and ` wt ; Pbti as per equations (2) and (3) respectively. This yields:

                                            "                                         #1−αρ
                                                                         1
                                                                       1−αρ
                                 wt∗ = αρ                      Pbti
                                                    R
                                                                               di                                     (4)
                                               Ot (wt∗ )
                                                                                           
Following the determination of wt∗ , each firm i ∈ Ot (wt∗ ) posts price p∗it ≡ p wt∗ ; Pbti and
                                                              1
                                                      bi  1−ρ
                                                 ∗     Pt
hires labor to produce its expected demand qit ≡ p∗             . Price expectations are not
                                                                                 it

updated based on    wt∗   so, in this sense, the model deviates from rational expectations (RE).
While some updating can certainly be accommodated, there must be residual heterogeneity
for social dynamics to operate at the end of the period.



                                                           12
Realized Inflation After p∗it and qit∗ have been set, the taste shock γ t is realized and the
aggregate price level is computed as a consumption-weighted average of individual prices. At
                                                          1
                                                    γ t Pt 1−ρ
price level Pt , the realized demand for good i is p∗          which may differ from the available
                                                                                 it

supply qit∗ . Consumption is thus the minimum of demand and supply so the auctioneer
                                                                              1
                                                                          1−ρ 
                                                                    γ  P ∗
                               c
computes Pt∗ to solve Pt∗ = R cjtit dj p∗it di and cit = min qit∗ , pt ∗ t
                           R
                                                                                   . The result is:
                                                                                                            it



                                                        1
                                                       1−ρ                                                   1
                                                                                                             1−ρ
                                min{Pbti ,γ t Pt∗ }                                   min{Pbti ,γ t Pt∗ }
                                                                                                                             
             Pt∗                                                                                                  p wt∗ ; Pbti di
                    R                                                   R
                                  p(w∗ ;Pbi )
                                                              di =                      p(w∗ ;Pbi )
                                                                                                                                    (5)
                                        t   t                                                 t   t
                Ot (wt∗ )                                            Ot (wt∗ )



with p (·), Ot (·), and wt∗ as per equations (1), (2), and (4) respectively. We now have a
                                             n             o
mapping from a set of price expectations Pbti | i ∈ [0, 1] to the realized price level Pt∗ .
Recalling Pbti ≡ exp(bπ it )Pt−1
                              ∗                                    ∗
                                   and invoking Pt∗ ≡ exp(π ∗t )Pt−1    , the mapping from a set of
                        i
inflation expectations π    bt | i ∈ [0, 1] to realized inflation π ∗t is straightforward.11


Flow of Funds There is a household in the background who supplies workers and buys
goods. Workers remit their wages to the household. Fixed costs and profits of operating
firms are also remitted to the household. The household’s total income thus equals its total
expenditure on goods.


Discussion We now elaborate on some of the modeling elements used above, namely the
role of γ t and the choice of α < 1. As per Woodford (2013), “it is appealing to assume
that people’s beliefs should be rational, in the ordinary-language sense, though there is a
large step from this to the RE hypothesis.” The principle of ordinary-language rationality
motivates the timing of our taste shock. Without γ t in equation (5), the auctioneer could
compute Pt∗ at the same time as wt∗ . While our firms deviate from the RE hypothesis by
not updating Pbti based on wt∗ , they would also be deviating from rationality in the ordinary-
  11
     As equations (4) and (5) show, our model is one where actual inflation is determined entirely by expected
inflation. In other words, the central bank can only change inflation by changing expectations. While our
abstraction from conventional policy tools is done to isolate the effect of communication, work by Campbell
(2013) demonstrates that it may in fact be optimal for policymakers to rely on open mouth operations, even
when open market operations are available.



                                                                       13
language sense if they did not update Pbti based on Pt∗ . The choice of α < 1 is similarly
motivated. Notice from equation (1) that α = 1 prompts all firms to set the same price,
namely a constant mark-up over the wage, regardless of expectations. On one hand, this
isolates the effect of expectations on realized inflation through just the labor market. On the
other hand, it eliminates the lag between wt∗ and Pt∗ in the auctioneer’s problem. We can
thus use α = 1 to build some intuition but our full model will employ α < 1. With α < 1,
prices are not simple mark-ups so γ t enters equation (5) and the lag between wt∗ and Pt∗ is
restored. Importantly, this restoration stems from production being non-linear in labor, not
from production being decreasing returns to scale.12


3.2     Results with One Forecasting Rule

Before combining the model of Subsection 3.1 with the two forecasting rules in Section 2, it
is instructive to establish how the model works with one forecasting rule since that covers
the two limits: 100% Random Walking and 100% Fed Following.

                 bit ∼ N (µ, σ 2 ) for all i, then π ∗t = µ + f (σ; Ω), where Ω is the set of all
Proposition 1 If π
parameters excluding µ and σ. To conserve on notation, f (σ) ≡ f (σ; Ω) henceforth.

Proposition 1 says that excess inflation, π ∗t − µ, does not depend on the mean expecta-
tion µ. It does, however, depend on the extent of expectations heterogeneity σ which is a
dependence we want to emphasize. In particular, our model is sufficiently non-linear that
realized inflation may not equal the mean expectation when expectations are heterogeneous.
Naturally though, realized inflation should line up with the mean expectation in the long-
run: if everyone draws inflation forecasts from N (µ, σ 2 ) but realized inflation ends up being
π ∗t 6= µ, then N (µ, σ 2 ) is a biased forecasting rule and its survival into the long-run would
seem at odds with ordinary-language rationality. We therefore seek parameter conditions
under which heterogeneity (σ > 0) and mean rationality (π ∗t = µ) co-exist. The rest of
  12
    In a previous version, we showed that the key properties of our model hold when production is instead
                               1−α                                                                      zλ
given by F (`it , zit ) = `α
                           it zit  , where zit is firm effort and the real disutility of such effort is λit with
λ ∈ (1, ∞]. Notice that F (`it ) = `α it is just the limiting case of λ → ∞.


                                                      14
this subsection will build up to these parameter conditions. Unless otherwise specified, all
                               bit ∼ N (µ, σ 2 ) for all i as in Proposition 1.
lemmas and propositions assume π
       To fix ideas, start with the limiting case of α = 1. As per Subsection 3.1, prices will
be a constant mark-up over the wage so realized inflation will be determined in the labor
market. We can thus focus on equation (4). Absent a fixed cost, all firms will operate so
Ot (wt ) = [0, 1] for any wt . In other words, the operating set will be independent of the wage.
The following lemma reveals that realized inflation will exceed the mean expectation:

                                                         σ2
Lemma 1 If α = 1 and U = 0, then f (σ) =               2(1−ρ)
                                                              .

                                          σ2
The excess inflation in Lemma 1,        2(1−ρ)
                                               ,   is a Jensen’s inequality term which arises because
normal inflation expectations are compounded into log-normal price expectations and ag-
gregated. The Jensen’s term is exacerbated by more heterogeneity in inflation expectations
(i.e., higher σ) and more substitutability between goods (i.e., higher ρ). As σ increases, the
compounding process skews the distribution of price expectations further right. The highest
expectation firms thus drive wages up more than the lowest expectation firms drive them
down. The effect is strongest when goods are more substitutable because high expectation
firms foresee a huge increase in sales by undercutting the aggregate price level and thus
participate more actively in the labor market.
       Eliminating excess inflation without eliminating heterogeneity requires overcoming the
Jensen’s inequality term. Intuitively, this requires giving low expectation firms more pull to
overcome the pull that compounding gives high expectation firms. Allowing low expectation
firms to not produce by introducing a fixed cost is one way to achieve this, motivating our
use of U > 0.13 With fixed costs, Ot (wt ) ⊂ [0, 1] and, as shown next, |Ot (wt ) | decreases
when expectations become more heterogeneous:


Lemma 2 If α ≤ 1 and U > 0, then the fraction of firms that operate is decreasing in σ.
  13
    In principle, one could instead assume normality (rather than log-normality) of price expectations. In
practice though, prices cannot be negative so the appropriate assumption would be truncated normality
which, like log-normality, is not symmetric.



                                                      15
The intuition for Lemma 2 is as follows. Higher σ amplifies the disproportionate effect that
high expectation firms have on wage determination. Since a higher wage cuts into expected
profit, the presence of a positive fixed cost means more firms will choose not to operate.
       What we have just described is an exit channel which will put downward pressure on the
wage and thus potentially offset the Jensen’s inequality term. Can the offset be complete in
the sense of restoring mean rationality (π ∗t = µ) without eliminating heterogeneity (σ > 0)?
We first saw the Jensen’s term in Lemma 1 so let us start with that context:

Lemma 3 If α = 1 and U ≥ 1 − ρ, then f (σ 0 ) = 0 for a unique σ 0 > 0. Moreover,
f 0 (σ 0 ) > 0.

In words, Lemma 3 says that a sufficiently high fixed cost introduces a point of mean ratio-
nality – that is, a point σ 0 > 0 with no excess inflation – when α = 1. The solid gray line in
Figure 1(a) provides a graphical representation of this result.14
       We will now show that the model with α < 1 can have two points of mean rationality.
We want the main results to be derived under α < 1 for the reasons discussed at the end of
Subsection 3.1. We also want two points of mean rationality so that the Fed Following and
Random Walking rules in Definitions 1 and 2 are not restricted to having the same standard
deviation. Proposition 2 below identifies parameter conditions under which our model has
two mean rational points. We will denote these points as σ F and σ R and use them later as
the standard deviations in Definitions 1 and 2 respectively. Proposition 2 also establishes a
region of negative excess inflation in between these two points.

Proposition 2 There exist values α ∈ (0, 1) and U > U > 0 such that α ∈ (α, 1) and
U ∈ U , U yield f (σ F ) = f (σ R ) = 0 for σ R > σ F > 0. Moreover, f 0 (σ F ) < 0 and
          

f 0 (σ R ) > 0 so f (σ) < 0 for σ ∈ Σ ⊆ (σ F , σ R ), where Σ is a non-empty set.

The parameter conditions identified in Proposition 2 are qualitative in nature so the blue
area in Figure 1(b) provides a numerical example when ρ = 0.9. For any combination of α
  14
    The ability of exit to counter Jensen’s inequality does not hinge on inflation expectations being single
draws from a normal distribution: if each firm were to draw a full prior as its forecast, the proof of Lemma
3 shows that exit can be restored with two different forecasts and appropriate bounds on U .

                                                    16
and U in this blue area, our model has two mean rational points with a region of negative
excess inflation in between. It also turns out that the region of negative excess inflation is
the entire region between the two mean rational points. The blue line in Figure 1(a) provides
a graphical representation.
   To understand why excess inflation is negative between the two mean rational points,
recall the competing effects of higher σ on wages in equation (4). As σ increases, the
compounding of inflation expectations into price expectations skews the distribution of price
expectations right and puts upward pressure on the wage through the labor demands of
high expectation firms. As the wage increases though, low expectation firms find production
unprofitable and the resulting decline in operation puts downward pressure on the wage. For
lower values of σ, the exit of low expectation firms dominates and dampens the wage but,
when σ becomes sufficiently large, the labor demands of high expectation firms take over.
The dependence of wt∗ on σ is thus U-shaped. We know from equation (1) that individual
prices respond positively to wages so, all else constant, the shape of wt∗ feeds into Pt∗ . Notice,
however, that α < 1 implies additional upward pressure on Pt∗ at the price aggregation stage.
Since only firms with sufficiently high expectations produce, the individual prices aggregated
                               
by equation (5) are p wt∗ ; Pbti with Pbti high. Therefore, the pass-through from wt∗ to Pt∗
                                                  
varies across σ but, for α ∈ (α, 1) and U ∈ U , U , it is enough to generate two mean rational
points with a U-shaped pattern in between. If the fixed cost is too high (i.e., U > U ) or the
returns to labor are too low (i.e., α < α), then exit is too strong relative to labor demand
and we get only one mean rational point. If the fixed cost is too low (i.e., U < U ), then exit
is weak and we get no mean rational points.


3.3    Two Forecasting Rules with Common Means

We now move to an environment with two forecasting rules. Consider the two rules given
in Definitions 1 and 2 but with π t = π ∗t−1 = µ. Understanding how the model works under
this restriction will help us understand what happens when inflation approaches the central



                                                17
bank’s target in our simulation results. The simulations in Sections 4 and 5 will then allow
for π t 6= π ∗t−1 to see how inflation can be made to approach the target in the first place.


                      bit ∼ N (µ, σ 2F ) for a group of size ξ t and π
Proposition 3 Suppose π                                              bit ∼ N (µ, σ 2R ) for the
rest, where f (σ F ) = f (σ R ) = 0. If α = 1, then π ∗t = µ for all ξ t ∈ (0, 1).


Under α = 1, Proposition 3 says that the entire population is mean rational when each
subpopulation is individually mean rational. We know from equation (1) that all firms set
the same price when α = 1 so any heterogeneity in expectations only affects the economy
through labor market clearing, namely equation (4). The latter aggregates linearly across
subpopulations so, if the component distributions are each parameterized to deliver π ∗t = µ,
then their mixture will also deliver π ∗t = µ.
   Now consider the more interesting case of α < 1 which introduces heterogeneity into
the price aggregation of equation (5). Recall that any combination of α and U from the
blue area in Figure 1(b) produces two mean rational distributions when ρ = 0.9. Call this
the feasible parameter space for ρ = 0.9. The blue area in Figure 2(a) plots the feasible
parameters for which any mixture of the two mean rational distributions produces negative
excess inflation. To provide a concrete example of what this means, Figure 2(b) plots excess
inflation, yt ≡ π ∗t − µ, as a function of the degree of mixing, ξ t , for one combination of α
and U drawn from the blue area in Figure 2(a). Any other combination will deliver the
same general shape. Note that we are using yt to denote excess inflation when there are
two forecasting rules rather than f (·) which denoted excess inflation when there was only
one forecasting rule. We verify that the blue area in Figure 2(a) overlaps the entire feasible
space in Figure 1(b) so combinations of α and U which generate two distinct mean rational
distributions also generate negative excess inflation for any mixture of these distributions
when ρ = 0.9. Similar results are verified for ρ = 0.85 and ρ = 0.95.
   Notice that the shape of yt over ξ t ∈ [0, 1] in Figure 2(b) resembles the shape of f (·) over
σ ∈ [σ F , σ R ]. This is useful as it permits interpretation of our results vis-à-vis Figure 1(a):
if one uses N (µ, σ 2x ) with some σ x ∈ (σ F , σ R ) to approximate the aggregate distribution

                                                  18
generated by ξ t ∈ (0, 1) and π t = π ∗t−1 = µ, then π ∗t < µ follows for the reasons discussed in
Subsection 3.2.
    Before proceeding, let us comment on how the feasible parameter space changes with
ρ. As mentioned above, for each value of ρ listed in Figure 2(a), the shaded area exactly
overlaps the feasible region for that ρ. Notice that the shaded area shifts up as ρ decreases.
In other words, the feasible region involves higher values of U as ρ decreases. Lower ρ means
goods are less substitutable so the demand for good i falls by less when the price of good i
rises. Firms can achieve higher profits in this environment so a higher fixed cost is needed
to create the exit channel. Also notice that lower values of ρ admit a larger feasible region.
With less substitutability between goods, firms are less responsive to each other and this
helps generate similar equilibrium properties across a wider range of parameter choices.



4     Announcements to Increase Inflation

We now combine the economic model in Section 3 with the social dynamics in Section 2
to study how central bank announcements can be used to increase inflation. Our model
abstracts from conventional policy tools such as short-term interest rates, isolating the effect
of communication and mimicking the situation faced by a central bank at the zero lower
bound. We first consider announcements about the level of inflation. We then consider
announcements about major initiatives (e.g., Quantitative Easing) which have the potential
to skew the entire distribution of inflation expectations.


4.1    Inflation Targets

Recall that announcements affect the forecasting rule in Definition 1 but this rule only
matters for inflation if used by enough firms. The economic model of Section 3 allows us to
calculate π ∗t conditional on ξ t and the forecasting rules. Using social dynamics as per Section
2, we can then determine ξ t+1 conditional on π ∗t , ξ t , and the forecasting rules.
    Suppose inflation starts at π 0 = −2%. A less extreme starting point (e.g., π 0 = 1%)

                                                19
would not change the nature of the results and, if anything, would be easier to overcome.
                                                                     bi1 ∼ N (−2%, σ 2R ).
With ξ 1 = 0, all firms are Random Walkers who forecast according to π
The mean rational property thus yields π ∗1 = −2%. Now suppose the central bank tries to
increase inflation by announcing π t = 2% for all t ≥ 1. This announcement introduces a
new forecasting rule, Fed Following, which a small fraction of firms mutate towards. We set
the mutation parameter to θ = 0.02 which is conservative compared to the social dynamics
literature.15 This ensures that Fed Following will only become popular if it performs well in
tournaments.
      In our baseline social dynamics, randomly matched firms compare forecasting perfor-
mance and switch rules after being outperformed eight times (S = 8). We use N = 1000
firms and randomly draw N pairs with replacement each period to simulate the meetings.
Alternative specifications – for example, different strike accumulation rules, different values
of θ and S, and more/less meetings per period – are discussed in Section 7. The model
parameters are set to ρ = 0.9, α = 0.9, and U = 0.18. The choice of ρ captures high
but imperfect substitutability between goods. The choices of α and U come from the blue
region in Figure 1(b) so that we have two individually mean rational subpopulations. Any
parameter combination from this region will deliver qualitatively similar results.16 Lastly, we
assume that the taste shock is uniformly distributed according to γ t ∼ U [0.99, 1.01]. These
parameter choices deliver σ F = 0.0036 and σ R = 0.0643 as the solutions to f (·) = 0.
      Figure 3(a) summarizes the results. Notice that inflation converges to 2%, albeit slowly.
Slow convergence reflects two competing forces. Recall from Subsection 3.1 that firms with
higher price expectations demand more labor and set higher prices. FFs start as the high
expectation firms so their initial impact is to increase inflation via wage and price-setting.
However, also recall from Subsection 3.1 that firms with low expectations (relative to their
peers) are less likely to operate. RWs start as the low expectation firms so their initial
impact is to decrease inflation by not fully participating in the labor market.
 15
      Arifovic et al. (2013), for example, use a mutation parameter of 0.1.
 16
      Recall from Subsection 3.3 that the blue regions in Figures 1(b) and 2(a) coincide.



                                                      20
   If the upward pressure from FF price-setting outweighs the downward pressure from RW
exit, then the central bank may want to make even more aggressive announcements. The
path we consider is one where the central bank announces short-term targets above its long-
run goal of 2%. The idea that there could be differences between short-run announcements
and long-run goals is not unprecedented. For example, as part of the “Evans Rule” adopted
between December 2012 and March 2014, the Federal Reserve was willing to tolerate one-
to two-year ahead inflation of up to 2.5% despite a 2% long-run target. The aggressive
announcements we have in mind take this a step further and target, rather than simply
tolerate, higher short-term inflation.
   As shown in Figure 3(b), aggressive short-term targets, 3% in this numerical example,
induce any FFs to set very high prices, boosting inflation. At the same time though, the big
gap between realized and targeted inflation early on does nothing to help the central bank
accumulate more FFs. Therefore, dropping the target to 2% right when 2% is reached will
lead to less than 2% inflation in subsequent periods. This is an application of Subsection
3.3: when the FF and RW rules are centered around similar points, having a mix of FFs
and RWs will lead to inflation below the common means. Basically, the mixture of rules
involves an amount of dispersion that leads the exit channel to dominate. We will refer
to the “inflation below the common means” phenomenon as undershooting of the central
bank’s long-run target when the common means equal this target. Recall that the FF and
RW rules are individually mean rational so, if the vast majority of firms used the same rule,
the exit channel would not dominate the pricing non-linearities in our model and inflation
would not undershoot. It would thus help the central bank to have ξ t close to 1 when the 2%
announcement takes hold. Figure 3(c) shows that gradually lowering the aggressive target
towards 2% gives FFs more chances to succeed in tournaments and achieves the desired
result.




                                             21
4.2       Additional Anti-Deflation Announcements

In Subsection 4.1, the direct effect of central bank announcements was limited to the mean
of the FF distribution. We now consider more potent announcements which can directly
affect the skewness of the economy-wide distribution. A practical example is what Krishna-
murthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2011) dub the inflation channel of QE: curbing deflationary
expectations through the Fed’s widely publicized large scale asset purchases.17
       We introduce this channel into our model via redraws. More precisely, some firms with
                                                     π it ) after hearing that the central bank
deflationary expectations redraw their expectations (b
will take a proactive approach to stimulating the economy. We will refer to the announce-
ments that convey this proactive approach as anti-deflation announcements. Each redraw
comes from the same distribution as the original draw so not all deflationary expectations
will be eliminated. However, redraws do have the effect of skewing the RW and FF dis-
tributions so that more mass exists in the positive region compared to the original normal
distribution. Since very few FFs actually expect deflation, the skew is stronger for RWs but,
either way, the effect of anti-deflation announcements is to increase expectations, reduce
dispersion, enlarge the set of operating firms, and put upward pressure on inflation.
       We consider two dimensions of anti-deflation announcements: rounds and intensity. In
our context, rounds means the number of periods with media coverage about an anti-deflation
policy like QE and, therefore, the number of periods that have redraws. Intensity means the
fraction of deflationary firms that are exposed to this coverage and, therefore, the fraction
that redraw in a given period. The central bank again faces π 0 = −2% but now it would like
to return to 2% without using short-term targets that differ from its long-run goal. Figure
4 illustrates how this can be achieved by varying rounds and intensity.
       Figures 4(a) and 4(b) fix intensity at 1, meaning that all firms with deflationary expec-
tations redraw. Figure 4(a) shows that one round of anti-deflation announcements helps
increase inflation but more time is needed to reach 2%. Figure 4(b) shows that two rounds
  17
    Much of the existing QE literature abstracts from the inflation channel and focuses on yield curves (e.g.,
Gagnon et al. (2010), D’Amico and King (2010), Williams (2011), Hamilton and Wu (2012), Wu and Xia
(2016), Wu and Zhang (2016), etc).

                                                     22
of anti-deflation announcements push the economy above 2% for a short time before inflation
dips back below 2% for several periods.
    Figure 4(c) then demonstrates that two rounds with less than full intensity can bring
the economy to 2% quickly and without any time above target. However, once the rounds
run out, the economy again dips back below 2% for several periods. Just as redraws skew
the distributions and increase operation, the end of redraws unskews the distributions and
decreases operation. Therefore, if there is a sufficiently interior mix of FFs and RWs when
the redraws stop, exit among RWs returns the undershooting problem of Figure 3(b). This
is the same problem we are seeing in Figures 4(b) and 4(c).
    Figure 4(d) illustrates the outcome of many rounds and low intensity. Notice that in-
creasing the number of rounds makes it possible to find an intensity that returns inflation to
2% monotonically. With more rounds, the central bank has more time to accumulate FFs
before anti-deflation announcements stop. This will help eliminate the undershooting prob-
lem discussed above. At the same time, more rounds must be combined with a sufficiently
low intensity to avoid exceeding 2% as in Figure 4(b).



5     Disinflation and Empirical Evidence

The discussion so far has focused on increasing inflation. Regardless of whether the cen-
tral bank uses short-term inflation targets or announcements about anti-deflation policies like
QE, we showed that the ultimate goal will be undershot when there is a clear mix of FFs and
RWs. This is triggered by the “inflation below the common means” phenomenon mentioned
earlier and reflects the existence of an exit channel. We also showed that announcements
can be designed to help FFs accumulate through tournament selection. In other words, un-
dershooting is avoided when central bank announcements are such that inflation approaches
the target with a high fraction of FFs. The aftermath of the recent global financial crisis has
not yet produced enough observations to allow testing this idea in a low inflation climate.
However, as we will now describe, a similar idea is relevant for decreasing inflation. This is


                                              23
useful because a number of countries have gone through disinflations with the use of targets.
We can exploit cross-country differences in how these targets were introduced to test our
model.


5.1       Disinflation in the Model

Suppose initial inflation is high. We consider two scenarios which are guided by the data
that will be presented in Subsection 5.2. In the first (abrupt) scenario, initial inflation is
π 0 = 8% and the central bank announces π t = 4% for all t ≥ 1. In the second (gradual)
scenario, initial inflation is π 0 = 15% and the central bank announces a downward path which
interpolates between 15% and a long-run target of 4%. Figure 5 shows how realized inflation
in the model differs across the two scenarios. The critical difference between these two
scenarios is the degree of abruptness, not the level of initial inflation. The same qualitative
results obtain if initial inflation is assumed to be the same in the two scenarios.
       Notice from Figure 5 that the central bank can convert more firms into Fed Followers
by achieving interim targets along the gradual path. This leads to most firms forecasting
             bit ∼ N (2%, σ 2F ) when 2% is reached, preventing undershooting because of
according to π
the mean rational property. In contrast, the abrupt scenario involves large gaps between
realized and announced inflation early on. These gaps impede the accumulation of FFs via
tournament selection. It is only once realized inflation is in the vicinity of the 2% target that
FFs begin to accumulate more quickly. However, with stubborn beliefs, this accumulation is
not quick enough to avoid having a clear mix of RWs and FFs when 2% is reached, opening
the door for undershooting. Our model thus predicts that undershooting is more likely when
the central bank tries to disinflate by abruptly introducing low inflation targets.18
  18
    To be sure, conventional policy tools (e.g., short-term nominal interest rates) can be used together with
announcements in a disinflation. Our abstraction from conventional tools allows us to isolate the effect of
the announcements.




                                                     24
5.2    Disinflation in the Data

As just described, a testable implication of our model is that abrupt targets during a disin-
flation lead to temporary undershooting while gradual targets do not. We now demonstrate
that this prediction is borne out in the data.
   We start with the set of 29 inflation targeters in Roger (2009) and Svensson (2010). The
sample for each country starts in the quarter in which it formally adopted inflation targets
and ends in 2013Q3. The earliest observation is thus New Zealand in 1990Q1. We collect
data on the path of inflation targets from individual central bank websites. Our data on
actual inflation then come from the IMF’s International Financial Statistics database, as per
Mishkin and Schmidt-Hebbel (2007). The number of countries that begin with above-target
inflation is much greater than the number that begin with below-target inflation so we focus
on the former. Excluding countries that eventually abandoned inflation targeting, we are
left with 19 countries. These countries are listed in the first column of Table 1. The rest of
the table provides qualitative indicators of abruptness and undershooting for each country
using the metrics described next.
   We first construct some intuitive dummies for abruptness in a given country. The first,
abrupt1, equals one if the targeted path is flat. This is the least subjective measure of
abruptness so we adopt it as the benchmark. The second dummy, abrupt2, equals one if the
absolute value of the net change in inflation targets between the time of introduction and
the end of our sample is less than 40% of the absolute value of the net change in realized
inflation over the same period. The third dummy, abrupt3, equals one if the standard error
of the inflation targets that make up the targeted path is smaller than the final target. The
left panel in Table 1 shows the division of countries between abrupt and gradual according
to each measure. By definition, any country with abrupt1 = 1 will also have abrupt2 = 1
and abrupt3 = 1.
   To help visualize the data, Figure 6 compares the average inflation rates and targeted
paths for abrupt versus gradual targeters. The top panel averages over countries with



                                             25
abrupt1 = 1 while the bottom panel averages over countries with abrupt1 = 0. Aver-
ages are for each point in time, with time 0 denoting the introduction of inflation targets.
For both abrupt and gradual targeters, the average long-run inflation target is around 4%.
Notice from Figure 6 that undershooting is more characteristic of abrupt inflation targeters,
consistent with the model predictions in Figure 5.
       For more formal empirical evidence on abruptness and undershooting, we construct some
undershooting dummies then run simple qualitative cross-country regressions. The benefit of
this approach is that it is model-free and scale-free: the results are less susceptible to outliers
and thus more robust for small samples. To construct a dummy variable for undershooting,
let t1 denote the first quarter in which actual inflation hits the targeted path from above and
let t2 , where t2 > t1 , denote the first quarter in which actual inflation hits the final target
from below.19 Our main dependent variable, under1, is a dummy that equals one if average
inflation is less than the average target over the period t1 to t2 . As an alternative, we also
define under2 which equals one if average inflation is less than the average target for the
period t1 to 2013Q3. The right panel in Table 1 shows the division of countries according to
each undershooting measure.
       The first two panels in Table 2 report the results of our qualitative regressions. The
first three columns in the left panel regress under1 on abrupt1, abrupt2, and abrupt3
respectively. The middle panel repeats the exercise using under2 as the dependent variable.
The intercepts in our regressions are generally small and statistically insignificant whereas
the abruptness coefficients are generally large and significant. On the whole, the range
of intercepts suggests that the probability of undershooting is 0-29% for gradual targeters
while the range of intercepts plus slopes suggests that this probability is 46-100% for abrupt
targeters. The difference is economically and statistically significant.
       To check the robustness of our empirical results, we also run regressions that control
for the distance between initial and desired inflation (d2target). Comparing the first and
  19
     If actual inflation never hit the final target from below, we set t2 equal to the last quarter in our sample
(i.e., 2013Q3). If actual inflation also never hit the targeted path from above, we set t1 equal to the first
quarter in which the final target became effective.


                                                       26
fourth columns in each panel of Table 2 reveals that the abruptness coefficient is largely
unchanged, both quantitatively and qualitatively. In contrast, the coefficient on d2target
is always small and insignificant. Therefore, even controlling for initial conditions, there is
evidence that undershooting is more characteristic of abrupt targeters.
    As a complement to the qualitative results, the last panel in Table 2 presents some
quantitative cross-country regressions. Our dependent variable, under num, is defined as the
average difference between actual and targeted inflation over the period t1 to t2 . Notice that
under1 = 1 if and only if under num < 0 so undershooting will now be indicated by negative
regression coefficients. The intercepts in the first three columns of this last panel measure
the average undershooting among gradual targeters whereas the sum of the intercepts and
abruptness coefficients measure the average undershooting among abrupt targeters. The
intercepts are positive but generally insignificant whereas the abruptness coefficients are
negative and generally significant. Classifying abruptness according to abrupt1, the first
column says that actual inflation will average 0.97 percentage points below an abrupt target.
The last column then says this result is robust to initial condition controls. The quantitative
results thus align with the qualitative ones.



6     Discussion of Key Channels

There are two recurring themes in our results: the possibility of temporarily undershooting
the central bank’s inflation target and the ultimate convergence of inflation to this target.
The exit channel introduced in Section 3 provides the economic mechanism for undershoot-
ing. In what follows, we elaborate on the asymmetries implied by the exit channel and the
relation of these asymmetries to our undershooting results. We also comment on the role
of social dynamics in limiting undershooting to a temporary phenomenon and generating
convergence.




                                                27
6.1       Exit and Asymmetry

Undershooting can occur regardless of whether inflation hits the central bank’s target from
above or below. See Figures 3(b), 4(b), 4(c), and 5(a). Also notice that we did not obtain
any results where inflation overshoots a constant target, except in the case of anti-deflation
announcements which involved extra tools. The dynamics of our model are therefore asym-
metric. The intuition goes back to our discussion of Figures 1 and 2. Parameters which
support two individually mean rational forecasting rules also generate negative excess infla-
tion (relative to a common mean) when expectations are a mixture of these two rules. This
is because the exit channel dominates the Jensen’s inequality term for such mixtures.
       The downward pressure imparted by exit can also apply if the mixture involves different
means. Consider, for example, Figures 3(a) and 5(a). The central bank is using constant
targets to change inflation by 4 percentage points, with Figure 3(a) illustrating a 4 percentage
point increase and Figure 5(a) illustrating a 4 percentage point decrease. In both cases,
realized inflation falls below the mean expectation once there is a clear mix of forecasting
rules. This is another instance of negative excess inflation but without the restriction of
common means. There is an important implication here for how sluggish (if at all) the
inflation adjustment will be. In particular, notice that it takes longer for inflation to rise by
4 percentage points in Figure 3(a) than it does for inflation to fall by 4 percentage points in
Figure 5(a).20 If realized inflation equaled the mean expectation along the entire transition
path, then the time to target would be the same regardless of whether the central bank
was trying to increase or decrease inflation. The exit channel, by creating negative excess
inflation during the transition, accelerates what the central bank is trying to achieve in
Figure 5(a) but makes it more sluggish in Figure 3(a).
       The above discussion suggests that, with constant targets, increasing inflation is harder
than decreasing inflation. The opposite is true with aggressive targets and the reason is again
the exit channel. To be more precise, recall that the central bank in Subsection 4.1 increased
  20
    What matters is the direction of the 4 percentage point change, not the starting point. Similar results
would be obtained if Figure 5(a) went from 2% to −2% instead of 8% to 4%. We have omitted this figure
for brevity.

                                                    28
inflation by announcing a short-term target above its long-run goal (an aggressive strategy)
whereas the central bank in Subsection 5.1 decreased inflation using a gradual path. Why
not decrease inflation by simply announcing a short-term target below the long-run goal?
The logic stems from an asymmetry in how Fed Followers help the central bank achieve its
goals. When the central bank announces a high target to increase inflation, FFs help by
setting high prices. When the central bank announces a low target to decrease inflation, FFs
help either by setting low prices or by exiting. Recall that exit puts downward pressure on
prices via the market-clearing wage. If the attempted disinflation is sufficiently large and
abrupt, then FFs will tend to exit and, once the majority of them have exited, they are
unavailable to help any further. There would be no gains to setting an even lower target in
this case.21 Therefore, the exit channel implies that the gains to being aggressive deteriorate
faster when trying to decrease inflation than when trying to increase it.
    The asymmetries generated by the exit channel help reconcile two seemingly contradictory
observations about the real world. On one hand, the new empirical evidence in Subsection
5.2 established that countries which disinflated with gradual targets rather than abrupt
targets were more successful in the sense of not undershooting their long-run goals. On
the other hand, countries stuck at the zero lower bound since the recent financial crisis have
only mustered sluggish increases in inflation, arguably because they have not been aggressive
enough. The exit channel in our paper helps reconcile these two observations. More precisely,
our exit channel (i) opens the door for negative excess inflation when expectations are a
mixture and (ii) implies asymmetric gains to being aggressive when trying to increase rather
than decrease inflation. These asymmetric gains do not negate the fact that a period of
gradual targets helps build credibility regardless of whether the central bank wants to push
inflation up or down. However, they do make a case for preceding gradualism with aggressive
announcements when trying to increase inflation.
  21
     If anything, an even lower target would be bad for credibility-building because it would just widen the
gap between realized and targeted inflation.




                                                    29
6.2    The Role of Social Dynamics

Our paper has used social dynamics to endogenize the mix of FFs and RWs. To better
appreciate the contribution of social dynamics to our results, we now consider what happens
if the mix of FFs and RWs is set according to some simple benchmarks.
   Figure 7(a) shows what happens if we fix ξ t = ξ for all t, where ξ ∈ {0, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, 1}.
Initial inflation and the targeted path are both as in Figure 5(a). The black line labeled
“baseline” in Figure 7(a) replicates the blue line labeled “realized” in Figure 5(a). The
colored lines in Figure 7(a) then show the results for the different values of ξ. If ξ = 0,
then no one uses central bank announcements as a basis for forecasting. Inflation stays
at its initial level and announcements are never effective. If ξ = 1, then everyone uses
the central bank’s announcements and inflation immediately falls to the long-run target. If
ξ ∈ {0.25, 0.5, 0.75}, then the mix of FFs and RWs is sufficiently interior that inflation settles
noticeably below the target: with a constant mix, ξ t is independent of how well different
rules perform so there is no mechanism (e.g., tournament selection) to accumulate FFs and
eliminate undershooting once it happens.
   The role of tournaments is also evidenced in Figure 7(b) which shows what happens if
social dynamics involve only mutation. The black line labeled “baseline” again replicates
the blue line labeled “realized” in Figure 5(a). Recall that the baseline specification starts
at ξ 1 = 0 then lets ξ t+1 evolve via mutation and tournament selection. The colored lines
in Figure 7(b) correspond to different starting points ξ 1 ∈ {0, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, 1}, with ξ t+1
evolving via mutation only. With just mutation, ξ t+1 = (1 − θ) ξ t + θ (1 − ξ t ) for all t so the
fraction of FFs converges smoothly to 0.5.
   Notice from the right panel of Figure 7(b) that, for the first 15 or so periods, the fraction
of FFs in the baseline is very similar to the fraction of FFs in the mutation-only specification
with ξ 1 = 0. When an abrupt target is first introduced, FF forecasts tend to be outper-
formed by RWs so FFs do not accumulate, even when tournaments exist. Around the target,
however, the tables turn and many RW forecasts are outperformed by FFs. Tournaments



                                                30
will now accelerate the accumulation of FFs which, given mean rationality of our forecasting
rules, eliminates undershooting. In contrast, all of the mutation-only specifications settle
well below the target because, as in the fixed proportions case, there is no mechanism to
accumulate FFs and eliminate undershooting once it happens.
    Tournaments thus play an important role in generating convergence to the long-run
target. For similar reasons, tournaments also play an important role in explaining why
gradual targets can achieve convergence without any undershooting. In Figure 5(b), for
example, the achievement of interim targets along the gradual path allowed tournaments to
accelerate the accumulation of FFs before the long-run target was reached. Introducing a
gradual path into the fixed proportions or mutation-only specifications would not eliminate
undershooting or achieve convergence because FF accumulation cannot accelerate.



7     Robustness Analysis

A key insight from our model is that inflation undershoots its long-run target when prior
gaps between realized and targeted inflation prevent FFs from accumulating quickly enough.
We explained how undershooting is related to the exit channel when discussing Figures
1(a) and 2(b). We also saw undershooting materialize when: inflation was increased with
aggressive targets in Figure 3(b); inflation was increased with high intensity anti-deflation
announcements in Figures 4(b) and 4(c); and inflation was decreased with abrupt targets in
Figure 5(a) which we argued is our model’s counterpart to the data in Figure 6(a). We now
establish that our undershooting result is robust to alternative parameterizations, taking
Figure 5(a) – disinflation with an abrupt target – as the baseline.
    To facilitate comparison, the first row of Table 3 presents six quantitative statistics
that summarize the properties of realized inflation in Figure 5(a). The first three statistics
are related to undershooting. We calculate hitting time as the number of periods it takes
inflation to hit the 4% target from above (first column of Table 3). This corresponds to t1 in
Subsection 5.2. We also calculate the fraction of FFs at hitting time (second column) and


                                             31
the lowest value of inflation realized along the transition path (third column). In the event
of undershooting, the lowest value of inflation will be noticeably below the 4% target. The
next three statistics in Table 3 are related to convergence. We calculate convergence time as
the number of periods until 90% of firms use the FF rule (fourth column). With a sufficiently
high fraction of FFs, mean rationality of the FF rule implies that realized inflation will be
very close to targeted inflation so we can use the fraction of FFs to assess convergence. We
also report realized inflation at convergence to make sure it is effectively 4% (fifth column).
Note that the difference between convergence time in the fourth column and hitting time in
the second column captures the amount of time spent undershooting. Finally, we report the
standard deviation of realized inflation at convergence across simulations to verify that the
frequency of convergence is effectively 100% (sixth column).
   The key properties of Figure 5(a) are salient in the first row of Table 3. Around 21% of
firms are using the FF rule when inflation first hits the target so inflation undershoots to
3.3% before converging to 3.9% once sufficiently many FFs (90%) have been accumulated.
   The second and third rows of Table 3 show the results for different values of the stub-
bornness parameter S. Decreasing stubbornness increases the fraction of FFs at the first hit.
With a high fraction of FFs when the target is first hit, both the depth of undershooting
and the amount of time spent undershooting are lower than in the baseline. Increasing stub-
bornness has the opposite effect: more undershooting relative to the baseline and a longer
time to convergence after the first hit. These results confirm the insight that undershooting
only occurs when inflation hits the target with insufficiently many FFs.
   The fourth row of Table 3 considers a different mode of interaction. Instead of tour-
naments between randomly matched firms, suppose tournaments occur locally: firms are
arranged in a circle and each firm meets its right and left neighbors every period. With
interactions set up as such, the same firms always meet each other. This will create clusters
of firms that use the same forecasting rule. Firms at the center of a cluster are thus more
likely to meet other firms using the same rule, increasing their effective stubbornness for
any value of S. The fourth row of Table 3 shows that local interactions increase the time

                                              32
to convergence relative to the baseline. This is consistent with local interactions generating
more stubbornness.
   The fifth row of Table 3 returns to random interactions but allows for negative strikes.
In particular, suppose randomly matched firms still switch after S = 8 strikes and still add a
strike when outperformed by a different forecasting rule but now they also subtract a strike
when their rule is the outperformer. The idea that agents respond to both good and bad
performance (rather than just bad performance as in the baseline) is consistent with Brock
and Hommes (1997), although we are still using social dynamics as in our baseline. The fifth
row of Table 3 shows that the baseline results are robust to allowing for negative strikes.
   The sixth and seventh rows of Table 3 show that the main messages about undershooting
and convergence in the baseline are robust to different values of the mutation parameter θ.
The eighth and ninth rows show that these messages are also robust to different starting
points for initial inflation π 0 . The tenth row shows that widening the support for the taste
shock γ t also does not have a material impact on the baseline results.
   The last two rows of Table 3 vary the number of random meetings per period in the
baseline to assess the effect of more or less information transmission between firms. With
more meetings, we find that more periods are needed to hit the central bank’s target for
the first time but, once there, undershooting is minimal and convergence is quick. This is
intuitive: increasing the number of meetings without increasing the number of strikes needed
for a rule switch is akin to decreasing the effective stubbornness of firms with the under-
performing rule. RWs (FFs) tend to have the under-performing rule when realized inflation
is close to (far from) the central bank’s target. With lower effective stubbornness for RWs
around the target, FFs start accumulating very quickly and undershooting is minimal. In
contrast, when we decrease the number of meetings per period, undershooting is salient and
convergence takes longer than in the baseline.




                                             33
8    Conclusion

This paper has investigated the effectiveness of central bank announcements when firms have
heterogeneous inflation expectations. We constructed a model of inflation determination
that is tractable and preserves its original non-linearities. We introduced the possibility of
exit by some firms and showed that this exit channel (i) accommodates two individually
mean rational forecasting rules with in-rule heterogeneity and (ii) puts downward pressure
on realized inflation when the mix of rules is sufficiently interior. We used social dynamics
to model the updating of inflation expectations and endogenize the fraction of firms using
each rule. Our model rationalizes why countries stuck at the zero lower bound have had
a hard time increasing inflation without being aggressive. The same model also predicts
that announcing an abrupt target to disinflate will cause inflation to undershoot the target
whereas announcing gradual targets will not. We presented new empirical evidence that
corroborates this prediction.




                                             34
References
Acemoglu, Daron, Asuman Ozdaglar, and Ali ParandehGheibi, “Spread of
 (Mis)Information in Social Networks,” Games and Economic Behavior, 2010, 70 (2), pp.
 194–227.
Andreoni, James and Tymofiy Mylovanov, “Diverging Opinions,” American Economic
 Journal: Microeconomics, 2012, 4 (1), pp. 209–232.
Anufriev, Mikhail, Cars H. Hommes, and Raoul H.S. Philipse, “Evolutionary Selec-
 tion of Expectations in Positive and Negative Feedback Markets,” Journal of Evolutionary
 Economics, 2013, 23 (3), pp. 663–688.
  , Tiziana Assenza, Cars Hommes, and Domenico Massaro, “Interest Rate Rules
  and Macroeconomic Stability under Heterogeneous Expectations,” Macroeconomic Dy-
  namics, 2013, 17 (8), pp. 1574–1604.
Arifovic, Jasmina, Herbert Dawid, Christophe Deissenberg, and Olena
 Kostyshyna, “Learning Benevolent Leadership in a Heterogenous Agents Economy,”
 Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 2010, 34 (9), pp. 1768–1790.
  , James Bullard, and Olena Kostyshyna, “Social Learning and Monetary Policy
  Rules,” The Economic Journal, 2013, 123 (567), pp. 38–76.
Ashraf, Quamrul and Peter Howitt, “How Inflation Affects Macroeconomic Perfor-
 mance: An Agent-Based Computational Investigation,” 2008. Working Paper, Brown
 University.
Atkeson, Andrew and Lee E. Ohanian, “Are Phillips Curves Useful for Forecasting
 Inflation?,” FRB Minneapolis Quarterly Review, 2001, 25 (1), pp. 2–11.
Berardi, Michele and John Duffy, “The Value of Transparency when Agents are Learn-
 ing,” European Journal of Political Economy, 2007, 23 (1), pp. 9–29.
Bernanke, Ben, “Central Bank Talk and Monetary Policy,” 2004. Remarks at the Japan
 Society Corporate Luncheon, New York, NY.
Blinder, Alan S., Michael Ehrmann, Marcel Fratzscher, Jakob De Haan, and
  David-Jan Jansen, “Central Bank Communication and Monetary Policy: A Survey of
  Theory and Evidence,” Journal of Economic Literature, 2008, 46 (4), pp. 910–945.
Boivin, Jean, “How People Think and How It Matters,” 2011. Remarks to the Canadian
 Association for Business Economics, Kingston, ON.
Branch, William A. and George W. Evans, “Unstable Inflation Targets,” 2011. Work-
 ing Paper, University of California, Irvine.
Brazier, Alex, Richard Harrison, Mervyn King, and Tony Yates, “The Danger of
 Inflating Expectations of Macroeconomic Stability: Heuristic Switching in an Overlapping-
 Generations Monetary Model,” International Journal of Central Banking, 2008, 4 (2), pp.
 219–254.

                                           35
Brock, William A. and Cars H. Hommes, “A Rational Route to Randomness,” Econo-
 metrica, 1997, 65 (5), pp. 1059–1095.

Bryan, Michael F., Brent H. Meyer, and Nicholas B. Parker, “The Inflation Expec-
 tations of Firms: What do they look like, are they accurate, and do they matter?,” 2014.
 Working Paper, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta.

Burnside, Craig, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo, “Understanding Booms
 and Busts in Housing Markets,” 2013. Working Paper, Northwestern University.

Caballero, Ricardo J. and Eduardo M.R.A. Engel, “Price Stickiness in Ss Models:
 New Interpretations of Old Results,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 2007, 54 (Supple-
 ment), pp. 100–121.

Campbell, Jeffrey R., “Open Mouth Operations,” 2013. Mimeo, FRB Chicago.

  , Charles L. Evans, Jonas D.M. Fisher, and Alejandro Justiniano, “Macroe-
  conomic Effects of FOMC Forward Guidance,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
  2012, Spring 2012, pp. 1–54.

Carney, Mark, “A Monetary Policy Framework for All Seasons,” 2012. Remarks to the
 U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, New York, NY.

Carroll, Christopher D., “The Epidemiology of Macroeconomic Expectations,” in
 L. Blume and S. Durlauf, eds., The Economy as an Evolving Complex System, III, Oxford
 University Press, 2003.

  , “Macroeconomic Expectations of Households and Professional Forecasters,” Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 2003, 118 (1), pp. 269–298.

Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles L. Evans, “Nominal
 Rigidities and the Dynamic Effects of a Shock to Monetary Policy,” Journal of Political
 Economy, 2005, 113 (1), pp. 1–45.

Clarida, Richard, Jordi Gali, and Mark Gertler, “The Science of Monetary Policy: A
  New Keynesian Perspective,” Journal of Economic Literature, 1999, 37 (4), pp. 1661–1707.

Coibion, Olivier and Yuriy Gorodnichenko, “Is the Phillips Curve Alive and Well after
 All? Inflation Expectations and the Missing Disinflation,” American Economic Journal:
 Macroeconomics, 2015, 7 (1), pp. 197–232.

Colander, David, Peter Howitt, Alan Kirman, Axel Leijonhufvud, and Perry
 Mehrling, “Beyond DSGE Models: Toward an Empirically Based Macroeconomics,”
 American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings, 2008, 98 (2), pp. 236–240.

Cornea, Adriana, Cars Hommes, and Domenico Massaro, “Behavioral Heterogene-
 ity in U.S. Inflation Dynamics,” 2013. Tinbergen Institute Discussion Papers 13-015/II,
 Tinbergen Institute.



                                           36
Cukierman, Alex and Allan H. Meltzer, “A Theory of Ambiguity, Credibility, and
 Inflation under Discretion and Asymmetric Information,” Econometrica, 1986, 54 (5), pp.
 1099–1128.

D’Amico, Stefania and Thomas B. King, “Flow and Stock Effects of Large-Scale Trea-
 sury Purchases,” 2010. Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2010-52, Federal Reserve
 Board.

DeGrauwe, Paul, “The Scientific Foundation of Dynamic Stochastic General Equilibrium
 (DSGE) Models,” Public Choice, 2010, 144 (3/4), pp. 413–443.

Eggertsson, Gauti B. and Benjamin Pugsley, “The Mistake of 1937: A General Equi-
 librium Analysis,” Monetary and Economic Studies, 2006, 24 (S-1), pp. 1–58.

Ellison, Glenn and Drew Fudenberg, “Rules of Thumb for Social Learning,” Journal
  of Political Economy, 1993, 101 (4), pp. 612–643.

Eusepi, Stefano and Bruce Preston, “Central Bank Communication and Expectations
 Stabilization,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2010, 2 (3), pp. 235–271.

Faust, Jon and Jonathan H. Wright, “Forecasting Inflation,” 2012. Working Paper,
  John Hopkins University.

Fuhrer, Jeffrey C., “Expectations as a Source of Macroeconomic Persistence: An Explo-
  ration of Firms’ and Households’ Expectation Formation,” 2015. Working Paper 15-5,
  Federal Reserve Bank of Boston.

  , “Expectations as a Source of Macroeconomic Persistence: Evidence from Survey Expec-
  tations in Dynamic Macro Models,” 2015. Working Paper 12-19, Federal Reserve Bank of
  Boston.

Gagnon, Joseph, Matthew Raskin, Julie Remache, and Brian Sack, “Large-Scale
 Asset Purchases by the Federal Reserve: Did They Work?,” 2010. Federal Reserve Bank
 of New York Staff Reports.

Gurkaynak, Refet S., Brian Sack, and Eric T Swanson, “Do Actions Speak Louder
 Than Words? The Response of Asset Prices to Monetary Policy Actions and Statements,”
 International Journal of Central Banking, 2005, 1 (1), pp. 55–93.

Hachem, Kinda, “Resource Allocation and Inefficiency in the Financial Sector,” 2014.
 Working paper, University of Chicago.

Haltiwanger, John and Michael Waldman, “Rational Expectations and the Limits of
 Rationality: An Analysis of Heterogeneity,” American Economic Review, 1985, 75 (3), pp.
 326–340.

Hamilton, James D. and Jing Cynthia Wu, “The Effectiveness of Alternative Monetary
 Policy Tools in a Zero Lower Bound Environment,” Journal of Money, Credit & Banking,
 2012, 44 (s1), 3–46.


                                          37
Heemeijer, Peter, Cars Hommes, Joep Sonnemans, and Jan Tuinstra, “Price Sta-
 bility and Volatility in Markets with Positive and Negative Expectations Feedback: An
 Experimental Investigation,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 2009, 33 (5),
 pp. 1052–1072. Complexity in Economics and Finance.

Hommes, Cars, “Reflexivity, Expectations Feedback and Almost Self-Fulfilling Equilibria:
 Economic Theory, Empirical Evidence and Laboratory Experiments,” Journal of Eco-
 nomic Methodology, 2013, 20 (4), pp. 406–419.

  , Domenico Massaro, and Matthias Weber, “Monetary Policy under Behavioral
  Expectations: Theory and Experiment,” 2015. Tinbergen Institute Discussion Papers
  15-087/II, Tinbergen Institute.

Judd, Kenneth L. and Leigh Tesfatsion, Handbook of Computational Economics: Agent-
  Based Computational Economics, North Holland, 2006.

King, Mervyn, “Monetary Policy: Practice Ahead of Theory,” 2005. Mais Lecture, Cass
 Business School, London.

Krishnamurthy, Arvind and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, “The Effects of Quanti-
 tative Easing On Interest Rates: Channels and Implications for Policy,” 2011. NBER
 Working Paper No. 17555.

Kroszner, Randall S., “Communications Strategy, Expectations Management, and Cen-
 tral Bank Credibility,” 2012. Fall 2011 Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Conference,
 Washington, DC.

LeBaron, Blake, “Evolution and Time Horizons in an Agent Based Stock Market,” Macroe-
  conomic Dynamics, 2001, 5 (2), pp. 225–254.

Mankiw, N. Gregory, Ricardo Reis, and Justin Wolfers, “Disagreement about Infla-
 tion Expectations,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2003, 2004, 18, pp. 209–248.

Melosi, Leonardo, “Signaling Effects of Monetary Policy,” 2012. Federal Reserve Bank of
 Chicago WP 2012-05.

Milani, Fabio, “Expectations, Learning and Macroeconomic Persistence,” Journal of Mon-
 etary Economics, 2007, 54 (7), pp. 2065–2082.

Mishkin, Frederic S. and Klaus Schmidt-Hebbel, “Does Inflation Targeting Make
 a Difference?,” in F. S. Mishkin and K. Schmidt-Hebbel, eds., Monetary Policy Under
 Inflation Targeting, Volume XI of Series on Central Banking, Analysis, and Economic
 Policies, Central Bank of Chile, 2007, pp. 291–372.

Orphanides, Athanasios and John C. Williams, “Imperfect Knowledge, Inflation Ex-
 pectations, and Monetary Policy,” in B. Bernanke and M. Woodford, eds., The Inflation-
 Targeting Debate, University of Chicago Press, 2005, pp. 201–234.

Page, Scott E., “Aggregation in Agent-Based Models of Economics,” The Knowledge En-
 gineering Review, 2012, 27 (2), pp. 151–162.

                                           38
Pezzey, John C.V. and Jason J. Sharples, “Expectations of Linear Functions with
 respect to Truncated Multinormal Distributions,” Environmental Modelling and Software,
 2007, 22 (7), pp. 915–923.

Pfajfar, Damjan and Blaz Zakelj, “Inflation Expectations and Monetary Policy Design:
  Evidence from the Laboratory,” Macroeconomic Dynamics, forthcoming.

Reis, Ricardo, “When Should Policymakers Make Announcements?,” 2011.           Mimeo,
 Columbia University.

Roger, Scott, “Inflation Targeting at 20: Achievements and Challenges,” 2009. IMF Work-
 ing Paper WP/09/236.

Smets, Frank and Raf Wouters, “An Estimated Dynamic Stochastic General Equilibrium
 Model of The Euro Area,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 2003, 1 (5),
 pp. 1123–1175.

Stein, Jeremy C., “Cheap Talk and the Fed: A Theory of Imprecise Policy Announce-
  ments,” American Economic Review, 1989, 79 (1), pp. 32–42.

Svensson, Lars E.O., “Inflation Targeting,” 2010. NBER Working Paper 16654.

Weizsäcker, Georg, “Do We Follow Others when We Should? A Simple Test of Rational
 Expectations,” American Economic Review, 2010, 100 (5), pp. 2340–2360.

Williams, John C., “Unconventional Monetary Policy: Lessons from the Past Three
 Years,” 2011. FRBSF Economic Letter.

Woodford, Michael, Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy,
 Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2003.

  , “Central Bank Communication and Policy Effectiveness,” 2005. Proceedings of the
  Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Symposium at Jackson Hole, pp. 399-474.

  , “Macroeconomic Analysis without the Rational Expectations Hypothesis,” 2013. Forth-
  coming, Annual Review of Economics.

Wu, Jing Cynthia and Fan Dora Xia, “Measuring the Macroeconomic Impact of Mon-
 etary Policy at the Zero Lower Bound,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 2016, 48
 (2-3), pp. 253–291.

   and Ji Zhang, “A Shadow Rate New Keynesian Model,” 2016. Working paper, Univer-
  sity of Chicago.

Yellen, Janet, “Communication in Monetary Policy,” 2013. Remarks at the Society of
 American Business Editors and Writers 50th Anniversary Conference, Washington, DC.




                                          39
                                          Table 1: Data


             Country              abrupt1      abrupt2       abrupt3 under1             under2
             Canada                  0              1            1             1           1
             Chile                   0              0            0             0           0
             Colombia                0              0            0             0           0
             Czech Republic          0              1            1             1           1
             Ghana                   1              1            1             1           1
             Guatemala               0              1            1             0           0
             Hungary                 0              0            1             0           0
             Iceland                 1              1            1             1           0
             Indonesia               0              0            1             0           0
             Israel                  0              0            0             0           0
             Mexico                  0              0            0             0           0
             New Zealand             0              1            1             0           0
             Norway                  1              1            1             1           1
             Peru                    0              0            0             1           0
             Romania                 0              0            1             0           0
             South Africa            1              1            1             1           0
             Sweden                  1              1            1             1           1
             Turkey                  0              0            0             0           0
             United Kingdom          0              0            1             1           1

Notes: The left panel classifies countries as abrupt versus gradual targeters based on the
abruptness measures defined in Subsection 5.2. The right panel codes whether or not the
targeted path was undershot based on the undershooting measures in the same subsection.


                                     Table 2: Regressions


                     under1                             under2                            under num
 intercept 0.29** 0.20    0.17   0.33**   0.21*    0.10     0.00     0.32*    0.39      0.66**     0.40     0.15
           (0.02) (0.16)  (0.41) (0.05)   (0.10)   (0.47)   (1.00)   (0.07)   (0.15)    (0.04)     (0.40)   (0.67)
 abrupt1 0.71***                 0.68**   0.39                       0.28     -1.36**                       -1.14*
           (0.00)                (0.01)   (0.12)                     (0.29)   (0.02)                        (0.05)
 abrupt2          0.58***                          0.46**                               -1.33***
                  (0.01)                           (0.03)                               (0.01)
 abrupt3                  0.45*                             0.46**                                 -0.53
                          (0.08)                            (0.05)                                 (0.35)
 d2target                        0.00                                -0.01                                  0.02
                                 (0.70)                              (0.33)                                 (0.33)


Notes: Regression coefficients with p-values in brackets. * denotes rejection at the 10% level,
** at the 5% level, and *** at the 1% level. All variables are as defined in Subsection 5.2.


                                                   40
                                      Table 3: Robustness



                                   Undershooting                        Convergence
                            hitting %FF at minimum        convergence   inflation at  stdev at
                             time   first hit inflation      time       convergence convergence
  1)   baseline               14       21       0.033         30           0.039       0.0007
 2)    S=1                    11       68       0.038         12           0.039       0.0006
 3)    S=10                   14       20       0.032         47           0.039       0.0007
 4)    local                  13       24       0.033         61           0.039       0.0007
 5)    positive/negative      14       20       0.033         33           0.039       0.0007
 6)    θ = 0.01               19       14       0.032         35           0.039       0.0006
 7)    θ = 0.05               10       30       0.033         32           0.038       0.0010
 8)    π 0 = 0.06             11       17       0.032         28           0.039       0.0007
 9)    π 0 = 0.10             16       21       0.033         31           0.039       0.0006
 10)   γ t ∈ [0.95, 1.05]     14       20       0.033         30           0.039       0.0007
 11)   5 × N meetings         16       67       0.038         17           0.039       0.0005
 12)   0.8 × N meetings       14       20       0.032         48           0.039       0.0007

Notes: All inflation rates in this table are reported as fractions. The baseline row summa-
rizes the properties of realized inflation in Figure 5(a). It is based on N = 1000 firms, N
random meetings drawn with replacement each period, firms only counting positive strikes,
stubbornness S = 8, mutation θ = 0.02, initial inflation π 0 = 0.08, inflation target π t = 0.04
for all t, and taste shock γ t ∈ [0.99, 1.01]. The rest of the rows vary one parameter at a time
as indicated. The results in the columns are based on 100 simulations. The first five columns
report averages and are defined as follows: hitting time (in periods) is the first time inflation
hits the inflation target from above; %FF at first hit is the percentage of Fed Followers at
the hitting time; minimum inflation is the lowest value of realized inflation along the tran-
sition path; convergence time (in periods) is the first time the percentage of Fed Followers
exceeds 90% (80% for the row with θ = 0.05); inflation at convergence is realized inflation
at the convergence time. The last column is the standard deviation of realized inflation at
the convergence time.




                                                41
                                                              Figure 1: One Forecasting Rule

                      (a) Getting Mean Rationality                                                           (b) Parameter Space Example
                                                           π*−
                                         Excess Inflation (π − µ)
                                                                                                   0.4
                                                                                                                                                                     2 crossings
                                                                                                                                                                     1 crossing
                       α = 1 and U = 0                                                            0.35                                                               0 crossing
                       α = 1 and U ≥ 1 − ρ
                                                                                                   0.3
                            α,1) and U ∈ (U,U)
                       α ∈ (α

                                                                                                  0.25




                                                                                              U
                                                                                                   0.2
          0                                                                          σ

                                                                                                  0.15


                                                                                                   0.1


                                                                                                  0.05


                                                                                                     0.7                0.75    0.8         0.85         0.9         0.95




Notes: The left panel illustrates key properties of f (σ) under different assumptions. The
dashed and solid gray lines correspond to Lemmas 1 and 3 respectively. The solid blue line
is consistent with Proposition 2. An intersection with the horizontal axis is a mean rational
point. The red, yellow, and blue areas in the right panel demarcate combinations of α < 1
and U > 0 which produce zero, one, and two mean rational points respectively when ρ = 0.9.




                                     Figure 2: Two Forecasting Rules with Common Mean

                      (a) Parameter Space Example                                                                      (b) Dependence of yt on ξ t
                                                                                                                  -3
                                                                                                             10
                                                                                                  0.5
              0.4
                                                                             =0.85

          0.35
                                                                             =0.9                   0
                                                                             =0.95


              0.3                                                                                 -0.5

          0.25                                                                                     -1
                                                                                          yt
      U




              0.2
                                                                                                  -1.5

          0.15
                                                                                                   -2
              0.1
                                                                                                  -2.5
          0.05
                                                                                                   -3
                0.7       0.75           0.8        0.85        0.9   0.95
                                                                                                         0                0.2         0.4          0.6         0.8                 1
                                                                                                                                             t




Notes: The left panel illustrates combinations of α < 1 and U > 0 which (i) produce two
mean rational points σ F > 0 and σ R > 0 and (ii) generate negative excess inflation when
expectations are a mixture of N (µ, σ 2F ) and N (µ, σ 2R ). The right panel plots excess inflation
as a function of the fraction of expectations drawn from N (µ, σ 2F ). The parameters used to
plot the right panel come from the shaded area in the left panel.


                                                                                         42
                       Figure 3: Announcements to Increase Inflation

                                     (a) Constant Target
                   0.05                                                 1
                            Realized
                   0.04     Target
                            Mean expectation
                                                                        0.8
                   0.03     FF fraction
                   0.02                                                 0.6

                   0.01                                                 0.4
                      0
                                                                        0.2
                   -0.01
                   -0.02                                               0
                        0       5       10     15     20      25      30

                   (b) Aggressive Short-Term Target with Abrupt Drop
                   0.05                                                 1
                   0.04
                                                                        0.8
                   0.03
                   0.02                                                 0.6

                   0.01                                                 0.4
                      0
                                                                        0.2
                   -0.01
                   -0.02                                               0
                        0       5       10     15     20      25      30

                   (c) Aggressive Short-Term Target with Gradual Drop
                   0.05                                                 1
                   0.04
                                                                        0.8
                   0.03
                   0.02                                                 0.6

                   0.01                                                 0.4
                      0
                                                                        0.2
                   -0.01
                   -0.02                                               0
                        0       5       10     15     20      25      30

Notes: Panels plot results for different target paths. Lines average over 100 simulations.
Shaded areas are [10%, 90%] confidence intervals for realized inflation. The x-axis is time in
periods. The y-axis reports fractions, with inflation (realized, target, and mean expectation)
on the left scale and the fraction of Fed Followers on the right scale.
                                               43
                           Figure 4: Anti-Deflation Announcements

                                    (a) Rounds=1, Intensity=1
                   0.03                                                     1

                   0.02                                                     0.8

                   0.01                                                     0.6

                      0                                                     0.4
                                                         Realized
                                                         Target
                  -0.01                                  Mean expectation   0.2
                                                         FF fraction
                  -0.02                                                  0
                       0        5        10     15      20      25      30

                                    (b) Rounds=2, Intensity=1
                   0.04                                                     1

                   0.03                                                     0.8
                   0.02
                                                                            0.6
                   0.01
                                                                            0.4
                      0                                  Realized
                                                         Target
                  -0.01                                  Mean expectation   0.2
                                                         FF fraction
                  -0.02                                                  0
                       0        5        10     15      20      25      30

                                (c) Rounds=2, Intensity=0.75
                   0.03                                                     1

                   0.02                                                     0.8

                   0.01                                                     0.6

                      0                                                     0.4
                                                         Realized
                                                         Target
                  -0.01                                  Mean expectation   0.2
                                                         FF fraction
                  -0.02                                                  0
                       0        5        10     15      20      25      30

                                (d) Rounds=25, Intensity=0.1
                   0.03                                                     1

                   0.02                                                     0.8

                   0.01                                                     0.6

                      0                                                     0.4
                                                 Realized
                                                 Target
                  -0.01                          Mean expectation           0.2
                                                 FF fraction
                  -0.02                                                  0
                       0        5        10     15      20      25      30


Notes: Panels plot results for different combinations of rounds and intensity. The x-axis is
time in periods. The red vertical bar indicates when the anti-deflation announcements stop.
The y-axis reports fractions, with inflation (realized, target, and mean expectation) on the
left scale and the fraction of Fed Followers on the right scale.


                                               44
                      Figure 5: Abrupt vs Gradual Targeters in the Model

                                           (a) Abrupt
               0.1                                                           1
                                               Realized
                                               Target
              0.08                             Mean expectation              0.8
                                               FF fraction

              0.06                                                           0.6


              0.04                                                           0.4


              0.02                                                           0.2


                 0                                                           0
                  0          5        10        15         20     25        30


                                           (b) Gradual
               0.2                                                           1
                                              Realized
                                              Target
                                              Mean expectation
                                              FF fraction



               0.1                                                           0.5




                 0                                                           0
                  0          5        10        15         20     25        30


Notes: The x-axis is time in periods. The y-axis reports fractions, with inflation (realized,
target, and mean expectation) on the left scale and the fraction of Fed Followers on the right
scale.




                                               45
                         Figure 6: Abrupt vs Gradual Targeters in the Data

                                            (a) Abrupt

               0.1
                                                                      inflation
                                                                      target
              0.08



              0.06



              0.04



              0.02



                 0
                     0            5         10           15      20               25



                                           (b) Gradual

               0.2
                                                                      inflation
                                                                      target

              0.15




               0.1




              0.05




                 0
                     0            5         10           15      20               25



Notes: Average inflation targets and average realized inflation. The horizontal axis is time
in quarters since IT adoption. The top panel averages over abrupt targeters (abrupt1 = 1)
while the bottom panel averages over gradual targeters (abrupt1 = 0).



                                                 46
                                       Figure 7: Benchmarks

                             (a) Baseline vs Fixed Proportions
                      Inflation Rate                                 Fraction of Fed Followers
          0.09
                                                            1
          0.08
                              baseline                     0.8
          0.07                0% FF initial
                              25% FF initial
                              50% FF initial               0.6
          0.06                75% FF initial
                              100% FF initial
                              target                       0.4
          0.05
                                                           0.2
          0.04
                                                            0
          0.03
              0        10        20              30          0             10        20          30



                               (b) Baseline vs Mutation Only
                       Inflation Rate                                Fraction of Fed Followers
           0.09
                               baseline                      1
                               0% FF initial
           0.08
                               25% FF initial
                               50% FF initial              0.8
           0.07                75% FF initial
                               100% FF initial
                               target                      0.6
           0.06
                                                           0.4
           0.05
                                                           0.2
           0.04
                                                             0
           0.03
               0        10        20             30              0          10        20         30



Notes: The x-axis is time in periods. The y-axis in the left panels is realized inflation in
fractions, where baseline replicates the blue line labeled realized in Figure 5(a). The y-axis
in the right panels is the fraction of Fed Followers, where baseline replicates the purple line
labeled FF fraction in Figure 5(a).




                                                      47
Appendix A - Proofs
Proof of Proposition 1
Let φ (·) and Φ (·) denote the standard normal PDF and CDF respectively. From Pezzey
and Sharples (2007), the moment generating function of a truncated normal random variable
with mean 0 and variance σ 2 is:
                                                                                                     
                                                                   2                          r2 σ2                      c
                             R                                                                                               
                                     exp (rx) φ x, σ                       dx = exp             2
                                                                                                          Φ rσ −         σ
                                                                                                                                                      (6)
                             x≥c


                              bit = µ + εit with εit ∼ N (0, σ 2 ) in equation (2), we can rewrite
                 bit Pt−1 and π
                    
Using Pbti = exp π
the operation constraint as:
                                                                           1−αρ              
                                                           1        U          αρ         wt∗
                                      εit ≥ ln            αρ       1−αρ                   ∗
                                                                                         Pt−1
                                                                                                    −µ≡X                                              (7)


Combining equations (6) and (7) with the wage equation in (4) then yields an implicit
definition of X which is independent of µ:
                                                                                                                                   
                              1−αρ                 U                  σ2                                              σ           X
                      X=       αρ
                                         ln       1−αρ
                                                             +     2(1−αρ)
                                                                                 + (1 − αρ) ln Φ                    1−αρ
                                                                                                                             −    σ
                                                                                                                                                      (8)

Turn now to inflation. Substitute the firm pricing equation (1) into the price aggregator (5)
and simplify to get:

                                                                                                  b t π∗
                                                                                                i                            
                                                                                                                          π it
                                                                            R                    π      +ln(γ )    ρ(1−α)b
                                                                                         exp min 1−ρ  , t 1−ρ t − (1−ρ)(1−αρ)   di
                                         α(1−ρ)(X+µ)                ε ≥X
      π ∗t =   1−ρ        1−αρ
                                 
                     ln              +                         + ln  itR                                                                             (9)
                                                                                                                                                 
                ρ          U                1−αρ                                                           b it π ∗
                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                           π        +ln(γ )             π it
                                                                                                                                   (1−α)b
                                                                                         exp min          1−ρ
                                                                                                                , t 1−ρ t      − (1−ρ)(1−αρ)  di
                                                                                εit ≥X


Combining equations (8) and (9) then yields:
                                                                                                                               
                                     α(1−ρ)                     σ2
                      π ∗t   =        1−αρ
                                                µ+           2(1−αρ)
                                                                      + α (1 − ρ) ln Φ 1−αρ    σ
                                                                                                    − Xσ                                             (10)
                                                                      b t π∗
                                                                     i                           
                                                                                              π it
                                               R                     π      +ln(γ )    ρ(1−α)b
                                                             exp min 1−ρ  , t 1−ρ t − (1−ρ)(1−αρ)   di
                                          ε ≥X
                                     + ln  itR
                                                                                                                              
                                                                      b t π∗
                                                                    i                           
                                                                      π      +ln(γ )         π it
                                                                                        (1−α)b
                                                             exp min 1−ρ  , t 1−ρ t − (1−ρ)(1−αρ)  di
                                                  εit ≥X


        bit = µ + εit and εit ∼ N (0, σ 2 ) with (6) to simplify (10). It will help to define:
Now use π
                                                                                                                  1−α                 1−αρ
                                       (1−α)σ                                                    [2−α(1+ρ)]σ 2
                                 Φ(− (1−ρ)(1−αρ) − X )  Φ(   σ
                                                                − X
                                                                    ) exp                                                        U
                                                                                                                              ( 1−αρ )     αρ
                                                   σ       1−αρ   σ                             2(1−ρ)(1−αρ)2
               Υ (X, σ) ≡                                                           ρ(1−α)σ                                                          (11)
                                                                           Φ(− (1−ρ)(1−αρ) − X
                                                                                             σ)




                                                                             48
If γ t ≤ Υ (X, σ), then:
                                                                                                             ρ(1−α)σ
                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                        Φ(− (1−ρ)(1−αρ) − X
                                                                                                                          σ)
                                                                                        
                    (α−ρ)(1−αρ)−(1−α)2 σ 2
       π ∗t   −µ=      (1−ρ)(1−αρ)2     2
                                             + α (1 − ρ) ln Φ               σ
                                                                          1−αρ
                                                                                 −   X
                                                                                     σ
                                                                                             + ln             (1−α)σ               (12)
                                                                                                        Φ(− (1−ρ)(1−αρ) − X
                                                                                                                          σ)



Otherwise, π ∗t − µ solves:
                                                                            
                    1−α2 +α(1−ρ) σ 2
π ∗t   −µ =           (1−αρ)2     2
                                    + α (1 − ρ) ln Φ 1−αρ    σ
                                                                    − Xσ                                                                    (13)
                                                  π ∗ −µ+ln(γ t )         π∗                                                  π ∗ −µ+ln(γ t )
                                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                       2
                                σ
                           Φ( 1−αρ −X        σ                              t −µ+ln(γ t ) − (1+αρ−2ρ)σ            ρ(1−α)σ
                                     σ)
                                        −Φ 1−αρ − t     σ
                                                                   +exp        1−ρ                2        Φ − (1−ρ)(1−αρ) − t      σ
                                                                                            2(1−ρ) (1−αρ)
                    + ln                  
                                                  π∗  −µ+ln(γ t )
                                                                        ∗
                                                                          π t −µ+ln(γ t )    (1+αρ−2α)σ 2
                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                              π∗
                                                                                                                                              
                               ασ    X      ασ
                           Φ( 1−αρ − σ )−Φ 1−αρ −   t              +exp                   +                Φ  −
                                                                                                                  (1−α)σ
                                                                                                                            −   t −µ+ln(γ t )
                                                        σ                      1−ρ                2
                                                                                                  2(1−ρ) (1−αρ) (1−ρ)(1−αρ)         σ



Either way, we have a definition of π ∗t − µ which is independent of µ. 


Proof of Lemma 1
                                                                    
Impose α = 1 on equations (1), (2), and (3) to get p wt ; Pbti = wρt , Ot (wt ) = [0, 1], and
                    1
             bi  1−ρ                           
                ρP                                                                   w∗
` wt ; Pbti = wtt       . Substituting p wt∗ ; Pbti into equation (5) gives Pt∗ = ρt and substi-
                                                     1         1−ρ
             ∗ bi                           wt∗      R     i 1−ρ
tuting ` wt ; Pt into equation (4) gives ρ =            Pbt      di      . Combining these two ex-
                                                                                  R     i  
                                                                                          π
                                       bit and π ∗t then yields π ∗t = (1 − ρ) ln
pressions and using the definitions of π                                             exp 1−ρ
                                                                                          bt
                                                                                              di .
With πbit ∼ N (µ, σ 2 ), we can use the moment generating function of the normal distribution
to simplify the preceding integral. The integral is taken over the entire set so the moment
                                             σ2
generating function just yields π ∗t = µ + 2(1−ρ) . 


Proof of Lemma 2
The fraction of firms not operating is ∆ ≡ Φ Xσ . Taking derivatives yields d∆  ∝ dX  − Xσ
                                                 
                                                                             dσ   dσ
so what we want to show is dXdσ
                                 > Xσ . Using equation (8) from the proof of Proposition 1
produces:
                                                      X
                             dX       σ               σ
                                 = 1−αρ +           σ
                                                                                      (14)
                             dσ                Φ(       −X
                                                         σ)   σ
                                           1 + φ 1−αρ
                                                    σ
                                                        −X
                                                ( 1−αρ   σ)
                                                            1−αρ
                                                                            
                                                                       σ   X
                                                               Φ       −
                                                   σ        X        1−αρ σ
The desired inequality is thus                   1−αρ
                                                        −   σ
                                                                   
                                                                       σ   X
                                                                                    > −1. Showing xΦ (x) > −φ (x)
                                                                 φ       −
                                                                     1−αρ σ
                                              Rx                   Rx                        Rx
completes the proof: xΦ (x) = x                    φ (t) dt >         tφ (t) dt = −               φ0 (t) dt = −φ (x). 
                                             −∞                  −∞                          −∞




                                                                 49
Proof of Lemma 3
If α = 1, then the equations in the proof of Proposition 1 reduce to:
                                                                                                     
                            1−ρ              U              σ2                             σ        X
                     X=      ρ
                                   ln       1−ρ
                                                      +   2(1−ρ)
                                                                    + (1 − ρ) ln Φ        1−ρ
                                                                                                −   σ
                                                                                                                   (15)

                                                                                               
                                                  σ2
                            π ∗t   −µ=       + (1 − ρ) ln Φ
                                                2(1−ρ)
                                                                  −              σ
                                                                                1−ρ
                                                                                            X
                                                                                           (16)
                                                                                            σ
                                         
We can thus write f (σ) = X − 1−ρ ρ
                                     ln   U
                                         1−ρ
                                               with X dependent on σ as per (15). To make this
dependency explicit, we further write X (σ) in place of just X. Consider
                                                                       any
                                                                           σ 0 > 0 satisfying
                                                                 1−ρ    U
f (σ 0 ) = 0. That is, consider any σ 0 > 0 satisfying X (σ 0 ) = ρ ln 1−ρ . If U ≥ 1 − ρ, then
X (σ 0 ) ≥ 0 which, given dX dσ
                                > Xσ from the proof of Lemma 2, implies X 0 (σ 0 ) > 0. Notice
f 0 (·) = X 0 (·). This means that, if U ≥ 1 − ρ, then any σ 0 > 0 satisfying f (σ 0 ) = 0 must
also satisfy f 0 (σ 0 ) > 0. There is thus at most one σ 0 > 0 such that f (σ 0 ) = 0. To show
exactly one such σ 0 > 0, it will suffice to show lim+ f (σ) < 0 and lim f (σ) > 0. Equation
                                                σ→0            σ→∞ 
(15) yields X (0) ≡ lim+ X (σ) = (1 − ρ) ρ1 ln 1−ρ    U
                                                           + ln Φ lim+ −X(σ)
                                                                          σ
                                                                                  . Notice that
                      σ→0                                                                   σ→0

                                                     if U < 1 − ρ. Therefore, U ≥ 1 − ρ
X (0) > 0 is impossible while X (0) < 0 is only possible
                                              1−ρ      U
implies X (0) = 0 and thus lim+ f (σ) = − ρ ln 1−ρ         < 0. Equation (15) also yields
                                   σ→0
 lim X (σ) = ∞ and thus lim f (σ) = ∞. Putting everything together, we can now conclude
σ→∞                       σ→∞
that there is exactly one σ 0 > 0 such that f (σ 0 ) = 0. Moreover, f 0 (σ 0 ) > 0.
    The exit channel behind this result depends on heterogeneity, not on π      bit being a point
expectation. To see this, consider two types of firms j ∈ {1, 2}. The fraction of type 1 firms
is τ and the fraction of type 2 firms is 1 − τ . A type j firm takes inflation expectations over
                                 
the entire distribution N µ, σ 2j , with the resulting CDF for its price expectations denoted
                                                                      w∗
by Fj (·). The price-setting problem with α = 1 still yields Pt∗ = ρt but the labor demand
                               1
                           1−ρ       1       
of a type j firm is now wρ∗
                                   R 1−ρ
                                    Pbt dFj Pbt and operation requires:
                             t


                                                         Z      ρ         1−ρ
                                                                               ρ
                                    wt∗             1−ρ         1−ρ
                                     ρ
                                            ≤        U
                                                              Pbt     dFj Pbt                                      (17)


If only one type operates (say j = 1), then labor market clearing yields:
                                                Z    1   1−ρ
                                        wt∗          1−ρ
                                         ρ
                                              = τ Pbt dF1 Pbt                                                      (18)

                                                                                      wt∗
To ensure that only type 1 firms operate, we need (17) with                            ρ
                                                                                            as per (18) to hold at j = 1




                                                               50
but not at j = 2. Stated otherwise, we need:

                                               1−ρ                                      1−ρ
                                                                 !   <U ≤               
                                                                                             ρσ 2
                                                                                                     
                                    τρ   exp
                                                (
                                               ρ σ2      2
                                                   1 −ρσ 2   )                   τ ρ exp        1
                                                                                            2(1−ρ)
                                                 2(1−ρ)2



                        ρ(σ 21 −ρσ 22 )                ρσ 21                                                                       wt∗
A necessary condition is 2(1−ρ)   2     >            2(1−ρ)
                                                                     or, equivalently, σ 1 > σ 2 .22 Combining Pt∗ =                ρ
with (18), we can now write:

                                                               σ 21
                                          π ∗t = µ +         2(1−ρ)
                                                                           + (1 − ρ) ln τ

If τ = 1, then all firms use the same prior so everyone operates and we again q  have π ∗t > µ.
If τ ∈ (0, 1), then only type 1 firms operate and π ∗t = µ provided σ 1 = (1 − ρ) 2 ln τ1 . 
                                                                                           



Proof of Proposition 2
                                                                                  
Define U ≡ 1 − αρ. It will suffice to establish the result for some subset of 0, U . At σ = 0,
equations (12) and (13) both reduce to:
                                                                                                            
                                                                                                     −X(σ)
                            f (0) ≡ lim+ f (σ) = α (1 − ρ) ln Φ                             lim        σ
                                                                                                                                  (19)
                                       σ→0                                                 σ→0+


           −X(σ)
If lim+      σ
                   = ∞, then f (0) = 0. Moreover, (12) and (13) will both also produce:
  σ→0

                                                            X(σ)
                                                      φ( −             )1
                                                                                               
                                                                                X(σ)                         α(1−ρ)
  f 0 (0) ≡ lim+ f 0 (σ) = α (1 − ρ) lim+                    σ
                                                            X(σ)                       − X 0 (σ) =                  lim   X 0 (σ) (20)
              σ→0                              σ→0    Φ(   − σ         )σ        σ                            1−αρ σ→0+


where the last equality follows from using equation (14). Turn now to X (·). At σ = 0,
equation (8) yields:
                                                                                                               
                                                                  1          U                           −X(σ)
                                                                                 
                       X (0) ≡ lim+ X (σ) = U                    αρ
                                                                       ln    U
                                                                                     + ln Φ       lim     σ
                                                                                                                                  (21)
                                 σ→0                                                            σ→0+


Notice from (21) that X (0) > 0 is impossible while X (0) < 0 is only possible if U < U .
Therefore, U = U implies X (0) = 0 and thus lim+ −X(σ)
                                                   σ
                                                       = ∞. Since X 0 (0) ≡ lim+ X 0 (σ) ∼
                                                                                         =
                                                                      σ→0                                             σ→0
X(h)−X(0)        X(h) h→0+                                                                           0
   h−0
             =    h
                      −−−→  −∞, it now follows that f (0) = 0 and f (0) < 0 when U = U . Taken
together, f (0) = 0 and f 0 (0) < 0 imply existence of a σ > 0 such that f (σ) < 0. Combined
with lim f (σ) = ∞, this then implies existence of a σ R > 0 satisfying f (σ R ) = 0 and
        σ→∞
f 0 (σ R ) > 0. For f (·) continuous in U , we can thus find an  > 0 such that there also exists
a σ R > 0 satisfying f (σ R ) = 0 and f 0 (σ R ) > 0 when U ∈ U − , U . To show existence
                                                                          

  22
       Recall that this derivation assumes α = 1. With lower values of α, it is possible to get σ 1 < σ 2 .

                                                                      51
of a σ F ∈ (0, σ R ) satisfying f (σ F ) = 0 and f 0 (σ F ) < 0, it will suffice to show f (0) = 0
and f 0 (0) > 0 when U ∈ U − , U . If f 0 (0) = 0, then it will suffice to show f (0) = 0
                                         

and f 00 (0) ≡ lim+ f 00 (σ) > 0. For any U ∈ 0, U , we have X (0) ∈ (−∞, 0) from (21) and
                                                      
              σ→0
                                                                           2         
                                                                       X(σ)        X(σ)
thus f (0) = 0 from (19). We also have X 0 (0) = 1−αρ      X(0)
                                                                lim+    σ
                                                                              φ  −   σ
                                                                                          = 0 from
                                                                                               σ→0
(14) and the property lim z 2 φ (−z) = 0. Therefore, equation (20) yields f 0 (0) = 0 and
                                     z→−∞
it remains to show f (0) > 0. With σ = 0 and lim+ −X(σ)
                                00
                                                           σ
                                                               = ∞, equation (11) implies
                                                    σ→0
                     1−αρ
Υ (X (0) , 0) = UU αρ < 1 so, for small taste shocks, the behavior of f 00 (·) around zero is
                   
                                                                                      00
dictated by equation (13). After some algebra (available upon request), we obtain ! f (0) =
                                                           r            2
(1−α)(α−ρ)+α(1−ρ)2                                ρ(1−ρ)          ρ(1−ρ)
    (1−αρ)2 (1−ρ)
                   which  is positive for α ∈ 1 −    2
                                                         −    1 −    2
                                                                            − ρ, 1 ≡ (α, 1).

Therefore, there must exist a σ F ∈ (0, σ R ) satisfying f (σ F ) = 0 and f 0 (σ F ) < 0 when
              
U ∈ U − , U and α ∈ (α, 1). 


Proof of Proposition 3
We first characterize π ∗t for any α ≤ 1. We then establish the properties under α = 1.

General Characterization To simplify notation, define:
                                                                            1−αρ
                                                                                    wt∗
                                                                                         
                                                             1      U
                                     π ∗t −µ
                                                   ln       αρ   ( 1−αρ )    αρ
                                                                                    ∗
                                                                                   Pt−1
                                                                                              −µ
                                                                                                                  σj
                           yt ≡      1−αρ
                                          , xt ≡                      1−αρ
                                                                                                   , and υ j ≡   1−αρ


The variable yt is just excess inflation scaled up by a constant. The variable xt provides a
more compact way to express the operation condition in equation (2). In particular, if the
difference between a firm’s inflation forecast and the mean forecast is greater than or equal
to xt , then the firm operates. With a mixture of normal expectations, equations (2) and (4)
yield xt implicitly defined by:23
                                      h        2                                                                                 i
            1             U                      υ                             xt                                υ 2R                xt
    xt =   αρ
                ln       1−αρ
                                    + ln ξ t exp 2F Φ υ F −                    υF
                                                                                          + (1 − ξ t ) exp        2
                                                                                                                            Φ υR −   υR


The expression for excess inflation then comes from equation (5). If the realized taste shock
is small enough to support γ t Pt∗ ≤ Pbti for all operating firms, then γ t Pt∗ will drop out of
the consumption weights, leaving Pt∗ and yt∗ explicitly defined. Otherwise, Pt∗ and yt∗ will be
  23
     The derivations that follow parallel those in the proof of Proposition 1 and are thus omitted. The only
difference is the use of a mixture of normals rather than a single normal when evaluating any integrals.




                                                                       52
implicitly defined. The threshold γ t works out to:
                                               2  
                                                υ
                                                                            2  
                                                                             υ
                                                                                            1−α         1−αρ
                                                           x                            x            U
                                        ξ t exp 2F Φ υ F − υ t +(1−ξ t ) exp 2R Φ υ R − υ t
                                                                  F
                                                                                                  ( 1−αρ
                                                                                                   R
                                                                                                         ) αρ
      Υ (xt , ξ t ) ≡             
                                        ρ(1−α)υ F
                                                      2                                  
                                                                                              ρ(1−α)υ R 2
                                                                                                        
                                           1−ρ                                                   1−ρ
                                                                                                          ρ(1−α)υ        
                                                            ρ(1−α)υ F  xt
                                                                                           
                                                                                                                      R − xt
                         ξt exp                         Φ −           −υ     +(1−ξt ) exp              Φ −
                                                                                                       
                                            2                  1−ρ       F                      2           (1−ρ)    υR

                                                          2 
                                                                                             (1−α)υ R 2
                                                                                                  
                                           (1−α)υ F
                                             1−ρ               (1−α)υ                        1−ρ
                                                                                                         (1−α)υ        
                                                                        F − xt +(1−ξ ) exp                        R − xt
                                                                                         
                             ξt exp                         Φ −                                       Φ −
                                                                                                      
                                              2                  1−ρ     υF       t     
                                                                                                2           1−ρ     υR




                                                          ln Υ(xt ,ξ t )
If γ t ≤ Υ (xt , ξ t ), then yt = xt −                       1−αρ
                                                                         .    Otherwise, yt solves:

                                                                                                            ρ(1−α)
                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                  ξ t h(xt ,yt ,γ t ,υ F ,1,          )+(1−ξt )h(xt ,yt ,γ t ,υR ,1, ρ(1−α)
                                                                                                                                                       1−ρ )
                  h                              i
         α(1−ρ)               1             U                    1                                             1−ρ
  yt =                xt −        ln                      +            ln            ξ t h(xt ,yt ,γ t ,υ F ,α, 1−α                                  1−α
          1−αρ               αρ            1−αρ                1−αρ
                                                                                                                1−ρ   )+(1−ξ t ( t t t R
                                                                                                                              )h x  ,y  ,γ   ,υ  ,α, 1−ρ )


                                                    where
                                                                                    ln(γ t )
                                                                                                 
                                            (βυ)2               xt
                                                                                  yt + 1−αρ
         h (xt , yt , γ t , υ, β, δ) ≡ exp    2
                                                       Φ βυ − υ − Φ βυ −                υ
                                                                                                      
                                                                    ln(γ t )                      ln(γ t )
                                                (δυ)2   (1−αρ) yt + 1−αρ                     yt + 1−αρ
                                       + exp      2
                                                      +       1−ρ
                                                                                Φ −δυ −           υ


Notice that the limiting cases of ξ t = 0 and ξ t = 1 return the model with expectations
characterized by a single normal distribution.
                                                                                                              
                                                                                           1             U
Special Case Suppose α = 1. Defining λ ≡                                                   ρ
                                                                                               ln       1−ρ
                                                                                                                   , the mixture equations derived
above reduce to:
                                                                                                                                              
                                               υ 2F                          yt +λ                                       υ 2R                yt +λ
            exp (yt ) = ξ t exp                 2
                                                          Φ υF −              υF
                                                                                         + (1 − ξ t ) exp                 2
                                                                                                                                    Φ υR −    υR
                                                                                                                                                           (22)

                                                           2                 
                                                           υ
Under ξ t = 0, equation (22) yields exp (yt ) = exp 2R Φ υ R − yυt +λ         R
                                                                                  . Under ξ t = 1, it
                         2               
                          υ
yields exp (yt ) = exp 2F Φ υ F − yυt +λ F
                                              . Since yt = f (σ R ) = 0 at ξ t = 0 and yt = f (σ F ) =
                                       2                                2              
                                       υ                                      υ
0 at ξ t = 1, it follows that exp 2F Φ υ F − υλF = 1 and exp 2R Φ υ R − υλR = 1.
                                                  2                          2           
                                                   υi           yt +λ            υi           λ
Consider now ξ t ∈ (0, 1). If yt < 0, then exp 2 Φ υ i − υi > exp 2 Φ υ i − υi = 1
for i ∈ {F,R} so equation
                               (22)
                                   2 implies
                                        yt >0 which is a contradiction. If yt > 0, then
       υ 2i         yt +λ          υi
exp 2 Φ υ i − υi            < exp 2 Φ υ i − υλi = 1 for i ∈ {F, R} so equation (22) implies
yt < 0 which is a contradiction. Therefore, yt = 0 for ξ t ∈ (0, 1). 




                                                                                  53
