NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE EFFECT OF CHILD HEALTH INSURANCE ACCESS ON SCHOOLING:
EVIDENCE FROM PUBLIC INSURANCE EXPANSIONS
Sarah Cohodes
Daniel Grossman
Samuel Kleiner
Michael F. Lovenheim
Working Paper 20178
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20178
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2014

We are grateful to Tal Gross, Kosali Simon and Diane Schanzenbach for helpful comments and guidance
on all simulated eligibility calculations. We also thank seminar participants at Cornell University,
Harvard University, the 2014 American Economic Association Annual Meeting as well as David Autor,
Amitabh Chandra, Larry Katz and Aaron Yelowitz for helpful feedback on earlier versions of this
work. This paper represents a combination of two prior working papers: “The Impact of Medicaid
Expansion for Children on their Educational Attainment” by Sarah Cohodes and “The Effect of Health
Care Access on Schooling: Evidence from Public Insurance Expansions” by Samuel Kleiner, Michael
Lovenheim and Daniel Grossman. Cohodes gratefully acknowledges support from a Harvard University
grant from the Multidisciplinary Program in Inequality and Social Policy. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Sarah Cohodes, Daniel Grossman, Samuel Kleiner, and Michael F. Lovenheim. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Effect of Child Health Insurance Access on Schooling: Evidence from Public Insurance
Expansions
Sarah Cohodes, Daniel Grossman, Samuel Kleiner, and Michael F. Lovenheim
NBER Working Paper No. 20178
May 2014, Revised October 2014
JEL No. H51,H52,I13,I21,I28
ABSTRACT
Public health insurance programs comprise a large share of federal and state government expenditures.
Although a sizable literature analyzes the effects of these programs on health care utilization and health
outcomes, little prior work has examined the long-term effects and resultant health improvements
on important outcomes, such as educational attainment. We contribute to filling this gap in the literature
by examining the effects of the public insurance expansions among children in the 1980s and 1990s
on their future educational attainment. Our findings indicate that expanding health insurance coverage
for low-income children increases the rate of high school completion and college completion. These
estimates are robust to only using federal Medicaid expansions, and mostly are due to expansions that
occur when the children are older (i.e., not newborns). We present suggestive evidence that better
health is one of the mechanisms driving our results by showing that Medicaid eligibility when young
translates into better teen health. Overall, our results indicate that the long-run benefits of public health
insurance are substantial.
Sarah Cohodes
John F. Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
cohodes@fas.harvard.edu
Daniel Grossman
MVR Hall, Dept. of PAM
Cornell University
Ithaca NY 14853
dan.s.grossman@gmail.com

Samuel Kleiner
Cornell University
College of Human Ecology
108 Martha Van Rensselaer Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853
and NBER
skleiner@cornell.edu
Michael F. Lovenheim
Department of Policy Analysis and Management
Cornell University
102 Martha Van Rensselaer Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853
and NBER
mfl55@cornell.edu

1. Introduction
Whether and how to provide access to affordable healthcare for low-income Americans
has become a central policy issue in the US, driven in part by the large and persistent health
disparities that exist across the socioeconomic spectrum. The importance of this issue is
underscored by the intense debate surrounding the passage and implementation of the 2010
Affordable Care Act (ACA), one of the largest expansions of public health insurance in US
history. A core component of the ACA was to further expand eligibility for Medicaid, which is
the primary method through which the government provides affordable health insurance to lowincome families. Since its inception in 1965, Medicaid has gone through repeated expansions
that have greatly expanded the scope of the program as well as the public sector’s role in health
insurance provision. As a result, over 50% of children in the United States currently are eligible
for publicly-provided health insurance through this program,2 and health insurance coverage is
high amongst this population (DeNavas-Walt et al., 2013).
The expansions that generated this high level of coverage were expensive. In 2012, total
state and federal spending on Medicaid was $415.2 billion (Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation,
2014), which makes it the largest government program that targets low-income Americans.3 The
substantial public funds devoted to providing health insurance to low-income children, as well as
recent debates over the value of such insurance that surrounded the passage of the ACA,
highlight the importance of understanding what benefits, if any, accrue to individuals due to
health insurance access when they are young.
2

Throughout this paper, we refer to “public health insurance” and Medicaid synonymously. Publicly-provided
health insurance also includes State Children’s Health Insurance Plans (SCHIP). Medicare, however, is not included
in our definition of public health insurance for purposes of this paper.
3
As a point of reference, total expenditures on food stamps (SNAP) in 2012 were $78.4 billion, and spending on
Temporary Aid for Needy Families (TANF) was $31.4 billion. Total Medicare expenditures were $536 billion,
which highlights that the Medicare and Medicaid/SCHIP programs are of roughly similar size.

1

The effect of Medicaid expansions on access to healthcare and on subsequent child health
has been studied extensively, (e.g., Currie and Gruber, 1996a, 1996b; Moss and Carver, 1998;
Baldwin et al., 1998; Cutler and Gruber, 1996, LoSasso and Buchmueller, 2004; Gruber and
Simon, 2008), typically showing that Medicaid expansions increase access to healthcare,
decrease infant mortality, and improve childhood health. Furthermore, these expansions and
Medicaid access more generally have been linked to a lower likelihood of bankruptcy and to less
medical debt (Gross and Notowidigdo, 2011; Finkelstein et al., 2012). If Medicaid leads to better
health outcomes among children and to more stable finances among low-income households, as
is suggested by prior research, Medicaid expansions could lead to long-run benefits for affected
children. Given the persistently high returns to human capital investments (e.g., Autor, Katz and
Kearney, 2008) as well as human capital models that suggest childhood health and family
resources should both positively influence educational attainment, examining the effects of
Medicaid expansions on long-run educational attainment is of considerable policy interest.
In this paper, we provide the first US-based evidence in the literature on how expanding
health insurance for children influences their eventual educational attainment.4 Similar to prior
work on Medicaid, we exploit the expansions of Medicaid and the State Children’s Health
Insurance Program (SCHIP) that took place in the 1980s and 1990s to examine how the
educational attainment of these children was affected by access to these programs. We use data
on 22-29 year olds born between 1980 and 1990 from the 2005-2012 American Community
Survey (ACS) that allow us to match each respondent to his or her state of birth. We then use

4

Two prior studies have examined the role of public health insurance on educational attainment in the developing
world (Alcaraz et al., 2013; Chen and Jin, 2012), however it is doubtful that these results can be generalized to the
United States or to other industrialized nations.

2

data from the March Current Population Survey (CPS) to calculate Medicaid eligibility by age,
state, year and race that we link to our ACS sample.
With these data, we follow the method of simulated instrumental variables pioneered by
Currie and Gruber (1996a, 1996b) and Cutler and Gruber (1996), in which we use Medicaid
eligibility of a fixed population in each age, state, year and race as an instrument for actual
eligibility. This IV approach accounts for the fact that the composition of a state may be
endogenous to Medicaid eligibility rules. By using a fixed sample to calculate eligibility, the
model is identified using eligibility rule changes only. The underlying identification assumption
for our purposes is that Medicaid rules are not changing due to unobserved cross-cohort trends in
educational attainment. A large body of prior work has established the credibility of this
assumption in terms of health, fertility and family bankruptcy (Currie and Gruber, 1996a;
DeLeire et al., 2011; Gross and Notowidigdo, 2011). We extend this literature by implementing a
series of robustness checks, including using only federal Medicaid variation that cannot be
affected by state-level choices, to further support the validity of this methodology.
The main contribution of this paper to the literature is to demonstrate the effect of health
insurance access among both young and school-age children on their long-run educational
attainment. While there is a sizable body of research demonstrating a link between fetal health as
well as the provision of fetal healthcare services on future educational outcomes (e.g., Figlio et
al., 2013; Levine and Schanzenbach, 2009; Currie and Gruber, 1996b), the effect of children’s
access to healthcare services on their educational attainment has not been studied previously.5

5

Currie, Decker and Lin (2008) present suggestive evidence that exposure to Medicaid expansions when young lead
to better health in adolescence, which suggests there could be an effect on educational attainment as well. In a
related study, Brown, Kowalski and Lurie (2014) use IRS tax data to show that the eligibility expansions in the
1980s led to higher earnings by the time individuals reached the age of 31. Their work does not examine educational
attainment, but their results and ours strongly complement one another.

3

From a policy perspective, this is an important group to consider because of the large amount
spent on providing health insurance to non-newborn children. Furthermore, socioeconomic
disparities in educational outcomes begin at young ages and largely persist throughout the
lifecycle (Carneiro and Heckman, 2002; Todd and Wolpin, 2007). Thus, it is critical to
understand whether reducing health insurance disparities across the socioeconomic distribution
among children can be useful as a means to close these persistent educational gaps that are
present in later years.
We find consistent evidence that Medicaid exposure when young increases later
educational attainment. A 10 percentage point increase in average Medicaid eligibility between
the ages of 0-17 decreases the high school dropout rate by 0.4-0.5 of a percentage point, has a
small and typically insignificant effect on college enrollment, and increases the four-year college
attainment rate (i.e., BA receipt) by 0.6-1.0 percentage point. These estimates translate into
declines in high school non-completion of about 4.0-5.9% and increases in BA attainment of
about 2.3%-3.0% relative to the sample means. In separate estimates by race, we find that the
high school completion effects are localized to nonwhites, while the college completion rate
impacts are largest among white children.
Another important contribution of this analysis is to examine whether it is sufficient for a
child to be treated at birth or whether there are returns to expanding eligibility amongst older,
largely school-age children. Prior work in this area has focused more on eligibility at birth than
on the effects of eligibility at older ages (Levine and Schanzenbach, 2009; Currie and Gruber,
1996b).6 We provide some of the first estimates in this literature on heterogeneity by age at the
time of expansion. While we do not find strong age patterns in the data, we see evidence that
6

Currie and Gruber (1996a) examine effects of Medicaid expansions on child mortality for children 1-14, but they
do not break out the effects by child age at expansion.

4

Medicaid expansions at older ages have effects on educational attainment. That is, Medicaid
expansions to slightly older, mostly school-age children increase educational attainment, not just
eligibility expansions at birth.7
As a means to understand a central mechanism through which these effects operate, we
examine the impact of Medicaid eligibility when young on teen health. Using data from the
Youth Risk Behavior Surveillance System (YRBSS), we show suggestive evidence that
Medicaid eligibility between age 0 and one’s age at the time of the survey has sizable positive
effects on a range of health outcomes. For example, an increase in Medicaid eligibility
throughout one’s youth reduces risky sexual activity, body mass index (BMI), drinking, and
smoking cigarettes or marijuana. Furthermore, Medicaid eligibility decreases the number of
reported mental health issues, and students are less likely to report having an eating disorder.
While these estimates typically are not statistically significantly different from zero at
conventional levels, they provide support for the idea that better health is an important
mechanism that drives at least part of the increased educational attainment we document.
Overall, our results point to large effects of Medicaid expansions for children on their
eventual educational attainment. These effects are particularly important because lower-income
families are most affected by Medicaid and SCHIP expansions, and it is children from these
families that have exhibited the most sluggish growth in educational attainment over the past 30
years (Bailey and Dynarski, 2011). Our estimates suggest that the long-run returns to providing
health insurance access to children are larger than just the short-run gains in health status, and

7

The effect of Medicaid eligibility at birth could be biased downward due to the fact that Medicaid reduces infant
mortality (Currie and Gruber, 1996b). Any resulting compositional changes in birth cohorts likely would lead to a
reduction in long-run outcomes, all else equal. To the extent Medicaid changes the composition of births and/or of
older children through reduced mortality, this should attenuate our estimates. However, infant and child mortality
rates are sufficiently low in the US that any such attenuation is probably very small.

5

that part of the return to these expansions is a potential reduction in inequality and higher
economic growth that stems from the creation of a more skilled workforce.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes the public health
expansions we use in our analysis, and Section 3 reviews the literature on the effects of health
insurance on health and family finances as well as the literature examining the links between
health, family resources and educational outcomes. Section 4 provides a description of the data.
We outline our empirical strategy and detail our results in Sections 5 and 6, respectively, before
concluding in Section 7.

2. Medicaid and Public Health Care Expansions for Children
The Medicaid program was introduced in 1965 and phased in mostly over the late 1960s
as a health insurance component for state-based cash welfare programs that targeted low-income,
single-parent families. Beginning in the mid-1980s, the Medicaid program was slowly separated
from cash welfare, first by extending benefits to low-income children in two-parent families and
then by raising the income eligibility thresholds for two groups: children and pregnant women
(Gruber, 2003; Gruber and Simon, 2008).8 Thus, since the 1980s, Medicaid has been expanded
to many low-income families who did not previously qualify due to their income levels, family
composition and/or labor force participation. As a result of these expansions, by the mid-1990s,
most children in America below the poverty line, and all young children below 133% of the
poverty line, were eligible for Medicaid. In certain states, their parents were as well.
Importantly, for most of these expansions, states could choose to implement the
expansion based on their own eligibility preferences. By the early 1990’s, states were required to
cover all children below 100% of the poverty line, and children under age 6 below 133% of the
8

For more details on Medicaid expansions, see Currie and Gruber (1996a), Gruber (2003), and Gruber and Simon
(2008).

6

poverty line. Many states opted to provide more generous coverage, however, for which the
federal government would provide matching funds up to a certain threshold. In 1997, Congress
passed the State Children’s Health Insurance Plan (SCHIP), which was one of the largest
expansions of public health insurance to date. SCHIP provided matching funds to states to
expand coverage to children from households with incomes below 200% of the poverty line.
Prior to SCHIP, states were permitted to cover children up to 200% of the poverty line, but,
without federal matching funds, very few states did so.
In this paper, we exploit these expansions in Medicaid generosity in the 1980s and 1990s
that were phased in at different times, and with different generosity levels across states, to
identify the effect of Medicaid eligibility on long-run educational attainment. Thus, we use both
state-level variation, which assumes the timing of state eligibility changes is exogenous with
respect to underlying trends in educational attainment of residents, and federal variation to
explicitly test the robustness of our estimates to the assumption that the state Medicaid variation
is exogenous.

3. Previous Literature
The effect of Medicaid eligibility on education will flow through two main potential
channels: better health due to Medicaid take-up, as well as higher household resources stemming
from the insurance protection provided by Medicaid. This paper thus relates to the large
literature examining the effect of Medicaid on health care utilization, health outcomes and
household finances, as well as the literature linking health and family resource changes to
educational outcomes. Below, we discuss both sets of research in turn.
3.1 Effects of Medicaid Expansions on Utilization, Health Outcomes and Family
Finances

7

Much prior research has documented the effects of Medicaid expansions on both the use
of medical care and health status. In their examination of the effects of health insurance on
utilization, Buchmueller et al. (2005) provide a detailed survey of this literature, noting that
economic theory predicts that health insurance coverage induces greater medical care utilization
by reducing the cost of care to patients (Phelps, 1997). Consistent with this prediction, studies of
state-based Medicaid and federal expansions of coverage show that these programs lead to
increases in health care use on both extensive and intensive margins. These effects are observed
both among children and adults (e.g. Currie and Gruber, 1996a, 1996b; Currie, 2000; Kaestner et
al., 2000; Kaestner et al., 2001; Almeida, Dubay, and Ko, 2001; Banthin and Selden, 2003;
Dafny and Gruber, 2005). As noted by Levy and Meltzer (2008), while health insurance
increases the quantity of care consumed, the effects of coverage will vary based on the
availability of providers and efficacy of the medical care consumed as a result of increased
coverage. While their review suggests that health insurance improves the health of infants and
children (with little conclusive evidence shown for non-elderly adults), Finkelstein et al. (2012)
present evidence that the expansion of public insurance improves both physical and mental
health for adults as well.
Recent work also has suggested that public health insurance successfully shelters lowincome families from financial risk associated with negative health shocks. Gross and
Notowidigdo (2011) show that families exposed to Medicaid expansions are less likely to declare
bankruptcy, while the estimates of Dave et al. (2013) indicate that Medicaid eligibility was
associated with a decrease in the employment probability of women who recently gave birth. In
their study of the randomized Medicaid experiment in Oregon, Finkelstein et al. (2012) find that

8

obtaining access to public health insurance reduces the amount of out-of-pocket medical
expenditures as well as medical debt.
3.2 Effects of Health and Family Resources on Educational Attainment
How are such changes in child health and family finances from Medicaid expansions
predicted to affect educational attainment? A sizable literature dating back to the seminal
contribution of Grossman (1972) examines the effect of education on future health,9 but much
less work has been done estimating the effect of health in childhood on educational achievement
and attainment. Existing research has documented that better fetal health translates into increased
educational outcomes. These studies testing the “fetal origins” hypothesis overwhelmingly show
that health interventions and shocks among pregnant women, as well as differences in
measurable health at birth, have long-run consequences for cognitive ability, educational
outcomes of children, and adult health (e.g., Miller and Wherry, 2014; Figlio et al., 2013;
Almond and Mazumder, 2011; Almond, Edlund and Palme, 2009; Almond, 2006; Black,
Devereaux and Salvanes, 2007; Oreopoulos et al., 2008; Royer, 2009).
Despite the evidence linking fetal health to long-run outcomes, little research exists
examining how childhood health after birth impacts such outcomes. Currie et al. (2010) find that
children with health problems in early childhood have poorer long-run health, a higher likelihood
of being on social assistance, and lower educational outcomes. Case, Fertig and Paxson (2005)
and Case, Lubotsky and Paxson (2002) both show that worse health in childhood is negatively
associated with long-run outcomes, such as health, educational attainment, and labor market
outcomes. Historical evidence also suggests such a link exists: hookworm eradication led to
9

There currently is very mixed evidence on whether education affects long-run health outcomes (e.g., Adams et al.,
2003; Cutler and Lleras Muney, 2006; Grossman, 2004; Clark and Royer, 2013), with much heterogeneity in terms
of the credibility of the identification strategies used, the time periods and countries studied, and the education levels
examined.

9

more school attendance and literacy gains in the US south in the early 1900’s (Bleakley 2007),
and malaria eradication efforts resulted in small gains in income for cohorts whose regions were
treated before other cohorts (Bleakley 2010).10
Cox and Reback (2013) as well as Lovenheim, Reback and Wedenoja (2013) examine the
effect of health care access on educational attainment using the rollout of school-based health
centers in the US. The former study finds that center openings lead to high attendance rates,
while the latter shows they cause lower teen birth rates but do not affect high school dropout
rates. The students treated by these centers are typically in high school, so the differences
between these estimates and the large effects of health found by researchers examining younger
children may potentially be due to heterogeneity in the effects of health at different times during
childhood.
Another main channel through which Medicaid can influence educational attainment is
through its effect on family resources. Several recent studies attempt to isolate the causal impact
of additional funds on educational achievement. Dahl and Lochner (2012) use the Earned Income
Tax Credit (EITC) as an instrument for unexpected income changes and find that an additional
$1000 of income for a family in poverty results in children’s test score gains of about 0.06
standard deviations. Duncan, Morris, and Rodrigues (2011) find test score effects of a similar
magnitude to those in Dahl and Lochner (2012) when they examine 11 random assignment
experiments of welfare and anti-poverty programs from the 1990’s. Michelmore (2013) shows
that income changes from the EITC also lead to higher college enrollment and completion.
Together, these studies suggest that changes in family finances and child health generated by
Medicaid expansions could lead to impacts on long-run educational attainment.
10

See Almond and Currie (2011) for a comprehensive overview of the fetal origins hypothesis and Eide and
Showalter (2011) for evidence on the effect of health on human capital outcomes throughout the life cycle.

10

While we provide the first analysis in the literature of the long-run effects of Medicaid on
educational attainment, there are two papers in the literature that are closely associated with ours.
The first paper is Levine and Schanzenbach (2009), which analyzes the effect of Medicaid and
SCHIP expansions at birth on future educational achievement as measured by state-level NAEP
scores. They examine differences in Medicaid expansion by state and the differences between
age cohorts in a triple difference framework. Their results suggest that a 50 percentage point
increase in Medicaid eligibility corresponds to a 0.09 standard deviation increase in reading test
scores. They find no effect on math test scores, however.
Our analysis is distinguished from theirs along several dimensions. First, we focus on the
effects of expanding health insurance to children of all ages. This question has been studied
much less but is particularly important given the expected increase in the number of insured
children due to the implementation of the ACA (Kenney et al., 2011) and the amount of money
spent in the US on providing health care to children through Medicaid.11 Indeed, our results
indicate that expanding eligibility to non-newborn children is an important driver of the long-run
effects of Medicaid, which further highlights the relative contribution of our analysis. Second,
we examine effects on long-run educational attainment rather than on test scores at younger ages.
A growing body of evidence points to the effect of given educational interventions on test scores
being a poor predictor of the effects on the longer-run outcomes that are of greater interest, such
as educational attainment and earnings (e.g., Ludwig and Miller, 2007; Chetty et al., 2011;
Deming et al., 2013).12

11

If health insurance among school-age children did not positively affect these children, ostensibly the government
could only offer Medicaid to pregnant women and households with very young children. Thus, it is important to
understand what value there is to offering school-age children Medicaid.
12
Much of this evidence suggests that it is particularly problematic to use effects on contemporaneous test scores to
predict long-run outcomes. Levine and Schanzenbach (2009) examine effects on the NAEP scores of 4th and 8th

11

The second related work is a working paper by Brown, Kowalski and Lurie (2014). They
use IRS tax data to examine the effect of Medicaid expansions throughout a child’s early life on
earnings. Because their data begin in 1996, they only observe their youngest cohorts at age 15,
which means there could be potential problems associated with endogenous mobility.13
Nonetheless, they find results that are highly complementary to our own: Medicaid eligibility
increases from 0-18 are associated with higher earnings, lower EITC receipt, and higher labor
force participation. That they obtain these estimates on a different dataset using somewhat
different cohorts is notable. Together, our results point to large effects of Medicaid expansions
on the long-run outcomes of affected children.

4. Data
We use three sources of data in our analysis of the effects of insurance expansions on
educational attainment. Below, we describe these sources of data, as well as the construction of
the variables that we use in our investigation.
4.1 Medicaid Eligibility Data
Our Medicaid eligibility data are constructed for the years during which our 1980-1990
birth cohort are between the ages of 0-17 using the March Current Population Survey (CPS). We
construct two eligibility measures, using state and year information on eligibility rules similar to
those used in Gross and Notowidigdo (2011) and Gruber and Simon (2008).14 Eligibility

graders, which themselves are longer-run test score outcomes. Furthermore, instructors are unlikely to manipulate
NAEP scores endogenously with respect to Medicaid eligibility rates, which would not necessarily be the case for
contemporaneous test scores used to evaluate a given educational intervention. Nevertheless, it is not at all clear that
effects on NAEP scores would translate into higher educational attainment, which underscores the importance of our
analysis.
13
Endogenous mobility is less of an issue in our analysis because we observe state of birth rather than one’s state of
residence at age 15 or older.
14
We are extremely grateful to Tal Gross and Kosali Simon for providing us with the computer code that forms the
basis for our eligibility calculations.

12

calculations are based on the household's income, the age and number of children in the
household, and the gender and unemployment status of the head of household.
The first Medicaid eligibility measure we construct is the proportion of households of a
given race (white, nonwhite) with children of age a in state s and year t who are eligible for
Medicaid, where a ∈ (0,1,...17) . Thus, for example, we calculate the proportion of households
with 5-year-olds in New York who are eligible for Medicaid in each year between 1980 and
2007. We calculate eligibility separately by child’s race due to the strong correlation between
race and Medicaid eligibility: a given change in eligibility rules is likely to impact nonwhites
differently than whites even though the Medicaid rules themselves are race-neutral.
These calculations allow us to measure the proportion of children of each age and race
group that are Medicaid-eligible in each state and in each year between 1980 and 2007. As
described below, our outcome data span the years 2005-2012. We focus on the 1980-1990 birth
cohorts who are between the ages of 22 and 29 in 2005-2012, which is why our CPS sample ends
in 2007 (when the 1990 birth cohort is 17).15 Due to small sample sizes in the CPS, particularly
within each age-race-state cell, we use three-year moving averages of calculated eligibility
instead of yearly eligibility.16 Aside from making the estimates more precise, our use of these
moving averages has little effect on the results. We refer to this measure of Medicaid eligibility
as “actual eligibility.”
Actual eligibility varies within states over time due to changes in eligibility rules,
changes in demographic composition, and changes in the economic circumstances of households.

15

We have conducted extensive sensitivity analyses using different birth cohort ranges and ACS age ranges. Our
results are not very sensitive to the age range or birth cohorts used. These sensitivity analyses are available from the
authors upon request.
16
This method necessitates the use of CPS data through 2009 (which contains 2008 income information), to enable
the construction of our 3-year moving average.

13

In order to isolate the variation in Medicaid eligibility due to eligibility rule changes, we follow
the method first used in Currie and Gruber (1996a, 1996b) and Cutler and Gruber (1996) and
calculate the proportion of each state, age and race in each year that would be eligible for
Medicaid using a fixed national sample that does not vary across states or over time. We use a
20% national sample from the 1986 CPS and calculate the share of this fixed population with a
child of age a in year t and race r that would be eligible for Medicaid in each state using that
state’s Medicaid eligibility rules in that year. The 20% sample is comprised of 31,223
individuals, and these respondents are assigned to each state (including DC) so that the total
sample size is 1.6 million (31,223 × 51). Critically, this sample does not vary by demographic
characteristics across states or over time. Thus, this measure is unaffected by state- specific
trends in populations or economic conditions that relate to both eligibility and coverage, (e.g. a
state-level recession).
For each year, we use the same 1.6 million person sample and adjust family income for
inflation using the Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers. We then calculate our
measure of “simulated fixed eligibility” for individuals of a given state, age and race based on
the federal- and state-specific Medicaid eligibility rules in effect in a given year.17 Finally, we
collapse these estimates into unique state-year-age-race cells that yield the proportion of the
fixed sample eligible for Medicaid in each cell. Since the fixed sample includes the same sample
in every year, we calculate yearly eligibility rather than the three-year moving average that we
use for actual eligibility.
Our baseline estimates include Medicaid eligibility variation coming from federal
Medicaid expansions, state decisions about whether they will provide more generous benefits
17

Of the initial 31,223 individuals in the fixed sample, 23,870 are white and 7,353 are nonwhite.

14

than required by federal law, as well as the timing of state expansions and their generosity levels.
Among these sources of variation, the one that is most worrisome is the timing of state
expansions: state expansion decisions may be endogenous with respect to underlying trends in
educational attainment. Thus, we also construct measures of Medicaid eligibility that only are a
function of federal rules. Federal Medicaid rules have different impacts on states due to preexisting state-level AFDC policies. Hence, we fix AFDC rules in each state as of 1980 and then
calculate 3-year moving average actual eligibility as well as yearly fixed simulated eligibility for
each age, race and state that would occur only due to changes in federal regulations governing
Medicaid eligibility thresholds. Put differently, our federal eligibility measures yield state-yearage-race eligibility that would occur if no states provided more generous Medicaid access than
required under federal law. The reason this is not simply a cohort-based analysis, then, is that the
effect of federal rules varies by state according to (fixed) welfare policies. By design, this source
of Medicaid eligibility variation cannot be correlated with any decisions states can make
regarding Medicaid policies.
Trends in our Medicaid eligibility measures, both overall and by race, are shown in
Figure 1. For each birth cohort, we show the average eligibility between the ages of 0-17 to
which the cohort was exposed. The panels of the figure show, for the 1980-1990 birth cohorts,
actual eligibility that is a function of both state and federal rules as well as eligibility that uses
only federal rules. As demonstrated in Figure 1, there was a dramatic rise in Medicaid eligibility
that took place across the birth cohorts we study. Overall, average eligibility rates over the
course of childhood increased 172% between the 1980 and 1990 birth cohorts. Much of this was
the non-linear increase in eligibility that came from the 1990 federal Medicaid expansion that
extended eligibility to all children born after September 30, 1983 in families up to 100% of the

15

poverty line. In the second and third panel of Figure 1, we show that the proportional increases
experienced between whites and nonwhites were similar, but the higher baseline eligibility rates
among nonwhites in 1980 led to much higher eligibility among the 1990 cohort than among the
1980 cohort. In our data, over 50% of nonwhites born in 1990 were eligible for Medicaid over
the course of their childhood, while less than 30% of whites were eligible among this birth
cohort.
Figure 1 also shows that the trends in overall eligibility track the trends in federal
eligibility closely, especially after the 1984 birth cohort, which highlights the importance of
federal Medicaid policies for identification. The simulated eligibility trends are very close to the
actual trends as well. Thus, most of the aggregate pattern in Medicaid eligibility is due to policy
changes rather than demographic shifts in the US population.
4.2 Educational Attainment
The main outcome data we use come from the 2005-2012 American Community Survey
(ACS). The ACS was designed to replace the Census, and thus the variables and design across
the two surveys are almost identical. The sample for our analysis consists of birth cohorts from
1980-1990 who are between 22 and 29 in 2005-2012. Thus, for each individual in our sample,
we observe eligibility in his or her birth state at each age between 0 and 17. Table 1 shows the
birth cohorts included in our analysis sample at each age and year. The top row shows the ACS
(i.e., calendar) year, and the column shows the age of the respondent. For example, in the 2008
ACS, observations of 25 year olds come from the 1983 cohort. This table illustrates that we do
not observe each birth cohort in each ACS survey due to our constructed age cutoffs. For
example, 29 year olds are observed in 2009-2012 and come from the 1980-1983 birth cohorts
only, whereas 25 year olds come from the 1980-1987 birth cohorts and are included in each of

16

the ACS years in this analysis. Our use of 1980 as the earliest birth cohort is driven by our lack
of information about state-specific Medicaid eligibility pre-1980, and thus it is not feasible to use
earlier birth cohorts.18 Furthermore, we examine individuals only up to age 29 as by age 29 most
education has been completed (Bound, Lovenheim and Turner, 2010). Including older
individuals would reduce the number of calendar years in which we can identify eligibility for
such respondents.
The central benefit of using the ACS data for this analysis is our ability to link each
respondent to the state of his or her birth. Using the current state of residence is problematic
because students may endogenously sort across states, especially if Medicaid indeed impacts
education outcomes. One’s state of birth is unlikely to be related to Medicaid rules, however,
especially since prior work has found no link between Medicaid rules and fertility patterns
(Zavodny and Bitler, 2010; DeLeire, Lopoo and Simon, 2011). We calculate, for each
respondent, indicators for whether the person did not complete high school, whether she attended
any college and whether she obtained a Bachelors Degree (BA). Our measure of high school
completion includes GEDs, which is potentially problematic if Medicaid eligibility shifts
students from obtaining a traditional high school diploma to a GED.19 In 2008 and after,
however, the ACS asks directly about GED completion. Using data from 2008-2012, we find
little evidence that our main high school completion results are being driven by GEDs, as shown
in Table 4. We thus conclude that our use of pre-2008 data is not biasing the main conclusions

18

We also note that Medicaid eligibility was very low pre-1980 and there were few expansions. Thus, our focus on
birth cohorts between 1980 and 1990 captures most of the policy-driven variation in Medicaid exposure that has
occurred since the program’s inception.
19
Heckman and LaFontaine (2006) present evidence that the returns to a GED are lower than the returns to a high
school diploma. Thus, examining patterns of substitution across these degrees is of interest.

17

one might draw from our results about the relationship between Medicaid and high school
completion.
We collapse the data to birth cohort, state of birth, survey year, race (white/nonwhite)
means for all variables, using the individual census weights. We then link each birth cohort,
state-of-birth, race, survey year cell to the Medicaid eligibility means discussed in Section 4.1. In
particular, we calculate average eligibility for each birth cohort in each survey year (t), state of
birth (s) and race (r) over their childhood ages ( ∈ [0,17]):
∑

=
where

,

(1)

is the average Medicaid eligibility in birth state s and survey year t of race r when

the individual was age i.
We construct an identical measure using fixed simulated eligibility:
_

=

∑

_

,

(2)

where fs_eligibility is fixed simulated Medicaid eligibility of those in a given birth cohort and
race (r) in state of birth (s) and survey year (t) when the individual was age (a) that is calculated
using a constant sample from the 1986 CPS, as described above.
Descriptive tabulations of the analysis data for the full sample and by race group are
shown in Table 2. In the full sample, the average respondent is 25, and about 68% of the
respondents are white. The gender and age composition of the sample varies little across race
groups. Furthermore, the educational attainment of nonwhites is much lower than whites, while
average Medicaid eligibility is much higher for nonwhites. Both of these patterns reflect the
strong correlation between socioeconomic status and race, which highlights the potential

18

importance of any effect of Medicaid eligibility on educational attainment to help address gaps in
educational outcomes between whites and nonwhites.

5. Empirical Methodology
To analyze the effect of Medicaid eligibility expansions on educational attainment, we
use difference-in-difference methods, in which our identification strategy makes use of
differences across states over time in both the eligibility criteria (which varies by income, age
and family composition) and the timing of the expansions. Specifically, we estimate models of
the following form:
=
where

+

+

+

+

+

+

(3)

is the educational outcome (high school non-completion rate, college attendance rate

or college graduation rate) in state-of-birth s for age a, of race r in survey year t. The variable
eligibilitysart comes from equation (1) above and denotes the mean fraction of individuals
between the ages of 0 and 17 who were eligible for Medicaid in state s when respondents in year
t were aged 0-17.
In the baseline specification, the vector

includes percent male and an indicator for

whether the observation is for the nonwhite sample or not. As we discuss below, we then include
in

some measures of potential confounding policies. The model includes as well a set of

race-by-age fixed effects (
year fixed effects (

), race-by-state-of-birth fixed effects (

) and race-by-calendar

).20 The race-by-age fixed effects in particular are important because they

account for the fact that older individuals have more time to complete their education and that
this age pattern might be different across whites and nonwhites. The race-by-state fixed effects
control for fixed differences across states that are correlated with both Medicaid eligibility and
20

Henceforth, we will refer to “state fixed effects” and “state-of-birth fixed effects” synonymously.

19

educational attainment, such as the higher education structure and the industrial mix in the state,
which we allow to vary by race as well. The race-by-year fixed effects account for any economywide shocks that could be correlated with prior Medicaid expansions and that might be different
across racial groups.
The coefficient of interest in equation (3) is β1 ; conditional on the set of controls and
fixed effects in the model, the variation used to identify this coefficient comes from increases in
eligibility within state across birth cohorts over time. This is basically a difference-in-difference
specification, where the treatment dose varies across different cohorts depending on the state and
year of birth as well as on one’s race. As discussed in Section 4, this variation comes from two
sources: the first is rule changes that expand Medicaid eligibility to different populations within
each state, and the second is demographic shifts that expand the proportion of individuals who
meet pre-existing eligibility criteria.
For our analysis, the second source of variation is potentially problematic. If there are
demographic changes that affect the proportion of people eligible for Medicaid, these changes
are likely to be correlated with educational attainment. Our limited set of demographic controls
cannot fully account for such changes, although demographic changes that expand Medicaid
eligibility most likely generate a negative bias in estimating the effect of Medicaid on
educational attainment. We therefore use an instrumental variables strategy that is robust to
demographic shifts. This IV strategy amounts to using fs_eligibility from equation (2) as an
instrument for eligibility. Because fs_eligibility is based on eligibility rules in each year using a
fixed sample of individuals from the 1986 CPS, it is only affected by eligibility rule changes
over time within states.

20

Similar to any difference-in-difference analysis, there are two main assumptions we
invoke. The first is that Medicaid expansions are not correlated with underlying trends in
educational attainment across cohorts at the state level. A particular concern for our
identification strategy would be if Medicaid expansions are occurring in states that are becoming
more affluent. Then, even simulated fixed eligibility changes would be positively correlated with
underlying and unobserved trends in educational attainment. We do not believe such a situation
is likely, however, since states probably would be more compelled to expand Medicaid eligibility
due to increased, not decreased demand for public insurance. This is a common identification
assumption that has been invoked repeatedly in the Medicaid literature (e.g., Currie and Gruber,
1996a, 1996b; Cutler and Gruber, 1996; Gross and Notowidigdo, 2011; Gruber and Simon,
2008). The second assumption underlying our identification strategy is that there are no other
state-level policies that are correlated with Medicaid expansions that themselves might affect
educational attainment.
We provide an extensive set of robustness checks to provide additional confidence that
our results are not being driven by endogenous state Medicaid eligibility expansions or by other
policies. First, in some specifications we control for average state EITC amounts between the
ages of 0-17 for each cohort. Prior work linking EITC policies to educational outcomes suggests
EITC generosity could be a confounding factor if it is correlated with Medicaid generosity.21 We
also control for average school spending per pupil in the years in which each cohort was 5-17,
separately by urban, rural and suburban districts. Although there is a tenuous link between school
expenditures and education outcomes (see Hanushek, 2003 for an overview of this literature),
recent work has linked school spending increases from school finance reform to higher long-run
21

See Michelmore (2013) for an overview of state-level EITC laws. We thank Kathy Michelmore for providing us
with these data.

21

educational outcomes (Jackson, Johnson and Persico, 2014). If such spending changes are
correlated with Medicaid expansions, it could generate a bias in our results. We view these
alternative policies as the two that are most likely to produce confounding effects, and our
estimates that control for these policies provide evidence on whether this is so. In some
specifications, we also include race-by-state-of-birth-by-year fixed effects as well as race-byage-by-year fixed effects.22 These fixed effects allow us to control flexibly for any
contemporaneous age- or state-specific shocks, separately by race, which are correlated with
prior Medicaid expansions.
We provide more direct evidence that endogenous state Medicaid expansions are not
biasing our estimates by using only federal Medicaid eligibility rules as discussed in Section 4.1.
The race-by-state-of-birth fixed effects control for the fixed differences in AFDC rules across
states, and the identifying variation in the federal model comes solely through the fact that
federal rule changes have differential impacts on states due to pre-existing AFDC policies. Thus,
there is no scope in these models for endogenous state decisions regarding Medicaid, and to the
extent we obtain similar results using this variation, it will provide confidence in the validity of
the results that use state Medicaid variation as well. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first
paper to provide estimates using only federal eligibility variation, so these results are of interest
in their own right insofar as they help validate the widely-employed assumption that state
Medicaid expansions are exogenous.

22

Note that we do not control for race-by-state-by-age fixed effects. Thus, some of the identifying variation could be
coming from fixed differences across ages within a state. However, this would require the existence of shocks to
specific ages (but not birth cohorts) in a state that happen to be correlated with Medicaid eligibility differences.
Furthermore, the estimates that use only federal variation would be unaffected by any such shocks. We have
estimated models using these fixed effects, and the results are qualitatively similar (if somewhat less precise). We do
not include them in the analysis because there is little economic justification for these controls.

22

We also conduct robustness tests that include race and state of birth specific linear trends
across birth cohorts. These models are identified off of the non-linear increases in Medicaid
eligibility that followed from state and federal law changes, and they help guard against any
upward bias from correlated secular trends in educational attainment and Medicaid eligibility.
We further provide a robustness check in which we randomly assign observed eligibility levels
across age-state-year cells. Overall, our estimates are robust to using variation in Medicaid
eligibility from different sources and to the series of robustness checks we conduct. These
findings support the validity of our identification strategy.
Because errors are unlikely to be independent within states of birth over time, we cluster
all standard errors at the state-of-birth level. All estimates also are weighted using sample
weights provided in the ACS.

6. Results
6.1 Main Results
Table 3 presents the main results from our estimation of equation (3). Each cell in the
table comes from a separate regression, with Panel A showing results that use all Medicaid
eligibility and Panel B showing results using only federal eligibility. The first column in the table
presents the first stage, which shows how a change in fixed simulated eligibility translates into
actual eligibility. The table also shows the effect of actual Medicaid eligibility (“OLS”) and fixed
simulated eligibility (“RF,” for reduced form) on high school non-completion, college
enrollment and four-year college completion as well as the associated IV estimates.
Across outcomes and the specifications shown in different rows, we find consistent
evidence that Medicaid eligibility when young increases educational attainment. Focusing on the
baseline IV results in row (1), a 10 percentage point increase in fixed simulated eligibility

23

reduces high school non-completion by 0.38 of a percentage point, increases college enrollment
by 0.30 of a percentage point, and increases BA attainment by 0.61 of a percentage point. The
high school and college completion estimates are statistically significantly different from zero at
the 5% level and 10% levels, respectively. Relative to the mean attainment rates shown in Table
2, these estimates translate into a 4.0% decline in high school dropouts and a 2.3% increase in
BA receipt. As shown in Figure 1, there was a 24 percentage point increase in average eligibility
during childhood between the 1980 and 1990 birth cohorts. Our estimates suggest this change
would have reduced high school non-completion by 9.7% and increased college completion by
5.5%.23
To put these effects in perspective, it is helpful to compare them to educational
attainment trends over this period. Murnane (2013) shows that high school graduation rates
increased by about 6 percentage points between the 1980 and 1990 birth cohorts. Since a 24
percentage point increase in Medicaid would increase high school completion by 0.9 percentage
points, our results indicate that 15% of this increase can be attributed to Medicaid expansions.
Our tabulations from the Current Population Survey indicate that college completion rates among
23-year olds between the 1980 and 1990 birth cohorts increased by 4.8 percentage points. A 24
percentage point Medicaid eligibility increase would increase BA attainment by 1.5 percentage

23

It is likely that these gains in educational attainment are even more pronounced among those that take up
Medicaid. We estimate take-up of Medicaid in our cohorts as well and find results similar to those in Gruber and
Simon (2008). These estimates are available from the authors upon request. However, we note that neither these
estimates nor those in the literature elsewhere (Cutler and Gruber 1996) are the appropriate “first stages” in our
context. These estimates provide the contemporaneous effects on take-up, where we would need an estimate of the
effect on take-up over one’s entire childhood to match our reduced form results. Unfortunately, no comprehensive
longitudinal datasets exist with sufficient sample size to allow us to estimate this relationship. The CPS, which we
use for the contemporaneous take-up results, is not sufficient, for while it has many waves of data, it does not follow
the same families over many years. Following the majority of the Medicaid literature, we therefore focus on
eligibility rather than on take-up.

24

points using the baseline results, which implies that Medicaid expansions can explain 30.5% of
the overall BA attainment increases over this period.
How do these effect sizes compare to effects from other education interventions? Such
comparisons are complicated by the fact that we are examining attainment at relatively older
ages, which is rare in the literature examining early lifetime interventions. One point of
comparison is the class size literature. Dynarski, Hyman and Schanzenbach (2013) show the
effects of the Tennessee STAR class size experiment on BA attainment. Their estimates point to
a 1.6 percentage point increase in the likelihood of BA receipt due to being randomized into a
smaller class in primary school. Deming et al. (2014) show lottery-based results from an open
enrollment system in the Charlotte-Mecklenburg schools that winning a lottery and thus
attending a higher-quality high school increases the likelihood of college completion by 4.7
percentage points. In their analysis of school accountability, Deming et al. (2013) estimates that
a 1 percentage point increase in the likelihood of being subject to accountability sanctions for
low-performing students increases their high school graduation rate by 1 percentage point and
increases their BA attainment rate by 0.6 of a percentage point. Finally, Garces, Thomas and
Currie (2002) show that Head Start participants are 4 percentage points more likely to graduate
from high school in estimates that control for selection using mother fixed effects. Overall, our
estimates indicate that a 10 percentage point Medicaid expansion produces educational
attainment increases that are either of equal size or somewhat smaller than these other notable
educational interventions.
Rows (2)-(4) of Table 3 show our estimates are largely robust to adding additional
controls for EITC and school spending (row 2) as well as race-state-year and race-age-year fixed
effects (rows 3 and 4) into the models. The high school non-completion estimates become

25

slightly smaller in absolute value, but they also become less precise. Qualitatively, they do not
change by much. The other estimates change little in terms of magnitude, but all are less
precisely estimated due to the demanding nature of these models.
Table 3 also demonstrates that the OLS and reduced form/IV results are quite different
from each other. The OLS estimates in Panel A show Medicaid eligibility increases are
associated with smaller high school dropout declines and with smaller college completion
increases. These results are suggestive that the bias from failing to account for the correlation
between demographics and Medicaid eligibility would cause one to find a smaller effect of
Medicaid on educational attainment. Once this confounding factor is controlled for, however,
Table 3 indicates Medicaid expansions have a positive and sizable impact on long-run
educational attainment.
Panel B of Table 3 shows estimates that use only federal Medicaid eligibility. Focusing
on the baseline estimates in row (5), we show that federal eligibility expansions reduce high
school dropout and increase college enrollment and completion. Comparing the estimates in row
(5) to the baseline results in row (1), the point estimates for the reduced form are smaller in
absolute value when only the federal variation is used. As the IV estimates show, this difference
mostly reflects the smaller first stage. In Panel A, the first-stage estimates are around 0.9,
suggesting that a 10 percentage point change in fixed simulated eligibility is associated with a 9
percentage point change in actual eligibility.24 As expected, the link between federal Medicaid
rules and actual eligibility is much weaker because we are ignoring state responses to the federal

24

Our first-stage estimates are similar to what has been found in prior work. Cutler and Gruber (1996) report a firststage of 0.84 for children and 0.95 for women, while Gross and Notowidigdo (2011) have an implied first-stage
estimate of 0.61.

26

regulation changes. However, the first stage for the federal variation still is sizable in magnitude
and is statistically significant from zero at the 1% level.
Comparing the IV estimates from similar models across panels shows that using the
federal variation only produces results that are quantitatively and qualitatively similar to the
estimates that use state variation as well. For high school non-completion in the baseline
specification (row 1), the estimates indicate a 10 percentage point eligibility increase during
childhood reduces dropout by 0.38 of a percentage point using all Medicaid variation, and it
reduces dropout by 0.55 of a percentage point using only federal variation (row 5). For college
enrollment, the estimates in row (5) are smaller than those in row (1), and they are inconsistent
with all but a small increase in college attendance. Finally, for college completion, the IV
coefficients across panels of Table 3 show very similar effects of Medicaid eligibility
expansions. Comparisons of rows (2) and (6) show that our estimates using federal variation are
robust to the inclusion of EITC and school spending controls as well.25 That these two models
yield similar estimates of the effect of changes in Medicaid eligibility among children on longrun educational attainment supports our use of all Medicaid variation, as it suggests state
Medicaid eligibility variation is not endogenous with respect to long-run educational outcomes.
A final potential concern with the results in Table 3 is that the high school completion
variable groups GED and high school diploma recipients together. Starting in 2008, the ACS
began asking separately about high school diploma and GED receipt, and in Table 4 we present
estimates using 2008-2012 data where we separate high school diploma non-receipt from
diploma and GED non-receipt. Henceforth, we will only present IV and OLS estimates due to

25

We do not present federal variation results that include race-state-year and race-age-year fixed effects. Due to the
limited amount of variation in federal Medicaid eligibility, including these fixed effects yields large standard errors
that make the resulting estimates uninformative.

27

space considerations; reduced form estimates are available upon request. As the table
demonstrates, the effects are extremely similar across the two measures of high school
completion, suggesting that our baseline estimates do not obscure potential shifts between
traditional diplomas and GEDs. In addition, the some college and college plus estimates are
similar in the 2008-2012 sample, if somewhat larger among all outcomes. These results suggest
our estimates are not driven by the particular sample period we chose.
6.2 Educational Attainment Results by Race and Age at Expansion
Thus far, we have estimated models that pool effects across racial groups. But, given
persistent racial disparities in educational attainment, heterogeneous effects by race are of
considerable interest. In Online Appendix Tables A-1 and A-2, we estimate our models
separately for whites and nonwhites, respectively. For whites, the effects on high school noncompletion are negative, but they are smaller in absolute value than in the pooled model and they
are not statistically significant at conventional levels. Particularly when we include the full set of
fixed effects and when we use only federal variation, there is a positive effect of Medicaid on
college enrollment for whites. The effect is on the order of 1.0 to 1.3 percentage points for each
10 percentage point increase in Medicaid eligibility. There also is a sizable, positive effect on
college completion for whites, especially using the federal variation. While these point estimates
are large – suggesting a 2.5 percentage point increase from a 10 percentage point Medicaid
eligibility increase – they are consistent with observed increases in white college completion
across these cohorts.26

26

CPS tabulations indicate that college completion rates among white 23 year olds increased by 6.4 percentage
points between the 1980 and 1990 birth cohorts. White Medicaid eligibility expanded by 19 percentage points across
cohorts, which would increase BA attainment rates by 4.75 (=0.25*0.19*100) percentage points. This is 74% of the
total BA attainment increase over this period.

28

Among nonwhites, the effects on high school non-completion are particularly large. We
find that high school non-completion is reduced by about 0.45-0.59 percentage points for each 10
percentage point increase in Medicaid eligibility. There is little evidence of a college enrollment
effect, and although we find an increase in college completion, it is smaller than for the white
sample. Taken together, these estimates are consistent with a larger effect of Medicaid eligibility
for whites on higher education attendance and completion and a larger effect for nonwhites on
high school completion.
As discussed in Section 3.2., one of the contributions of this paper is to identify whether
there are effects of health insurance access after birth. Since prior work in this area has examined
effects of Medicaid eligibility among pregnant women, our estimates are informative about any
impacts of public health insurance among older children. In Table 5, we present IV estimates of
equation (3) that control separately for Medicaid eligibility when a respondent was 0-3, 4-8, 9-13
and 14-17. In Panel A, we show results from the baseline specification, while in Panel B we
include our full set of fixed effects (akin to row 4 in Table 3).
The results are not precise, due to the demanding nature of this specification, and there
are no strong age patterns that emerge. What is striking about these results is that they suggest
that Medicaid expansions at all ages are important for long-run outcomes such as education.
Thus, our results indicate that expanding Medicaid eligibility to children after birth (and infancy)
can have a substantial effect on long-run educational attainment. This finding sheds some light
on why our estimates are somewhat larger than those in Levine and Schanzenbach (2009), who
examine test score effects of Medicaid eligibility at birth. Our results show that educational
outcomes, at least in the longer-run, are sensitive to Medicaid expansions that target school-age
children as well.

29

6.3 Robustness Checks
In this section, we present two robustness checks that yield additional insight into the
validity of our central identifying assumption, namely that there are not differential underlying
trends in educational attainment correlated with public health insurance eligibility expansions.
First, in Table 6, we present results from the models presented in Table 3 that also include statespecific linear birth cohort trends, separately by race. If there are differential trends in
educational attainment correlated with Medicaid expansions, these results should yield
substantively different results from our baseline model. However, the results are very similar to
those in Table 3, suggesting that linear differences in trends across states are not biasing our
baseline estimates.
Second, in Table 7, we show the mean and the 2.5th and 97.5th percentiles from 500
simulations that randomly assign Medicaid eligibility and fixed simulated eligibility across agestate-year cells. That is, we take combinations of actual and fixed simulated eligibility, and as a
pair randomly assign them to different age-state-year cells, separately by race. This assignment
is done with replacement. Both for the baseline model and for the model including race-stateyear and race-age-year fixed effects, the average estimates are very close to zero. Furthermore,
the non-parametric confidence intervals suggests these null estimates are precisely estimated.
This robustness check suggests the results presented in Table 3 are due to the specific way the
Medicaid eligibility expansions were rolled out over time within states. When we randomly
assign eligibility levels, they are no longer meaningfully related to educational attainment.
6.4 The Effect of Childhood Medicaid Eligibility on Teen Health
As discussed in Section 4, one of the main mechanisms through which public health
insurance can affect long-run educational attainment is through promoting better health amongst

30

children. In order to examine the potential importance of this mechanism, we estimate the effect
of Medicaid eligibility during childhood on health outcomes in the teenage years. To do this
analysis, we use the Youth Risk Behavior Surveillance System (YRBSS), which is a nationallyrepresentative survey of 9th to 12th grade students that is conducted by the Centers for Disease
Control (CDC).27 The data are available from 1991-201128 and contain state identifiers, so we
can estimate equation (3) using these data with health outcomes as the dependent variable. A
central drawback of these data, however, is that we do not observe state of birth, only state of
current residence. These estimates therefore are potentially biased by endogenous mobility.
Table 8 contains health outcome estimates from the YRBSS data. Here, we calculate
Medicaid eligibility from age 0 up until each respondent’s age. Thus, for a 15-year-old, the
eligibility measure is average eligibility in the respondent’s state of residence he/she would have
experienced between the ages of 0-14. These estimates also include race-state-year and race-ageyear fixed effects. Across virtually all measures of health outcomes, Table 8 shows that Medicaid
eligibility during childhood translates into better health and better health behaviors by the time
one is a teenager. However, due to low power, the standard errors are large, rendering these
estimates more suggestive than conclusive. Still, they are informative as to a key mechanism
likely driving our results.
The first row of Table 8 includes as a dependent variable a risky sex index that we
construct based on several questions regarding sexual activity,29 and our IV results indicate a 10
percentage point increase in Medicaid eligibility during youth reduces risky sexual behavior by
27

These data can be accessed at: http://www.cdc.gov/HealthyYouth/yrbs/index.htm?s_cid=tw_cdc16.
We limit our sample to years 1995-2007 because in these years sample respondents between the ages of 14 and 18
are most similar to the 1980 to 1990 birth cohorts we analyze using ACS data.
29
See Online Appendix Table A-3 for a list of the variables used to construct this index as well as individual
estimates for each measure. The variables that constitute this index are indented directly below the Risky Sex Index
in the table. We also report the individual estimates for the variables that make up our measures of whether a
respondent has a mental health issue or an eating disorder in Online Appendix Table A-3.
28

31

3.5% relative to the sample mean.30 There is, however, an increase in the likelihood of being
sexually active due to public health insurance eligibility. Thus, while teens are having sex more,
they are practicing safer sex on average.
Our results suggest that those exposed to higher Medicaid eligibility at young ages have
lower weight as well. There is a negative effect of Medicaid eligibility on BMI, on the order of a
3.9% reduction relative to the sample mean from a 10 percentage point increase in eligibility. We
also find, as indicated in rows 4 and 5, that the likelihood of being overweight or obese declines
considerably. In addition, there are sizable, though imprecisely estimated, declines in the
likelihood of smoking marijuana, smoking cigarettes, and in alcohol consumption due to
Medicaid eligibility. Medicaid expansions are associated with mentally healthier teens as well, as
measured with a mental health index as well as by the prevalence of eating disorders.
That teens with higher Medicaid eligibility throughout their childhoods are healthier and
have fewer harmful health behaviors suggests that they are indeed utilizing the medical services
that are provided to them, are healthier as a result, and that increased health is one mechanism
that is driving the educational attainment effects we find. To the extent that such increases in
health enter into the education production function, they are likely to be one of the mechanisms
driving the higher educational attainment that stems from the same Medicaid eligibility
increases. While more work is necessary to clearly understand the role of health in producing
educational outcomes, these results provide suggestive evidence that such a link is present and
that health may be an important input into the education production function.

7. Conclusion

30

The first stage estimate for these regressions is 0.882, with a standard error of 0.123.

32

In this paper, we provide the first evidence on the effects of public health insurance
expansions on long-run educational attainment in the US. Overall, our results suggest large
effects of childhood Medicaid expansions on eventual educational outcomes. Our baseline
estimates indicate that a 10 percentage point increase in Medicaid eligibility between the ages of
0 and 17 decreases the likelihood of not completing high school by approximately 4.0-5.9% and
increases the 4-year college completion rate by 2.3%-3.0%. The effects on high school
completion are largest among nonwhites, while the effects on college attendance and completion
are largest for whites. We also present evidence that public health insurance expansions when
children are of school age are closely linked with long-run educational attainment; eligibility
expansions beyond birth lead to higher educational attainment. To the best of our knowledge,
these are the first estimates to demonstrate the importance of health insurance eligibility amongst
older children, particularly as it relates to educational outcomes. Our analysis concludes by
showing that the health insurance expansions we examine also translate into better health
amongst teenagers, which we posit is an important mechanism through which health insurance
access for children impacts their educational attainment.
Although the public health insurance expansions we study occurred in the past several
decades, our results have several implications that are important for current public policy. First,
they suggest that the long-run benefits of providing health insurance to low-income children may
be much larger than the short-run gains. Evidence pointing to the large and growing returns to
educational attainment (e.g., Autor, Katz and Kearney, 2008) as well as the importance of
education in increasing intergenerational economic mobility (Black and Devereaux, 2011; Chetty
et al., 2014) suggests that the returns on the public investments in health insurance in the 1980s
and 1990s will be realized for some time.

33

Second, our results relate to current policy discussions over the future of the SCHIP
program, which have accompanied the larger debate over the ACA. More specifically, the ACA
prohibits states from imposing eligibility and enrollment standards for Medicaid and SCHIP that
were more restrictive than those in place in March 2010 (when the ACA was passed) until 2019.
However, there have been attempts in Congress to repeal these provisions, which would
essentially allow states to cut SCHIP benefits and eligibility. In addition, SCHIP funding is up
for re-authorization in 2015, and its passage is far from assured. A back-of-the-envelope
calculation indicates that eliminating the SCHIP program would reduce eligibility for public
health insurance by 15.4 percentage points. Our baseline estimates suggest such a decline would
increase the high school dropout rate by six-tenths of a percentage point and would decrease the
college enrollment rate by five-tenths of a percentage point and the college completion rate by
0.9 of a percentage point. The results from this study highlight the need to account for the types
of long-run effects of public health insurance provision when considering changes to the publicly
provided health care system that is targeted at low-income children.

34

References
Adams, Peter, Michael D. Hurd, Daniel McFadden, Angela Merrill, and Tiago Ribiera. 2003.
“Healthy, Wealthy, and Wise? Tests for Direct Causal Paths between Health and
Socioeconomic Status.” Journal of Econometrics 112(1): 3–56.
Alcaraz, Carlo, Daniel Chiquiar, Maria Jose Orraca, and Alejandrina Salcedo. 2013. “The Effect
of Publicly Provided Health Insurance on Education Outcomes in Mexico.” Working Paper.
Available at: http://vox.lacea.org/pdf/lacea2013_the_effect_publicly.pdf [Accessed October
2, 2014].
Almeida, R., L.C. Dubay, and G. Ko. 2001. “Access to Care and Use of Health Services by LowIncome Women.” Health Care Financing Review 22(4):27–47.
Almond, Douglas. 2006. “Is the 1918 Influenza Pandemic Over? Long-Term Effects of In Utero
Influenza Exposure in the Post-1940 U.S. Population.” Journal of Political Economy
114(4): 672–712.
Almond, Douglas, and Janet Currie. 2011. “Killing Me Softly: The Fetal Origins Hypothesis.”
The Journal of Economic Perspectives 25(3): 153-172.
Almond, Douglas, Lena Edlund, and Marten Palme. 2009. “Chernobyl’s Subclinical Legacy:
Prenatal Exposure to Radioactive Fallout and School Outcomes in Sweden.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 124: 1729-1772.
Almond, Douglas and Bhashkar Mazumder. 2011. “Health Capital and the Prenatal
Environment: The Effect of Ramadan Observance During Pregnancy." American Economic
Journal: Applied Economics 3: 56-85.
Autor, David H., Lawrence F. Katz, and Melissa S. Kearney. 2008. “Trends in U.S. Wage
Inequality: Revising the Revisionists.” Review of Economics and Statistics 90 (2): 300–323.
Bailey, Martha and Susan Dynarski. 2011. “Gains and Gaps: Changing Inequality in US College
Entry and Completion.” NBER Working Paper No. 17633.
Baldwin, Laura-Mae, Eric H. Larson, Frederick A. Connell, Daniel Nordlund, Kevin C. Cain,
Mary Lawrence Cawthon, Patricia Byrns, and Roger A. Rosenblatt. 1998. “The Effect of
Expanding Medicaid Prenatal Services on Birth Outcomes.” American Journal of Public
Health 88(11): 1623-1629.
Banthin, Jessica S., and Thomas M. Selden. 2003. “The ABCs of Children's Health Care: How
the Medicaid Expansions Affected Access, Burdens, and Coverage Between 1987 and 1996."
Inquiry 40(2): 133-145.
Black, Sandra E. and Paul J. Devereux. 2011. “Recent Developments in Intergenerational
Mobility.” In Card, D., Ashenfelter, O. (Eds.), Handbook of Labor Economics, vol. 4, Part B.
Elsevier: Amsterdam.
Black, Sandra E., Paul J. Devereux, and Kjell G. Salvanes. 2007. “From the Cradle to the Labor
Market? The Effect of Birth Weight on Adult Outcomes.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics,122(1): 409–439.
Bleakley, Hoyt. 2007. “Disease and Development: Evidence from Hookworm Eradication in the
American South.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 122 (1): 73–117.
Bleakley, Hoyt. 2010. “Malaria Eradication in the Americas: A retrospective Analysis of
Childhood Exposure.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 2(2): 1–45.
Bound, John, Michael F. Lovenheim and Sarah Turner. 2010. “Why Have College Completion
Rates Declined? An Analysis of Changing Student Preparation and Collegiate Resources.”
American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 2(3): 129–157.
35

Brown, David, Amanda E. Kowalski, and Ithai Lurie. 2014. “Medicaid as an Investment in
Children: What is the Long-Term Impact on Tax Receipts?” Yale University Working Paper,
available at http://www.econ.yale.edu/~ak669/medicaid.latest.draft.pdf, last accessed
10/7/2014.
Buchmueller, Thomas C., Kevin Grumbach, Richard Kronick, and James G. Kahn. 2005. "Book
Review: The Effect of Health Insurance on Medical Care Utilization and Implications for
Insurance Expansion: A Review of the Literature.” Medical Care Research and Review
62(1): 3-30.
Case, Anne, Angela Fertig, and Christina Paxson. 2005. “The Lasting Impact of Childhood
Health and Circumstance.” Journal of Health Economics 24(2): 365-389.
Case, Anne, Darren Lubotsky, and Christina Paxson. 2002. “T Economic Status and Health in
Childhood: The Origins of the Gradient.” American Economic Review 92(5): 1308-1334.
Carneiro, Pedro and James J. Heckman. 2002. “The Evidence on Credit Constraints in PostSecondary Schooling.” The Economic Journal 112(482): 705-734.
Chen, Yuyu, and Ginger Zhe Jin. 2012. “Does Health Insurance Coverage Lead to Better Health
and Educational Outcomes? Evidence from Rural China.” Journal of Health Economics
31(1): 1-14.
Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman, Nathaniel Hilger, Emmanuel Saez, Diane Whitmore
Schanzenbach, and Danny Yagan. 2011. “How Does Your Kindergarten Classroom Affect
Your Earnings? Evidence from Project Star.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 126(4): 15931660.
Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman, and Jonah Rockoff. 2013. Measuring the Impacts of Teachers II:
Teacher Value-Added and Student Outcomes in Adulthood.” NBER Working Paper No.
19424.
Chetty, Raj, Nathaniel Hendren, Patrick Kline and Emmanuel Saez. 2014. “Where is the Land of
Opportunity? The Geography of Intergenerational Mobility in the United States.” NBER
Working Paper No. 19843.
Clark, Damon and Heather Royer. 2013. “The Effect of Education on Adult Mortality and
Health: Evidence from Britain.” American Economic Review 103(6): 2087–2120.
Currie, Janet. 2000. “Do Children of Immigrants Make Differential Use of Public Health
Insurance?” In Issues in the Economics of Immigration, pp. 271-308. University of Chicago
Press.
Currie, J., M. Stabile, P. Manivong, and L. L. Roos. 2010. “Child Health and Young Adult
Outcomes.” Journal of Human Resources 45(3): 517–548.
Currie, Janet, and Douglas Almond. 2011. “Human Capital Development Before Age Five.”
Handbook of Labor Economics 4: 1315-1486.
Currie, Janet, and Jonathan Gruber. 1996a. “Health Insurance Eligibility, Utilization of Medical
Care, and Child Health." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 111(2): 431-466.
Currie, Janet, and Jonathan Gruber. 1996b. “Saving Babies: The Efficacy and Cost of Recent
Changes in the Medicaid Eligibility of Pregnant Women.” Journal of Political Economy
CIV: 1263–1296.
Cutler, David M., and Jonathan Gruber. 1996. "Does Public Insurance Crowd Out Private
Insurance?” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 111(2): 391-430.
Cutler, David M. and Adriana Lleras-Muney. 2006. “Education and Health: Evaluating Theories
and Evidence.” NBER Working Paper No. 12352.

36

Cox, Tamara Lalovic and Randall Reback. 2013. “Where Health Policy Meets Education Policy:
School-based Health Centers in New York.” Mimeo.
Dafny, Leemore and Jonathan Gruber. 2005. “Public Insurance and Child Hospitalizations:
Access and Efficiency Effects.” Journal of Public Economics 89(1): 109–129.
Dahl, Gordon B. and Lance Lochner. 2012. “The Impact of Family Income on Child
Achievement: Evidence from the Earned Income Tax Credit.” American Economic Review
102(5): 1927–1956.
Dave, Dhaval M., Sandra L. Decker, Robert Kaestner, and Kosali Ilayperuma Simon. 2013. “The
Effect of Medicaid Expansions in the Late 1980s and Early 1990s on the Labor Supply of
Pregnant Women.” NBER Working Paper No. w19161.
DeLeire, Thomas, Leonard M. Lopoo, and Kosali I. Simon. 2011. “Medicaid Expansions and
Fertility in the United States.” Demography 48(2): 725-747.
DeNavas-Walt, C., Bernadette D. Proctor, and Jessica C. Smith. 2013. “Income, Poverty, and
Health Insurance Coverage in the United States: 2012.” Washington, DC: US Department of
Commerce Economics and Statistics Administration, US Census Bureau. Retrieved October
2, 2014.
Deming, David, Sarah Cohodes, Jennifer Jennings, and Sandy Jencks. 2013. “School
Accountability, Postsecondary Attainment and Earnings.” NBER Working Paper No. 19444.
Deming, David, Justine Hastings, Thomas Kane, and Douglas Staiger. 2014. “School Choice,
School Quality and Postsecondary Attainment.” American Economic Review 104(3): 9911013.
Duncan, Greg. J., Pamela A. Morris, and Chris Rodrigues. 2011. “Does Money Really Matter?
Estimating Impacts of Family Income on Young Children’s Achievement with Data from
Random-assignment Experiments.” Developmental Psychology 47(5): 1263–1279.
Dynarski, Susan, Joshua Hyman, and Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach. 2013. “Experimental
Evidence on the Effect of Childhood Investments on Postsecondary Attainment and
Degree Completion.” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 32(4): 692-717.
Eide, Eric R., and Mark H. Showalter. 2011. “Estimating the Relation between Health and
Education: What Do We Know and What Do We Need to Know?” Economics of
Education Review 30(5): 778–791.
Figlio, David N., Jonathan Guryan, Krzysztof Karbownik, and Jeffrey Roth. 2013. “The Effects
of Poor Neonatal Health on Children's Cognitive Development.” NBER Working Paper No.
18846.
Finkelstein, Amy, Sarah Taubman, Bill Wright, Mira Bernstein, Jonathan Gruber, Joseph P.
Newhouse, Heidi Allen, and Katherine Baicker. “The Oregon Health Insurance Experiment:
Evidence from the First Year.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 127(3): 1057-1106.
Garces, Eliana, Duncan Thomas and Janet Currie. 2002. “Longer-Term Effects of Head Start.”
American Economic Review 92(4): 999-1012.
Gross, Tal, and Matthew J. Notowidigdo. 2011. “Health Insurance and the Consumer
Bankruptcy Decision: Evidence from Expansions of Medicaid.” Journal of Public Economics
95(7): 767-778.
Grossman, Michael. 1972. “On the Concept of Health Capital and the Demand for Health.”
Journal of Political Economy 80(2): 223–255.
Grossman, Michael. 2004. “The Demand for Health, 30 Years Later: A Very Personal
Retrospective and Prospective Reflection.” Journal of Health Economics 23(4): 629–636.

37

Gruber, Jonathan. 2003. “Medicaid.” In Robert Moffitt (Ed.), Means Tested Transfer Programs
in the U.S. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 15–77.
Gruber, Jonathan, and Kosali Simon. 2008. “Crowd-out 10 Years Later: Have Recent Public
Insurance Expansions Crowded Out Private Health Insurance?” Journal of Health
Economics 27(2): 201-217.
Hanushek, Eric A. 2003. “The Failure of Input-Based Schooling Policies.” The Economic
Journal 113(485): F64-F98.
Heckman, James J. and Paul A. LaFontaine. 2006. “Bias-Corrected Estimates of GED Returns.”
Journal of Labor Economics 24(3): 661-700.
The Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation. Federal and State Share of Medicaid Spending,
FY2012. Available Online: http://kff.org/medicaid/state-indicator/federalstate-share-ofspending/. Accessed May 13, 2014.
Jackson, C. Kirabo, Rucker Johnson, and Claudia Persico. 2014. “The Effect of School Finance
Reforms on the Distribution of Spending, Academic Achievement, and Adult Outcomes.”
NBER Working Paper No. 20118.
Kaestner, R.,T. Joyce, and A. Racine. 2001. “Medicaid Eligibility and the Incidence of
Ambulatory Care Sensitive Hospitalizations for Children.” Social Science Medicine 52(2):
305-13.
Kaestner, R., A. Racine, and T. Joyce. 2000. “Did Recent Expansions in Medicaid Narrow
Socioeconomic Differences in Hospitalization Rates of Infants?” Medical Care 38(2): 195206.
Kenney, Genevieve M., Matthew Buettgens, Jocelyn Guyer, and Martha Heberlein. "Improving
coverage for children under health reform will require maintaining current eligibility
standards for Medicaid and CHIP." Health Affairs 30, no. 12 (2011): 2371-2381.
Levy, Helen, and David Meltzer. 2008. “The Impact of Health Insurance on Health.” Annual
Review of Public Health 29: 399-409.
Levine, Philip B. and Diane Schanzenbach. 2009. “The Impact of Children's Public Health
Insurance Expansions on Educational Outcomes.” Forum for Health Economics & Policy
12(1): 1-26.
Lo Sasso, Anthony T. and Thomas C. Buchmueller. 2004. “The Effect of the State Children’s
Health Insurance Program on Health Insurance Coverage.” Journal of Health Economics
23(5): 1059-1082.
Lovenheim, Michael F., Randall Reback and Leigh Wedenoja. 2013. “How Does Access to
Health Care Affect Health and Education? Evidence from School-based Health Center
Openings.” Mimeo.
Ludwig, Jens and Douglas Miller. 2007. “Does Head Start Improve Children's Life Chances?
Evidence from a Regression Discontinuity Design.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 122(1):
159-208.
Michelmore, Katherine. 2013. “The Effect of Income on Educational Attainment: Evidence from
State Earned Income Tax Credit Expansions.” Mimeo.
Miller, Sarah Marie, and Laura R. Wherry. 2014. “The Long-Term Health Effects of Early Life
Medicaid Coverage.” Available at SSRN 2466691.
Moss, Nancy E. and Karen Carver. 1998. “The Effect of WIC and Medicaid on Infant Mortality
in the United States.” American Journal of Public Health 88(9): 1354-1361.
Murnane, Richard. 2013, January. “U.S high school graduation rates: Patterns and
explanations.” Working Paper 18701, National Bureau of Economic Research.
38

Oreopoulos, Philip, Mark Stabile, Randy Walld, and Leslie L. Roos. 2008. “Short-, Medium-,
and Long-Term Consequences of Poor Infant Health: An Analysis Using Siblings and
Twins.” Journal of Human Resources 43(1): 88–138.
Phelps, C. 1997. Health Economics, 2nd ed. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Royer, Heather. 2009. “Separated at Girth: US Twin Estimates of the Effects of Birth Weight.”
American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 1(1): 49–85.
Todd, Petra E. and Kenneth I. Wolpin. 2007. “The Production of Cognitive Achievement in
Children: Home, School, and Racial Test Score Gaps.” Journal of Human Capital 1(1): 91136.
Zavodny, Madeline and Marianne P. Bitler. 2010. “The Effect of Medicaid Eligibility
Expansions on Fertility.” Social Science & Medicine 71(5): 918-924.

39

Figure 1: Medicaid Eligibility by Birth Cohort and Race

0

.1

.2

Eligibility
.3 .4

.5

.6

Panel A: Average Eligibility by Birth Cohort

1980

1982

1984

1986

1988

1990

Birth Year
Actual Eligibility
Federal Eligibility

Simulated Eligibility
Simulated Federal Eligibility

0

.1

.2

Eligibility
.3 .4

.5

.6

Panel B: Average Eligibility of Nonwhites
by Birth Cohort

1980

1982

1984

Birth Year

Actual Eligibility
Federal Eligibility

1986

1988

1990

Simulated Eligibility
Simulated Federal Eligibility

0

.1

.2

Eligibility
.3 .4

.5

.6

Panel C: Average Eligibility of Whites
by Birth Cohort

1980

1982

1984

Birth Year

Actual Eligibility
Federal Eligibility

1986

1988

1990

Simulated Eligibility
Simulated Federal Eligibility

The figure shows average eligibility of 0-17 year olds by birth cohort calculated using 1980-2004 CPS
data combined with state by year Medicaid eligibility rules. Eligibility is calculated separately for whites
and non-whites. Simulated fixed eligibility is calculated by applying state-by-year rules to 1986 CPS
data. Federal eligibility uses only federal Medicaid rules, applied to each state using fixed 1980 AFDC
rules.

40

Table 1: Birth Cohorts by Age in Each ACS Year
Age
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29

2005
1983
1982
1981
1980

2006
1984
1983
1982
1981
1980

2007
1985
1984
1983
1982
1981
1980

2008
1986
1985
1984
1983
1982
1981
1980

2009
1987
1986
1985
1984
1983
1982
1981
1980

2010
1988
1987
1986
1985
1984
1983
1982
1981

41

2011
1989
1988
1987
1986
1985
1984
1983
1982

2012
1990
1989
1988
1987
1986
1985
1984
1983

Table 2: Summary Statistics for Analysis Samples
Variable Name
No High School

All
0.094
(0.048)
No High School or GED
0.126
(0.054)
At Least Some College
0.656
(0.086)
College Graduate
0.265
(0.108)
Age
25.001
(2.156)
Male
0.504
(0.039)
White
0.683
(0.466)
Black
0.143
(0.266)
Hispanic
0.123
(0.230)
Other Race
0.052
(0.108)
Married
0.616
(0.089)
Age 0-17 3-year Average
0.237
Medicaid Eligibility
(0.152)
Age 0-17 Average Fixed
0.254
Simulated Medicaid Eligibility
(0.155)
Age 0-17 3-year Federal Average 0.113
Simulated Medicaid Eligibility
(0.140)
Age 0-17 Average Federal Fixed
0.122
Simulated Medicaid Eligibility
(0.148)
Observations
5494

White Nonwhite
0.071
0.143
(0.029)
(0.045)
0.102
0.176
(0.038)
(0.050)
0.694
0.572
(0.062)
(0.071)
0.309
0.172
(0.096)
(0.065)
25.031
24.936
(2.155)
(2.157)
0.508
0.497
(0.032)
(0.049)
1.000
0.000
(0.000)
(0.000)
0.000
0.451
(0.000)
(0.290)
0.000
0.386
(0.000)
(0.255)
0.000
0.163
(0.000)
(0.135)
0.671
0.496
(0.027)
(0.053)
0.156
0.410
(0.077)
(0.127)
0.171
0.434
(0.083)
(0.116)
0.068
0.208
(0.070)
(0.195)
0.074
0.225
(0.073)
(0.205)
2754
2740

Source: Author’s tabulations from the 2005-2012 ACS. The samples
consist of 1980-1990 birth cohorts aged 22-29, for whom we observe
Medicaid eligibility in every year in their birth state from age 0 through 17.
All tabulations were done using ACS sample weights. Standard deviations
are shown in parentheses. Average eligibility is calculated using 3-year
moving averages. The GED tabulations only include ACS years 20082012. Federal Medicaid eligibility is calculated using federal rules only,
interacted with 1980 state AFDC rules as described in the text.

42

Table 3: The Effect of Average Medicaid Eligibility During School Years on
Educational Attainment
No HS
Specification
Panel A: All Eligibility
(1) Baseline
(2)

43

EITC & School
Spending
(3) EITC, School Spending,
R-S-Y & R-A-Y FE
(4) Baseline +
R-S-Y & R-A-Y FE
Panel B: Federal Eligibility
(5) Baseline
(6)

EITC & School
Spending

Some College

College Plus

1st Stage

OLS

RF

IV

0.910∗∗∗
(0.109)
0.951∗∗∗
(0.075)
0.894∗∗∗
(0.105)
0.846∗∗∗
(0.159)

-0.030∗∗
(0.014)
-0.023
(0.015)
-0.000
(0.021)
-0.001
(0.020)

-0.035∗∗
(0.015)
-0.035∗∗
(0.015)
-0.020
(0.024)
-0.021
(0.025)

-0.038∗∗
(0.016)
-0.037∗∗
(0.015)
-0.022
(0.024)
-0.025
(0.027)

0.022
0.027
0.030
0.019
(0.018) (0.022) (0.024) (0.016)
0.024
0.028
0.029
0.017
(0.019) (0.020) (0.021) (0.020)
0.044
0.064
0.073∗
0.041
(0.031) (0.041) (0.042) (0.028)
0.009
0.074
0.088
0.036
(0.033) (0.055) (0.067) (0.026)

0.211∗∗∗
(0.030)
0.209∗∗∗
(0.031)

-0.030∗∗
(0.014)
-0.023
(0.015)

-0.012∗∗∗
(0.004)
-0.011∗∗∗
(0.004)

-0.055∗∗∗
(0.021)
-0.054∗∗
(0.021)

OLS

RF

IV

OLS

RF

IV

0.055∗
(0.028)
0.062∗∗
(0.030)
0.095
(0.060)
0.079
(0.062)

0.061∗
(0.033)
0.065∗∗
(0.032)
0.108∗
(0.065)
0.095
(0.069)

0.022
0.002
0.012
0.019 0.017∗∗∗
(0.018) (0.007) (0.032) (0.016) (0.006)
0.024
0.002
0.012
0.017 0.017∗∗∗
(0.019) (0.007) (0.032) (0.020) (0.006)

0.079∗∗∗
(0.027)
0.079∗∗∗
(0.027)

Source: Authors’ estimation of equation (3) in the text using 22-29 year old respondents from the 2005-2012 ACS. Each cell in the table comes
from a separate regression (N=5480). The “OLS” columns refer to models that use a three-year moving average of actual eligibility as the
dependent variable, and the “RF” columns refer to models that use fixed simulated eligibility as the independent variable. All estimates include
an indicator for the cell being nonwhite or not as well as race-by age, race-by-calendar year and race-by-state of birth fixed effects. Rows 3 and
4 include race by state of birth by calendar year (R-S-Y) fixed effects and race by age by calendar year (R-A-Y) fixed effects. Standard errors
clustered at the state-of-birth level are in parentheses: *** indicates significance at the 1% level, ** indicates significance at the 5% level, and
* indicates significance at the 10% level.

Table 4: The Effect of Average Medicaid Eligibility During School Years on
Educational Attainment, Separating GED and HS Diplomas, 2008-2012

Specification
Panel A: All Eligibility
(1) Baseline
(2)

44

EITC & School
Spending
(3) EITC, School Spending
R-S-Y & R-A-Y FE
(4) Baseline +
R-S-Y & R-A-Y FE

Panel B: Federal Eligibility
(5) Baseline
(6)

EITC & School
Spending

1st Stage

No HS Diploma

No GED or HS

Some College

OLS

OLS

IV

OLS

-0.041∗∗
(0.020)
-0.040∗∗
(0.019)
-0.015
(0.027)
-0.021
(0.028)

IV

0.910∗∗∗
(0.113)
0.945∗∗∗
(0.076)
0.892∗∗∗
(0.105)
0.842∗∗∗
(0.160)

-0.020 -0.047∗∗
(0.019) (0.019)
-0.013 -0.047∗∗∗
(0.019) (0.018)
0.011
-0.025
(0.021) (0.024)
0.009
-0.028
(0.020) (0.026)

-0.023
(0.020)
-0.015
(0.020)
0.004
(0.023)
0.003
(0.023)

0.210∗∗∗
(0.029)
0.205∗∗∗
(0.030)

-0.020 -0.074∗∗∗
(0.019) (0.025)
-0.013 -0.072∗∗∗
(0.019) (0.026)

-0.023 -0.074∗∗∗
(0.020) (0.025)
-0.015 -0.072∗∗∗
(0.020) (0.026)

IV

College Plus
OLS

0.009
0.043
0.025
(0.020) (0.036) (0.019)
0.021
0.035
0.021
(0.022) (0.026) (0.022)
0.032
0.071∗
0.024
(0.028) (0.038) (0.031)
-0.003
0.090
0.019
(0.030) (0.067) (0.026)

IV
0.081∗
(0.043)
0.083∗∗
(0.041)
0.102
(0.072)
0.092
(0.076)

0.009
-0.003
0.025 0.087∗∗∗
(0.020) (0.038) (0.019) (0.029)
0.021
0.001
0.021 0.088∗∗∗
(0.022) (0.041) (0.022) (0.031)

Source: Authors’ estimation of equation (3) in the text using 22-29 year old respondents from the 2008-2012 ACS. Each cell in the table
comes from a separate regression (N=3957). The “OLS” columns refer to models that use a three-year moving average of actual eligibility
as the dependent variable, and the “RF” columns refer to models that use fixed simulated eligibility as the independent variable. All
estimates include an indicator for the cell being nonwhite or not as well as race-by-age fixed effects, race-by-calendar year fixed effects and
race-by-state of birth fixed effects. Rows 3 and 4 include race by state of birth by calendar year (R-S-Y) fixed effects and race by age by
calendar year (R-A-Y) fixed effects. Standard errors clustered at the state-of-birth level are in parentheses: *** indicates significance at the
1% level, ** indicates significance at the 5% level, and * indicates significance at the 10% level.

Table 5: IV Estimatss of the Effect of Average Medicaid Eligibility During School
Years on Educational Attainment, by Age at Eligibility
No HS
Any
Age Range Diploma College
Panel A: Baseline Model
0-3
-0.011
0.017
(0.014) (0.014)
4-8
-0.031∗∗
0.012
(0.010) (0.014)
9-13
0.008
-0.026∗
(0.009) (0.015)
14-17
-0.012
0.058∗∗
(0.009) (0.011)

College
Plus
-0.006
(0.007)
0.038∗∗
(0.014)
-0.027
(0.017)
0.068∗∗
(0.015)

Panel B: Baseline + R-S-Y and R-A-Y FE
0-3
0.000
-0.007
0.052
(0.021) (0.031)
(0.038)
4-8
-0.027
0.024
0.052
(0.020) (0.025)
(0.058)
9-13
0.004
0.013
-0.002
(0.011) (0.028)
(0.022)
∗∗
14-17
-0.014
0.070
0.023
(0.015) (0.027)
(0.024)
Source: Authors’ estimation of equation (3) in the text using 22-29 year old respondents from the 20052012 ACS. Each cell in the table comes from a separate regression (N=5480). All estimates include an
indicator for the cell being nonwhite or not, race-by-age-fixed effects, race-by-calendar year fixed effects
and race-by-state of birth fixed effects. Estimates in Panel B also includes race by state of birth by
calendar year (R-S-Y) fixed effects and race by age by calendar year (R-A-Y) fixed effects. Standard
errors clustered at the state-of-birth level are in parentheses: *** indicates significance at the 1% level,
** indicates significance at the 5% level, and * indicates significance at the 10% level.

45

Table 6: The Effect of Average Medicaid Eligibility During School Years on
Educational Attainment, Including State of Birth Linear Time Trends
Separately by Race
No HS
Specification
Panel A: All Eligibility
(1) Baseline
(2)

46

EITC & School
Spending
(3) EITC, School Spending,
R-S-Y & R-A-Y FE
(4) Baseline +
R-S-Y & R-A-Y FE
Panel B: Federal Eligibility
(5) Baseline
(6)

EITC & School
Spending

Some College

College Plus

1st Stage

OLS

RF

IV

0.856∗∗∗
(0.097)
0.915∗∗∗
(0.063)
0.812∗∗∗
(0.099)
0.735∗∗∗
(0.157)

-0.027∗
(0.014)
-0.020
(0.014)
0.013
(0.020)
0.011
(0.020)

-0.025∗
(0.015)
-0.032∗∗
(0.015)
-0.021
(0.026)
-0.019
(0.025)

-0.029∗
(0.017)
-0.035∗∗
(0.016)
-0.025
(0.029)
-0.025
(0.032)

-0.002
0.001
0.001
0.011
(0.018) (0.021) (0.024) (0.023)
-0.003 -0.000 -0.001
0.008
(0.019) (0.020) (0.021) (0.025)
0.031
0.059∗ 0.072∗
0.049
(0.035) (0.035) (0.040) (0.036)
0.006
0.085∗
0.115
0.044
(0.031) (0.048) (0.074) (0.034)

0.215∗∗∗
(0.031)
0.214∗∗∗
(0.031)

-0.027∗ -0.012∗∗∗
(0.014) (0.004)
-0.020 -0.011∗∗∗
(0.014) (0.004)

-0.057∗∗∗
(0.020)
-0.053∗∗∗
(0.020)

OLS

RF

IV

OLS

RF

IV

0.042
(0.033)
0.048
(0.035)
0.070
(0.072)
0.057
(0.080)

0.049
(0.039)
0.053
(0.038)
0.087
(0.082)
0.078
(0.098)

-0.002
0.003
0.016
0.011 0.017∗∗∗
(0.018) (0.007) (0.031) (0.023) (0.006)
-0.003
0.003
0.016
0.008 0.017∗∗∗
(0.019) (0.007) (0.031) (0.025) (0.006)

0.081∗∗∗
(0.027)
0.080∗∗∗
(0.026)

Source: Authors’ estimation of equation (3) in the text using 22-29 year old respondents from the 2005-2012 ACS. Each cell in the table
comes from a separate regression (N=5480). The “OLS” columns refer to models that use a three-year moving average of actual eligibility as
the dependent variable, and the “IV” columns refer to models that use fixed simulated eligibility as the independent variable. All estimates
include an indicator for the cell being nonwhite or not as well as race-by-age fixed effects, race-by-calendar year fixed effects and race-by-state
of birth fixed effects. Rows 3 and 4 include race by state of birth by calendar year (R-S-Y) fixed effects and race by age by calendar year
(R-A-Y) fixed effects. Estimates also include race by state of birth linear time trends. Standard errors clustered at the state-of-birth level
are in parentheses: *** indicates significance at the 1% level, ** indicates significance at the 5% level, and * indicates significance at the
10% level.

Table 7: Placebo Test with Randomly Assigned Medicaid Eligibility
No HS Graduation
RF
Baseline
Baseline +
R-S-Y & R-A-Y FE

IV

Some College
RF

BA
IV

RF

IV

1.95e−5
2.28e−5
-3.42e−5
-4.54e−5
-0.0001
-0.0002
(-0.007, 0.007) (-0.008, 0.008) (-0.010, 0.011) (-0.011, 0.012) (-0.009, 0.009) (-0.010, 0.010)
0.0002
0.0002
-5.09e−5
-8.32e−5
-0.0003
-0.0004
(-0.007, 0.007) (-0.008, 0.008) (-0.010, 0.011) (-0.012, 0.013) (-0.010, 0.011) (-0.011, 0.012)

47

Source: Authors’ estimation of equation (3) in the text using 22-29 year old respondents from the 2005-2012 ACS. We randomly
assign age-state-year eligibility and fixed simulated eligibility, as a pair, across different age-state-year cells. This is done separately
by race. We conduct 500 separate simulations for each outcome, both including and excluding state of birth by calendar year (R-S-Y)
fixed effects and race by age by calendar year (R-A-Y) fixed effects. All estimates include an indicator for the cell being non-white or
not as well as race-by-age fixed effects, race-by-calendar year fixed effects and race-by-state of birth fixed effects. The table shows the
mean estimate across all 500 runs, as well as the 2.5th and 97.5th percentiles in parentheses. The range in parentheses thus show the
non-parametric 95% confidence interval. IV estimates are constructed by dividing the reduced form (RF) by the first stage, which
also is estimated using this method. First stage estimates are available upon request from the authors.

Table 8: The Effect of Average Medicaid Eligibility During School Years on Teen
Health Outcomes and Behaviors, Observed Between Ages 14-18

Dependent Variable

Mean

OLS

IV

Risky Sex Index (0-4) (n=1441)

0.962

Ever Had Sex (n=1400)

0.481

Body Mass Index (n=1122)

23.210

Overweight (n=1122)

0.258

Obese (n=1122)

0.086

Ever Use Marijuana (n=1441)

0.432

Number of Days Drank Past Month (n=1439)

2.690

Ever Smoke Regularly (n=1436)

0.197

Any Mental Health Issue (n=1441)

0.223

Eating Disorder (n=1440)

0.101

-0.082
(0.209)
0.125
(0.102)
-0.107
(1.006)
-0.040
(0.061)
-0.052
(0.071)
-0.054
(0.162)
-0.605
(1.113)
-0.069
(0.113)
0.002
(0.124)
-0.180∗∗∗
(0.059)

-0.034
(0.302)
0.172
(0.181)
-0.897
(1.214)
-0.163
(0.107)
-0.076
(0.070)
-0.174
(0.209)
-2.832∗
(1.708)
-0.233
(0.157)
-0.112
(0.105)
-0.327∗∗∗
(0.077)

Source: Authors’ estimation of equation (3) in the text using 14-18 year old respondents from the 19952007 YRBS. Each cell in the table comes from a separate regression. Risky sex index is a count variable
that includes ever had sex, no birth control last sexual encounter (a combination of no birth control and
condom use variables), ever pregnant, and used alcohol or drugs last sexual encounter. See Appendix
Table A-3 for estimates of individual components of the Risky Sex Index as well as the variables from
which we calculate whether an individual has a mental health issue or an eating disorder. Medicaid
eligibility is calculated as average from age 0 to current age, so for age 14 it is 0-14. The “OLS” column
refers to models that use a three-year moving average of actual eligibility as the independent variable,
and the “IV” column refers to models that instrument actual eligibility with fixed simulated eligibility.
The first stage coefficient is 0.882 (se=0.123). The estimates include indicators for nonwhite as well as
race by age, race by calendar year, and race by state of residence fixed effects. Standard errors clustered
at the state-of-residence level are in parentheses: *** indicates significance at the 1% level, ** indicates
significance at the 5% level, and * indicates significance at the 10% level.

48

Table A-1: The Effect of Average Medicaid Eligibility During School Years on
Educational Attainment using the White Sample
No HS
Specification
Panel A: All Eligibility
(1) Baseline
(2)

50

EITC & School
Spending
(3) EITC, School Spending,
S-Y and A-Y FE
(4) Baseline +
S-Y and A-Y FE
Panel B: Federal Eligibility
(5) Baseline
(6)

EITC & School
Spending

1st Stage

OLS

RF

Some College
IV

OLS

RF

College Plus
IV

OLS

RF

IV

0.706∗∗∗
(0.134)
0.801∗∗∗
(0.084)
0.745∗∗∗
(0.125)
0.656∗∗∗
(0.190)

-0.022 -0.018 -0.025 -0.005
0.014
0.019
0.020
(0.018) (0.023) (0.032) (0.032) (0.029) (0.042) (0.042)
-0.012 -0.030 -0.037 -0.003
0.013
0.016
0.020
(0.019) (0.024) (0.031) (0.033) (0.028) (0.035) (0.046)
0.017
-0.028 -0.038
0.029
0.075
0.101∗
0.102
(0.022) (0.033) (0.043) (0.050) (0.046) (0.057) (0.064)
0.016
-0.026 -0.039 -0.009 0.105∗
0.159
0.088
(0.019) (0.031) (0.048) (0.041) (0.058) (0.109) (0.059)

0.051
(0.049)
0.061
(0.052)
0.098
(0.091)
0.079
(0.100)

0.073
(0.074)
0.076
(0.067)
0.132
(0.118)
0.121
(0.141)

0.234∗∗∗
(0.027)
0.236∗∗∗
(0.028)

-0.022 -0.012 -0.052 -0.005 0.030∗∗ 0.127∗∗ 0.020
(0.018) (0.010) (0.040) (0.032) (0.015) (0.061) (0.042)
-0.012 -0.012 -0.052 -0.003 0.031∗∗ 0.129∗∗ 0.020
(0.019) (0.010) (0.040) (0.033) (0.015) (0.062) (0.046)

0.059∗∗∗
(0.015)
0.060∗∗∗
(0.015)

0.250∗∗∗
(0.066)
0.253∗∗∗
(0.069)

Source: Authors’ estimation of equation (3) in the text using 22-29 year old white respondents from the 2005-2012 ACS. Each cell in the
table comes from a separate regression (N=2754). The “OLS” columns refer to models that use a three-year moving average of actual
eligibility as the dependent variable, and the “RF” columns refer to models that use fixed simulated eligibility as the independent variable.
All estimates include age fixed effects, calendar year fixed effects and state of birth fixed effects. Rows 3 and 4 include state of birth by
calendar year (S-Y) fixed effects and age by calendar year (A-Y) fixed effects. Standard errors clustered at the state-of-birth level are in
parentheses: *** indicates significance at the 1% level, ** indicates significance at the 5% level, and * indicates significance at the 10% level.

Table A-2: The Effect of Average Medicaid Eligibility During School Years on
Educational Attainment using the Nonwhite Sample
No HS
Specification
Panel A: All Eligibility
(1) Baseline
(2)

51

EITC & School
Spending
(3) EITC, School Spending,
S-Y & A-Y FE
(4) Baseline +
S-Y & A-Y FE
Panel B: Federal Eligibility
(5) Baseline
(6)

EITC & School
Spending

1st Stage

OLS

RF

Some College
IV

OLS

RF

College Plus
IV

OLS

RF

IV

1.128∗∗∗
(0.137)
1.095∗∗∗
(0.100)
1.059∗∗∗
(0.182)
1.101∗∗∗
(0.256)

-0.035∗ -0.053∗∗
(0.019) (0.023)
-0.035∗ -0.050∗∗
(0.019) (0.022)
-0.012
-0.011
(0.031) (0.046)
-0.013
-0.015
(0.030) (0.049)

-0.047∗∗
(0.020)
-0.045∗∗
(0.019)
-0.011
(0.039)
-0.014
(0.039)

0.039
0.042
0.036
0.019 0.059∗∗∗
(0.025) (0.031) (0.027) (0.014) (0.019)
0.041
0.040
0.036
0.012 0.057∗∗∗
(0.027) (0.034) (0.030) (0.016) (0.020)
0.058
0.051
0.050
0.001
0.090∗
(0.045) (0.083) (0.069) (0.032) (0.048)
0.022
0.033
0.032
-0.000
0.079
(0.051) (0.087) (0.071) (0.029) (0.053)

0.053∗∗∗
(0.019)
0.052∗∗∗
(0.019)
0.087∗
(0.050)
0.074
(0.056)

0.206∗∗∗
(0.032)
0.200∗∗∗
(0.033)

-0.035∗ -0.012∗∗
(0.019) (0.005)
-0.035∗ -0.012∗∗
(0.019) (0.005)

-0.056∗∗
(0.027)
-0.059∗∗
(0.029)

0.039
-0.004 -0.018
0.019
(0.025) (0.008) (0.036) (0.014)
0.041
-0.004 -0.021
0.012
(0.027) (0.008) (0.038) (0.016)

0.034
(0.031)
0.031
(0.033)

0.007
(0.007)
0.006
(0.007)

Source: Authors’ estimation of equation (3) in the text using 22-29 year old non-white respondents from the 2005-2012 ACS. Each cell in
the table comes from a separate regression (N=2726). The “OLS” columns refer to models that use a three-year moving average of actual
eligibility as the dependent variable, and the “RF” columns refer to models that use fixed simulated eligibility as the independent variable.
All estimates include age fixed effects, calendar year fixed effects and state of birth fixed effects. Rows 3 and 4 include state of birth by
calendar year (S-Y) fixed effects and age by calendar year (A-Y) fixed effects. Standard errors clustered at the state-of-birth level are in
parentheses: *** indicates significance at the 1% level, ** indicates significance at the 5% level, and * indicates significance at the 10% level.

Table A-3: The Effect of Average Medicaid Eligibility During School Years on
Teen Health Outcomes and Behaviors, Observed Between Ages 14-18

Dependent Variable

Mean

OLS

IV

Risky Sex Index (0-4) (n=1441)

0.962

Ever Had Sex (n=1400)

0.481

No Birth Control (n=1338)

0.230

Used Condom Last Encounter (n=1338)

0.633

Ever Pregnant or Impregnate Partner (n=1057)

0.051

Used Drugs or Alcohol Last Sexual Encounter (n=1339)

0.243

-0.082
(0.209)
0.125
(0.102)
-0.080
(0.166)
0.222
(0.180)
0.063
(0.051)
-0.091
(0.146)
0.002
(0.124)
-0.008
(0.120)
0.021
(0.120)
-0.033
(0.067)
-0.047
(0.033)
-0.103
(0.160)
-0.180∗∗∗
(0.059)
-0.091∗∗
(0.044)
-0.129∗∗∗
(0.044)

-0.034
(0.302)
0.172
(0.181)
-0.214
(0.210)
0.217
(0.188)
0.072
(0.073)
-0.114
(0.211)
-0.112
(0.105)
-0.049
(0.105)
-0.102
(0.127)
-0.154∗
(0.083)
-0.131∗∗∗
(0.048)
-0.449∗∗
(0.228)
-0.327∗∗∗
(0.077)
-0.163∗∗
(0.064)
-0.205∗∗∗
(0.052)

Any Mental Health Issue (n=1441)

0.223

Considered Suicide (n=1441)

0.186

Planned Suicide (n=1441)

0.149

Attempted Suicide (n=1438)

0.084

Hurt Self Attempting Suicide (n=1438)

0.026

Number of Suicide Attempts (n=1438)

0.180

Eating Disorder (n=1440)

0.101

Bulimic (n=1440)

0.050

Used Diet Pills (n=1440)

0.074

Source: Authors’ estimation of equation (3) in the text using 14-18 year old respondents from the 19952007 YRBS. Each cell in the table comes from a separate regression, and the indented variables make
up the index listed above them. Any mental health issue is coded as 1 if an individual reports any of
the suicide ideation variables included in the table. Any eating disorder includes both bulimia and diet
pill use. Medicaid eligibility is calculated as average from age 0 to current age, so for age 14 it is 0-14.
The “OLS” column refers to models that use a three-year moving average of actual eligibility as the
independent variable, and the “IV” column refers to models that instrument actual eligibility with fixed
simulated eligibility. The first stage coefficient is 0.882 (se=0.123). The estimates include indicators
for nonwhite as well as race by age, race by calendar year, and race by state of residence fixed effects.
Standard errors clustered at the state-of-residence level are in parentheses: *** indicates significance at
the 1% level, ** indicates significance at the 5% level, and * indicates significance at the 10% level.

52

