                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      TO CHARGE OR NOT TO CHARGE:
         EVIDENCE FROM A HEALTH PRODUCTS EXPERIMENT IN UGANDA

                                         Greg Fischer
                                         Dean Karlan
                                      Margaret McConnell
                                          Pia Raffler

                                      Working Paper 20170
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w20170


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2014




The authors thank London School of Economics and Yale University for funding, Adam Alagiah,
Erika Deserranno, Trina Gorman, Hideto Koizumi, Samuel Olweny and Indrani Saran for
excellent research assistance and management of the field work, and Gharad Bryan, Jessica
Cohen, Robin Burgess, Pascaline Dupas, Paul Gertler, Gerard Padró i Miquel, Chris Udry, Tom
Wilkening and participants in various seminars and conferences for comments. Human subjects
approval was obtained from the Institutional Review Boards at Yale (#1105008448) and
Innovations for Poverty Action (487.11May-001). All opinions and errors are ours. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2014 by Greg Fischer, Dean Karlan, Margaret McConnell, and Pia Raffler. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
To Charge or Not to Charge: Evidence from a Health Products Experiment in Uganda
Greg Fischer, Dean Karlan, Margaret McConnell, and Pia Raffler
NBER Working Paper No. 20170
May 2014
JEL No. D11,D12,D83,I11,I18,O12

                                          ABSTRACT

In a field experiment in Uganda, a free distribution of three health products lowers subsequent
demand relative to a sale distribution. This contrasts with work on insecticide-treated bed nets,
highlighting the importance of product characteristics in determining pricing policy. We put
forward a model to illustrate the potential tension between two of these important factors,
learning and anchoring, and then test this model with three products selected specifically for their
variation in the scope for learning. We find the rank order of percentage change of shifts in
demand matches theoretical predictions, although the differences are not statistically significant,
and only two of three pairwise comparisons match when the reductions are specified in percent
terms. These results highlight the importance of understanding pricing policy with respect to
product, market, and household characteristics.

Greg Fischer                                     Margaret McConnell
London School of Economics                       Harvard University
and CEPR                                         9 Bow St
g.fischer@lse.ac.uk                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                                 mmcconnell@gmail.com
Dean Karlan
Department of Economics                          Pia Raffler
Yale University                                  Department of Political Science
P.O. Box 208269                                  Yale University
New Haven, CT 06520-8629                         New Haven, CT 06520
and CEPR                                         pia.raffler@yale.edu
and also NBER
dean.karlan@yale.edu
1      Introduction

A long literature in marketing, psychology, and economics investigates how prices may
affect demand through channels other than the budget constraint. The reference price lit-
erature shows that price histories or even arbitrary prices can directly influence potential
buyers’ willingness to pay for a product.1 The empirical literature from marketing and
psychology, built largely on classroom and lab experiments as well as supermarket scanner
data, finds a large role for price anchors.2 All else equal, a lower price today makes the
price tomorrow seem higher.
     In contrast, a number of recent randomized field studies, particular those related to
the hotly contested issue of pricing health goods in low-income countries, find little ev-
idence for such non-budget-constraint effects of prices on demand and usage.3 This has
produced a loose consensus around the policy of free distribution for a variety of basic
health products (J-PAL, 2011). Reconciling these two seemingly divergent sets of findings
has profound implications for the distribution of health products but also for agriculture,
where government policies often include free or subsidized inputs.
    1 In psychology, there is a long history of studying the effect of reference points in absolute judgments.
See, for example, Sherif et al. (1958). Doob et al. (1969) proposed a theory of cognitive dissonance to
explain results from a series of field experiments demonstrating that low introductory prices of new brands
generated lower sales in the long run than introducing the product at its normal selling price. A range of
studies have demonstrated anchoring effects in estimation tasks (e.g., Tversky and Kahneman 1974; Jacowitz
and Kahneman 1995; Chapman and Johnson 1999; Epley and Gilovich 2001). The role of such anchors in
the formulation of individuals’ values has since received considerable attention (Ariely et al., 2003; Mazar
et al., 2013), although the robustness of such non-budget-constraint effects of prices on demand has recently
been called into question (Fudenberg et al., 2012; Maniadis et al., 2014).
    2 Classroom and lab experimental examples include Winer (1986); Kalwani and Yim (1992); Raghubir and

Corfman (1999); Adaval and Monroe (2002); Kopalle and Lindsey-Mullikin (2003); Anderson and Simester
(2004); Adaval and Wyer Jr (2011) and Rao and Monroe (1989). Mayhew and Winer (1992), Dekimpe et al.
(1998), and Kalyanaram and Little (1994) demonstrate reference price effects with scanner data. Nunes and
Boatwright (2004) provide evidence for the role of incidental prices in a range of settings, and Simonsohn
and Loewenstein (2006) demonstrate behavior consistent with price anchors in the apartment rental decisions
of individuals moving to new cities.
    3 Most directly related are Cohen and Dupas (2010) and Dupas (2014) in the context of insecticide-treated

bed nets and Ashraf et al. (2010) in the context of home water purification. Heffetz and Shayo (2009) also
find no evidence of large non-budget-constraint effects of prices on food purchases in either a lab or field
experiment.


                                                      2
    It is unlikely that a single pricing policy—for example, free distribution—is optimal for
an entire class of goods. On the other hand, answering the question “to charge or not to
charge” should not require case-by-case experimentation with no room for generalization.
Rather, the ultimate aim is to have an empirically validated model that maps from product,
market and household characteristics to an optimal pricing and distribution policy.
    To make progress towards this goal, we argue theoretically and show empirically that
differences in the scope for learning about the value of an experience good—for which
utility is revealed through use—are likely important. To understand the core intuition,
note that reducing short-term prices has two distinct effects. On one hand, lower prices,
including “free trial” periods, increase demand during the low-price period. In addition
to any direct benefit from this, those who purchase the product have an opportunity to
learn directly about the product’s effectiveness. Depending on prices and individuals’ prior
beliefs about the value of the product, this learning effect can either increase or decrease
subsequent demand. On the other hand, lower current prices may serve as reference points
or “anchors” that affect subsequent demand independently of intrinsic value.
    Using a theoretical framework built on this intuition, we designed a field experiment in
northern Uganda where three curative health products—Panadol, Elyzole, and Zinkid—were
distributed door-to-door either for free or for sale at market prices. All three products are
quite different from ITNs, the main product for which this question has been studied. They
are curative rather than preventive, consumable rather than durable, and unlikely to have
meaningful income effects.4 In stark contrast to the existing literature, we find that across
all three products prior free distributions reduce subsequent demand.
   4 The  use of ITNs reduces the incidence of malaria and may thereby increase households’ income and,
in turn, future demand for additional ITNs (see footnote 27 of Dupas (2014) for more discussion). In our
context, as discussed in Section 4, we do not believe any income effects would be substantial. We also would
expect income effects to lead to increases in demand from free distribution, which is not what we find. ITNs
are a key element in vector control and hence have significant positive externalities. There is also significant
scope for learning about the proper use and effectiveness of bed nets.



                                                       3
    We can rule out several alternative mechanisms for the difference, including the me-
chanical effect of having more of the product on hand if it had been previously distributed
for free. Households’ qualitative responses also support our empirical conclusions: those
who received free distribution are more likely to report that they do not want to purchase
the product because they or someone in their community had received it for free in the past.
    Among the three products, Panadol, a pain reliever widely known to consumers, pro-
vides a pure test of anchoring. It is free from most potentially conflating effects of a free
distribution on subsequent demand: there are no positive externalities, little to no scope for
learning, and small if any income effects. Thus the main mechanism through which current
prices can affect future demand is negative anchoring effects.5 Indeed we find that a free
distribution of reduces subsequent demand, consistent with models of reference-dependent
preferences (Kőszegi and Rabin, 2006; Mazar et al., 2013; Heidhues and Kőszegi, 2014)
where comparison effects dominate. The share of households purchasing Panadol from an
unrelated, for-profit firm is 12 percentage points lower ten weeks after free distributions
than after sales at market prices.
    For health products in low-income countries, where free or heavily subsidized distri-
bution is a common but controversial practice, there is a natural tension between price
anchors and the potential for learning about a product through use. Health products are a
canonical experience good, where in addition to any aggregate uncertainty relating to the
product there may be significant variation in the benefits or side effects across individuals.
Moreover, in low-income countries, the quality of medical advice may be low (Das et al.,
2008) so experiential learning may be especially important for long-run demand.
    In order to explore this tension, we study two other products that, unlike Panadol, have
   5 Panadol is not unique in its ability to isolate potential anchoring effects. One could use any well-known
product with potential for repeat purchase and free from confounding effects (e.g., croissants). Panadol
has the advantage of sharing characteristics common to the class of health goods, such as being distributed
through drug shops and health centers.



                                                      4
scope for learning. Experience with Elyzole, a moderately well-known deworming drug,
likely produces negative learning due to unpleasant side effects. In contrast, experience
with Zinkid, an improved but largely unknown treatment for childhood diarrhea that was
recently recommended by the World Health Organization at the time of our study, likely
produces positive learning.
   For both products, prior free distribution reduces demand. As predicted by the theory,
the relative reduction in percentage point terms is larger when there was scope for negative
learning (Elyzole) and less negative when there was scope for positive learning (Zinkid).
In the latter case, the reduction in demand caused by a free distribution is not statistically
distinguishable from zero. The pattern is consistent with the theoretical prediction that
positive learning can offset negative demand effects from price anchoring; however, we
note that none of the differences across products are statistically significant at conventional
levels. Furthermore, only two of the three pairwise comparisons conform to the theoret-
ical predictions when the reductions are specified in percent terms rather than percentage
points. The percent reduction in demand for Zinkid, with its relatively low base, is slightly
larger than that for Panadol, which is purchased by the large majority of households. While
firms may be more interested in percents, which relate directly to elasticity and thus profit
calculations, we focus on percentage point changes as this is typically the policy-relevant
object. For example, measurement of the Millennium Development Goals focuses exten-
sively on the proportion of populations covered by crucial health services (UNDP, 2009).
It is also the norm in the experimental literature on health product pricing in developing
countries (see Cohen and Dupas, 2010; Ashraf et al., 2010; Dupas, 2014; Tarozzi et al.,
2014).
   To test auxiliary hypotheses about the mechanisms through which price anchors may af-
fect subsequent demand, we also experimentally varied the identity of the organization dis-
tributing the products in the first wave between either a for-profit pharmaceutical company

                                              5
or a non-profit NGO. For-profit companies often offer free samples or steep introductory
discounts with no expectation that these will continue. Therefore, we hypothesized that
free distribution by a for-profit firm would shift price reference points less than distribu-
tion by an NGO from whom individuals could reasonably expect future free distributions.
Contrary to our hypothesis, we find no evidence of a differential effect; free distribution by
either type of organization reduces demand.
   However, distributor identity does matter for the contemporaneous sale of the relatively
unknown product. Households are 14 percentage points (50 percent) more likely to pur-
chase Zinkid from the non-profit than from the for-profit firm selling at the same price
and providing the same product information. We find no difference for the more well-
known products. The finding that NGOs are more effective at stimulating demand for
unknown products has important policy implications but was not one of our ex ante hy-
potheses. Furthermore, this difference does not persist: there is no discernible difference
in the subsequent purchase decisions from an unrelated, for-profit firm between those who
were originally offered the product by the NGO or for-profit marketers.
   Finally, we find no evidence that the price anchoring effect of free distributions for one
product spills over to the demand for other health products. There is no discernible effect
of having received a product for free in the first wave on the demand for Aquasafe, a new
product offered only in second wave. However, we note that confidence intervals for the
cross-product effect are large.
   We find negative effects on subsequent demand from prior free distribution for all three
products tested, but we stress that there is no generic answer to the question of whether to
charge or not to charge. One must examine specific product, market and household char-
acteristics to form proper policy implications. In aiming to illustrate the tension between
learning and reference-dependent preferences, we abstract from a number of potentially
important factors such as income effects, externalities, and habit formation. We return to

                                              6
these in discussing the generalizability of our results in Section 4. Furthermore, while
context and product characteristics may differ greatly and governments, firms and other or-
ganizations may have different objective functions when distributing products, our results
demonstrate that the tension between price anchors and learning is likely to be a critical
factor in many cases.



2     Experimental design & data

2.1        Experimental design

Setting and sampling. We conducted our experiment in Gulu District in northern Uganda.6
We selected 120 villages for the study and from each of these villages randomly selected
approximately 50 households from the household list kept by the village chief.7 Each vil-
lage was divided geographically into three groups and each group assigned to a marketer.8
    6 We  selected the Gulu District in order to conduct this study in conjunction with a methodological study
that compared the accuracy of data collected by professional surveyors hired and trained by Innovations for
Poverty Action to data collected by “community knowledge workers” (CKWs), local community members
hired by Grameen Foundation to both disseminate and collect information. The Gulu District was destabi-
lized by an insurgency from 1987 until 2006. In the wake of the insurgency, the area received a large amount
of NGO and government attention. Many NGOs were active in reconstruction and service provision, includ-
ing providing free health care and health products. Relative to other regions in Uganda, the Gulu District is
likely at the upper end of the distribution in terms of prior exposure to free or heavily-subsidized distribu-
tions of health goods. We believe this represents a conservative test for the effect of past prices on current
demand based on our expectation that prior exposure to free distributions would mute the effect of any single
subsequent distribution; however, demand could be particularly sensitive in an environment with high NGO
activity.
    7 Of these 120 villages, 72 were participating in the contemporaneous methodological study. These vil-

lages were selected based on their availability of certain administrative data. The remaining 48 villages were
selected randomly from an administrative government list of villages in Gulu. The number of households
drawn in each village depended on the number of respondents from the parallel study, which in turn was
determined by the number of households for which institutional data were available. The sample of the par-
allel study consisted of names of recipients for NGO and government services, including free bed nets, free
seedlings, and tarpaulins, as well as clients of a local bank. All 859 such individuals were included in the
sample, and the remaining households were randomly selected from household lists maintained by local vil-
lage leaders in order to arrive at a sample of approximately 50 households per village. In Uganda, the village
chief is referred to as Local Council 1 Chairperson (“LC1”).
    8 Grouping was done based on logistical ease. Groups were not always of equal size, but rather defined so

as to minimize distances between respondents for each marketer.


                                                      7
    First wave of marketing. The first wave of marketing (Wave 1), conducted in October-
November 2011, employed a two-level clustered randomization design, with randomization
both at the village and individual level. First, villages were randomly assigned to one of
four treatment groups in a two-by-two design.9 The first treatment dimension was the price
of the product, either free (“Free”) or sold (“Sale”). The second dimension was the type of
distributing organization: either a not-for-profit, non-governmental organization (“NGO”)
or a for-profit business (“For-Profit”). Thirty villages were assigned to each of the four
treatment cells. Table 1 illustrates balance across our village treatment assignments.
    Then, at the household level, we randomly assigned one of three products to be offered
to each household: Panadol (paracetamol, a painkiller), Elyzole (albendazole, a deworming
medication), and a combination pack of Restors and Zinkid (oral rehydration salts, “ORS”
and zinc supplements, the World Health Organization’s recommended treatment for child-
hood diarrhea). For the Sale treatment group, we used the same price for the entire study.
We set the price for the Sale group to be slightly above the average perceived price (from a
price perception survey, see below) in order to minimize the chance that respondents were
purchasing only in order to resell and to approximate a market price (i.e., the perceived
price plus a small add-on for the convenience of buying at one’s home).10,11
   9 Village   assignment to treatment was block randomized according to two variables. The first, price envi-
ronment, included information about pricing and drug availability with three possible categories: (1) no drug
outlets or none of our drugs; (2) no prices above the median or distributed for free; and (3) at least one price
above the median. The second, remoteness, also had three categories: (1) easy to travel and close to health
center; (2) difficult travel or far from health center; and (3) difficult travel and far from health center.
   10 Note we randomized the presence of free versus sale distribution, and NGO versus for-profit, at the

village level, whereas the exact product received we randomized at the individual level. Thus our estimates
are not biased from spillovers if the information flow is about the presence of an organization giving out free
health products. The correct interpretation of our estimates includes both a the direct effect of the treatment on
a household’s later behavior and a potential reinforcement effect (those around them also received the same
treatment and, through conversations and sharing of information, reinforced any effect). We are estimating
the combined effect, which is also the policy relevant parameter given the typical practice of community-
level distribution of health products. However, given that the exact product distributed was randomized at the
household level, giving out a particular health product for free may have cross-product spillovers. While this
could bias product-specific estimates, based on results reported below on cross-product effects, we believe
this is not an important risk.
   11 In earlier circulated versions of this paper, we referred to this as selling above the market price, but we




                                                        8
    In order to maximize the likelihood that individuals perceived the various marketing
and sales interactions as natural rather than experimental artifacts, we partnered with real
Ugandan organizations involved in the provision of health products. For the NGO treatment
group, we worked with the Uganda Health Marketing Group (“UHMG”), a large Kampala-
based NGO largely funded by USAID and focused on the distribution and promotion of
health products. For the For-Profit distribution, we worked with Star Pharmaceuticals Ltd
(“Star”), a large, Kampala-based company that imports, distributes and markets medicines
and other products for sale throughout Uganda. Although the marketers were employed
by UHMG and Star, we recruited, trained and monitored the marketers using the same
protocols for both NGO and For-Profit distribution. Marketers wore branded t-shirts and
displayed ID-cards from the relevant partner organization. The field marketers were all
locally recruited, reducing communication barriers.
    To mitigate potential liquidity constraints in the Sale treatment arm, several days be-
forehand the marketers distributed flyers throughout the village to announce the upcoming
marketing visit. The aim was to reduce short-term liquidity constraints. In order to min-
imize potential for differential response rates, a similar flyer was distributed in the Free
treatment arm announcing a distribution but not detailing whether products would be free
or sold.12
have changed the language to refer to it as perceived price for two reasons. First, because there are no posted
prices, most individuals’ set their final prices through a process of bargaining. Fitzpatrick (2014) finds that
48 percent of customers at informal drug shops successful bargain over the price of anti-malarial medicines.
Second, our door-to-door distribution also builds in transport and convenience, which we would expect to
influence households’ perception of how competitive our prices are relative to other alternatives. The prices
set in the first wave were as follows: Panadol: UGX 500 ($0.20) for a strip of ten tablets, Elyzole: UGX
1,800 ($0.71) for a pack of six tablets, Restors/Zinkid combination pack: UGX 2,000 ($0.79) for one sachet
of Restors and ten tablets of Zinkid.
   12 The flyers differed slightly by referring to an “upcoming distribution” in the Free treatment villages

and an upcoming “sale at a good price” in the sale villages. This may have induced different average rates
for entering into the Wave 1 sample frame between the Sale and Free treatments (65.4% versus 70.5%,
respectively). As shown in Panel A of Appendix Table A1, the differential entry rate is larger for households
assigned Panadol. However, the flyers were distributed widely in the village and made no mention of the
product that was going to be offered, which was randomized at the household level and only revealed to
households once they entered the sample frame. We therefore conjecture that the imbalance for Panadol


                                                      9
    Throughout the study we attempted to adhere to a natural marketing process, typical
in this region. We wanted to avoid marketing procedures that deviated considerably from
normal operating practices of NGOs or firms, so that the observed reactions of respondents
would be more natural. In particular, we expected that returning on several consecutive
days to a remote village to search for a specific respondent by name would be perceived as
atypical behavior for an NGO or ostensibly profit-maximizing firm with the aim of sustain-
able product delivery. This in turn could generate experimenter effects and mask the true
effect of price anchors. While this methodological choice gives us greater confidence that
our findings accurately reflect the effect of free distributions in non-experimental settings,
it is not without costs. Out of the original 5,707 households identified to be in the study,
3,879 were found in the first wave of marketing. This is a lower level of entrance into
the sample frame than often found in studies in developing country studies. As discussed
more fully below, this pattern reappears when looking at attrition in our second wave. In
each attempt to locate specific respondents we found approximately 75 percent of targeted
individuals.
    Marketers delivered sales pitches specific to each product, price treatment (free or sale)
and entity (NGO or for-profit). A pharmacist trained the marketers on how to explain usage
and dosage guidelines, and other such questions about the products.13 See Appendix B.1
and B.2 for details on the marketing scripts.14
was due to bad luck and not selection on unobserved willingness-to-pay for the product. Nevertheless, in
an extreme bounding exercise that assumes differential selection into the study is perfectly predicted by
willingness-to-pay such that those who were not found would never purchase the product, the results on
Panadol would be null, whereas those for Elyzole and Zinkid would remain unchanged.
   13 Marketers gave respondents information on dosage, storage and recommended use of the respective prod-

uct both verbally and in writing in Acholi, the local language. This information was based on the instruction
sheet of the drug and formulated in consultation with a pharmacist and board member of the Ugandan Na-
tional Drug Authority.
   14 The pamphlets distributed to households ahead of time stated that at your door there will either be a

“distribution of health products at your door on [...], be prepared!” or “health products for sale at your door
on [...], be prepared!”. However, the in-person script, for the Sale treatment by an NGO, explained the sale
price by saying “pay a small amount to share” in the cost, whereas the sale script for the for-profit said “at
great prices”. Although there are merits to both, we suggest using the phrase “at great prices”, or something


                                                     10
    In Wave 1, we offered one unit of the assigned product to households in the Free treat-
ment arm and five units to those in the Sale treatment.15 Prices were non-negotiable. Once
this transaction had been completed, marketers administered a questionnaire to respondents
in the Sale treatment group about why they decided to buy or not to buy and who might
use the product.16 In all cases, marketers had only one day to reach all respondents in each
village. Marketing was not continued on a second day in order to reduce the possibility of
spillovers of information or expectations across respondents.
    The three products were chosen deliberately to capture a range of potential learning
effects that could influence purchase decisions. Panadol is a common pain reliever and was
by far the most well-known product. Most respondents were likely to have been familiar
with the product (95 percent) although only few with the brand itself (10 percent). The
generic version of Panadol is widely available in most drug shops, and we expect little
scope for learning. Elyzole was less well-known as a brand, but other brands of deworm-
ing medication with the same active ingredient (albendazole) have been widely distributed.
Based on the relative salience of immediate side-effects, we expected that any learning ef-
fects would be negative despite potential for long-run benefits (Miguel and Kremer, 2004).
Zinkid was sold in combination with Restors, an oral-rehydration salt, following clinical
recommendations (World Health Organization, 2005). While Restors was a new brand,17
the generic version (ORS) was widely used, recognized and freely available from health
similar, for both NGO and for-profit entities for any replications or extensions of this, as the NGO wording
we used more strongly implies a sale at lower than market prices. The phrase “at great prices” is common for
marketing by for-profit entities such as UHMG and Star.
   15 One unit corresponds to the smallest amount of each product that could be sold separately. For Panadol

this was 10 tablets, for Elyzole this was 6 tablets, for Restors/Zinkid this was 1 sachet of Restors and 10
tablets of Zinkid, and for Aquasafe this was 8 tablets. Prices are given above. Only 2.5 percent of households
in the Sale treatment purchased five units, suggesting that the cap on the quantity of units for sale was only
rarely, if ever, binding.
   16 This survey was not conducted in the Free group in order to keep the interaction more natural.
   17 Restors is an ORS formulation with lower osmolarity which was recommended by the WHO in 2006

(WHO 2006). The lower osmolarity results in lower stool output by children with diarrhea, as compared to
the old formulation Hahn et al. (2002).



                                                     11
centers.18 However, the importance of zinc supplements in combating diarrhea had only
recently been established in the global health literature.19 As such, Zinkid represents a
new brand and product for which we expect there to be scope for positive learning. In a
study carried out with Zinkid users by our partner the Ugandan Health Marketing Group
in 2012, 93 percent of zinc users believed that the product was an effective treatment for
diarrhea, citing a quick end to diarrhea and fast recovery by the child as primary reasons
for this belief.20 Table 2 presents descriptive results from the price perception and product
awareness survey.
    Second wave of marketing. We conducted the second wave of marketing (Wave 2) on
average ten weeks after Wave 1, in December of 2011.21 The sole purpose of Wave 2 was
to get an outcome measure of respondents’ willingness to pay for health goods. In order
to avoid reputation effects from the first stage, we partnered with a different for-profit firm,
Surgipharm Uganda Ltd (“Surgipharm”). Again, marketers were employed by the partner,
but recruited, trained and monitored by the study team. In order to reduce association be-
tween the two waves, we changed the wording of all scripts without significantly affecting
the content. In order to reduce the probability that respondents associated Wave 2 with
Wave 1, we also assigned marketers to villages such that individual marketers did not visit
  18 One  concern about bundling ORS and zinc is that children and caregivers often cite the bad taste of ORS
as a reason for not using it (Freedman et al., 2010). However, ORS is a widely known therapy recommended
by the WHO since 1980 (da Cunha and Cash, 1989). If any learning occurs with ORS in our sample it occurs
because the formulation we distributed had lower osmolarity and therefore may have had a slightly improved
taste and because the low osmolarity formulation results in reduced stool output.
   19 Zinc became part of the WHO guidelines for the treatment of diarrhea in 2006. Larson et al. (2009) find

that use of zinc supplements in rural areas lags adoption among urban and high income individuals. Evidence
from studies in Tanzania and Benin suggest that while the prescription of zinc for childhood diarrhea is
increasing, the majority of diarrhea cases are not yet treated with zinc (Sanders et al., 2013).
   20 The three products also differ in terms of who would be the target user, which could affect the scope for

learning. The type of Panadol used was aimed at adults only; children under 12 were not allowed to use it.
Although Elyzole could be used by people of any age (except babies), parasitic infestations are most acute
amongst children. Zinkid was a product specifically aimed at children, with a target age group of six months
to five years.
   21 The minimum number of weeks between marketing waves was 6, the maximum 12 weeks, and the

median is 10 weeks. Timing varied for logistical reasons, such as weather and holidays. We do not find any
evidence that observed effects are correlated with differences in the number of days between waves.


                                                     12
the same village twice. While there may be time trends in the demand for health products,
we do not believe there is any reason to expect seasonal fluctuations in demand to vary
according to treatment status.22
    As a further test of the scope of price anchoring effects, we investigate whether hav-
ing received any product for free affects demand for other health products. We therefore
assigned 25 percent of households to be offered a fourth product not offered in Wave 1,
Aquasafe, a product designed for home water purification. The concept of water purifi-
cation was well-known and understood; however, although Aquasafe is one of the two
leading brands for water purification, the name itself was not well known by respondents
(only 16 percent recognized the brand, as shown in Table 2). Since no learning about
specific product characteristics takes place across products, the cross-product test allows
us to assess whether price anchoring will occur for broadly construed product categories,
such as “health products”.23 In the second marketing wave, the only randomization was
the household-level assignment of the product: 25 percent of households were marketed
the new product, Aquasafe, and 75 percent the same product from Wave 1. Figure A1
summarizes the experimental design.
    Attrition. In Wave 2, we found 2,887 of the 3,879 individuals treated in Wave 1.
This attrition rate of 25.6% resulted from a deliberate methodological decision to adhere
to a natural marketing process. As shown in Appendix Table A1, attrition between waves
is uncorrelated with individual characteristics (other than gender), including whether or
  22 Panadol  is a pain-killer that is used frequently to treat a variety of illnesses year-round, especially as
it often means avoiding a visit to the health center. The Ugandan Ministry of Health suggests preventive
deworming of children every three to six months, so we would expect participants to demand more deworming
medication at the time of our second visit (Ministry of Health, Republic of Uganda, 2012). Childhood
diarrhea is more common during the rainy season (Ahmed et al., 2008), therefore we might expect higher
demand for Zinkid to treat diarrhea in Wave 1 when rains were more common.
   23 The mechanisms of any such cross-product effects could include beliefs about the general quality of prod-

ucts marketed in a particular way (i.e., door-to-door or by a for-profit entity) or categorical price judgments,
whereby individuals judge utility of purchase by comparing price of product to endpoints or distributions
within the product category. For discussions of the latter mechanism, see, for example, Alba et al. (1999) and
Mazar et al. (2013).


                                                      13
not the subject received the product in Wave 1. See Panel B of Appendix Table A1 for
details. Attrition is not correlated with assignment to the Free or Sale treatments. We found
74.7% and 74.2% of Wave 1 subjects, respectively (p-value: 0.856). Attrition is, however,
marginally correlated with assignment to the NGO vs. for-profit treatments, where we
found 76.5% vs. 72.3% of subjects, respectively (p-value: 0.110).


2.2    Data

Village and drug outlet data. Before Wave 1, we surveyed community leaders and drug
outlets. We first asked the village chief about the number and type of drug outlets (including
drug shops, clinics and hospitals) in each village, the distance (in time and kilometers) to
the most popular and nearest facilities and any recent free distributions of health products.
We then visited every drug outlet (including both private drug shop and local health clinics)
in each village and asked about the price, availability and preferred brand for a list of
common drugs. There were drug outlets in 64 of the 120 villages and, when a drug outlet
was present, an average of 2.4 outlets per village. We used these data to determine the
relevant “shop price” for the drugs we were offering, stratification, and to test for treatment
effect heterogeneity.
   Price perception survey. Immediately prior to offering the product, marketers admin-
istered a price perception survey to 50 percent of respondents in Wave 1. After introducing
themselves, marketers showed respondents the two products other than the one assigned to
that individual to avoid potential anchoring effects on the product about to be offered for
sale or gift. After a brief description of the use of the product in general, respondents were
asked about their familiarity with the product and brand. If they were familiar with the
product, they were asked where they could purchase it and what price they would expect to
pay. In Wave 1, we solicited price perceptions of the three goods distributed in the wave.



                                              14
In Wave 2, individuals were asked only about the new product, Aquasafe.
     Post marketing survey. In order to understand the mechanisms influencing purchase
decisions, we conducted a short survey (Appendix C) of all individuals who were offered
products for sale (those assigned to the Sale group in the Wave 1 and all individuals in Wave
2). The survey was designed to mimic traditional marketing research in order to ensure that
participants’ experience was natural. The survey asked respondents in an unprompted way
to explain why they did or did not purchase the product.
     Observational usage data from physical observation of packaging. During Wave 1,
all respondents who had received a product, whether for free or purchased, were informed
that that they had also been entered into a lottery. If selected, they would need to present
the product packaging (blister packs) in order to claim their prize. It was clearly stated
that the prize did not depend on how much of the product was used, only on whether they
presented the blister packs. Six to eight weeks after Wave 1 (two to four weeks before
Wave 2), surveyors made unannounced visits to a sample of 329 households that received
a product in Wave 1 and recorded how many tablets were remaining in the blister packs.24



3      Theoretical framework

We put forward a model of households’ decisions to purchase non-durable health products
that includes both price anchoring and learning. With our focus on these elements, we ab-
stract away from other potentially important issues, such as health externalities, learning
    24 Surveyors were given details about how many units of the product each respondent had received, and
so were able to verify whether all packaging was present. Furthermore, all blister packs distributed by mar-
keters in Wave 1 had been discretely marked so that they could be identified as packaging distributed by our
marketers, rather than the same product obtained from elsewhere. Here we deviated from our overall strategy
of “naturalness.” In many design issues, we aimed to make the process as natural as possible from the partic-
ipant’s perspective, so that behavior would be less likely to shift because of Hawthorne, John Henry or mere
measurement effects. In this instance we felt that acquiring some data on usage was important enough to
deviate, but to roll it out in a promotional way so that it still was implemented under the pretense of a market
introduction of goods. Those who did “win” the lottery (about 10%) do not behave differently in Wave 2.


                                                      15
from one’s neighbors, expectations about product quality, knowledge of price distribution,
risk aversion, and habit formation. While the mechanisms we describe are applicable to
repeated purchase opportunities, the key features can be seen in a simple two-period, latent
utility model. This set-up differs from typical settings in which experience goods are an-
alyzed in that (1) rather than constrain the distributor to be a profit maximizer, we remain
agnostic regarding its objective function and (2) similar to Dupas (2014), we enrich the la-
tent utility framework to allow for gain-loss utility. Where required, additional derivations
and proofs appear in Appendix A.
   In each period, a household chooses to purchase a health product if and only if its
expected utility from the product exceeds the utility cost. In any period t, a household i
purchases the product if and only if


                          vit ≡ Eit (vi ) > εit + apt + R (pt − ptr ) ,                   (1)


where Eit (v) is the expected value (vi ) of the product to household i at time t; εit is a
normally-distributed, household- and time-specific preference shock with mean zero and
variance σε2 ; pt is the price at which the product is offered in period t; a is the marginal
utility of income, which we normalize to 1; and R(pt − ptr ) is the gain-loss utility from
purchasing at price pt relative to reference point ptr (Kőszegi and Rabin, 2006; Heidhues
and Kőszegi, 2014). We specify that ptr = pr (pt−1 , d), that is, the reference point is a
function of both the immediately preceding price and the identity of the distributor, d,
which can be either an NGO (N) or a for-profit enterprise (F). We allow for any general
form of gain-loss utility such that R0 ≥ 0 and ∂ ptr /∂ pt−1 > 0. This simply implies that
an increase in current prices will increase the future price reference point, and utility is
increasing in this reference point as any realized future price represents a “better deal”.
Likewise, a decrease in current price implies the opposite. It will be convenient to define


                                               16
the adjusted price as p̃t = pt +R (pt − ptr ) , that is, the current price plus the gain-loss utility
from purchasing at that price. For notation, if household i purchases the product in period t,
Pit = 1; if she does not, Pit = 0. We denote by πit the probability that household i purchases
the product at time t, and by πt the expected share of the population that purchases.
    Households are heterogeneous and differ in their true value of the product, vi , where
vi = v̄ + σiv . For analytical tractability, we assume that this true value is normally dis-
tributed, vi ∼ N(v̄, σv2 ). In period 0, a share of the households, α0 ∈ [0, 1], is informed of
their true values. The remaining households receive a signal of their value, ṽit = vi + b + bit ,
where b captures the mean bias in the population and bit ∼ N(0, σb2 ) .25 Note that we are
explicitly allowing for the possibility that the expected value of the product in the unin-
formed population may differ from the truth. If households tend to be optimistic about the
value of a product, b will be positive; for pessimistic beliefs, b will be negative. For in-
formed households, vit = vi , i.e., the true value. As in other literature on experience goods
pricing (Bergemann and Välimäki, 2006), if a household receives the product, we assume
they become perfectly informed about its value to them.
    The share of individuals purchasing in period t can be expressed as follows:26


                  πt = αt E (πt | In f ormed) + (1 − αt )E (πt |Unin f ormed) .                           (2)


The expected share of informed individuals purchasing in any period can be calculated
  25 This  is an alternative representation for the definition of pessimistic and optimistic customers used by
Shapiro (1983).
   26 Note that this model implicitly assumes that individuals cannot store the product. They do not buy today

with the intent of consuming in a subsequent period. This assumption is important. If individuals could store
the product for later consumption, individuals who received the product for free in round 1 may carry over
stock into round 2, mechanically reducing demand. In Section 4.3 we discuss the empirical support for the
assumption and show that individuals in our experiment indeed do not appear to be storing the product for fu-
ture consumption. We also assume, consistent with the work of Shapiro (1983), Milgrom and Roberts (1986),
Tirole (1988) and Villas-Boas (2004), that consumers do not have an experimentation motive for purchases.
Such experimentation is analyzed in Bergemann and Välimäki (1996, 2006) and would not substantively alter
the predictions of this theoretical framework.



                                                     17
simply as:


                           E (πt | In f ormed) = Pr(vi > εit + p̃t )

                                                  = Pr(v̄ + σiv − εit > p̃t )
                                                                
                                                        v̄ − p̃t
                                                  = Φ              ,
                                                           σI

where σI2 = σv2 + σε2 . Similarly, the expected share of uninformed individuals purchasing
in any period can be calculated as:


                    E (πt |Unin f ormed) = Pr(ṽit > εit + p̃t )

                                               = Pr(v̄ + σiv + b + bit − εit > p̃t )
                                                                 
                                                     v̄ + b − p̃t
                                               = Φ                  ,
                                                         σU

where σU2 = σv2 +σb2 +σε2 . This implies that there is more variation in the signal households
receive about the true value of the product than in the underlying true value, and hence
σU2 > σI2 .27
    The key predictions of the model are all derived from differentiating (2) with respect to
the price in the preceding period, pt−1 . This leads to:



                                                              
                 ∂ π2   ∂ α2      v̄ − p̃2           v̄ + b − p̃2
                      =        Φ             −Φ
                 ∂ p1   ∂ p1         σI                  σU
                                                                           
                           ∂ R α2       v̄ − p̃2      1 − α2      v̄ + b − p̃2
                        −          φ               +         φ                    .                      (3)
                          ∂ p 1 σI         σI           σU            σU

The first term on the right-hand side of (3) is the information effect. It can be either positive
  27 While  it is possible for uninformed priors to be tightly distributed around a common mean and posterior
beliefs, informed by experience, to be more dispersed, we consider situation unlikely in this context and do
not pursue it further.


                                                    18
or negative depending on households’ starting beliefs and the value of the product relative
to its price. The second term is the price anchoring effect, which operates through the gain-
loss utility term. It serves to reduce demand by increasing the effective price for both the
informed and uninformed as the period-1 price falls. The strength of this effect depends on
the shape of the loss function R. Note that the shape of this loss function also affects the
effective price in period 2, p̃2 .
    Before we proceed with a discussion of the total effect of prices on subsequent demand,
we draw the link to the existing literature on experience goods and consider the effect of
prices in the absence of gain-loss utility.

Remark 1. In the absence of gain-loss utility (R0 = 0), if households are not perfectly
informed (α1 < 1) and have unbiased beliefs about the value of the product (b = 0), then
reducing the price in period 1 will (a) reduce demand in period 2 (π2 ) if the period 2-price
is above the average value of the product, p2 > v̄, and (b) increase π2 if p2 < v̄.

    Reducing the price in any period will increase contemporaneous demand and thereby
the share of the population that has experience with the product. When some of the popula-
tion is uninformed, a lower price in the current period increases the share of the population
that knows the true value in the next period. The effect of this increase in experience on
future demand depends on how the future price compares to the value of the product. When
the period-2 price is above the average value, this learning effect tends to decrease demand.
Intuitively, when price is above the average value, demand for the product is coming from
individuals with positive idiosyncratic shocks (σbit ) to their beliefs about the true value.
When more individuals are informed, it is relatively less likely that any given individual
will have received shocks large enough to induce them to buy. Expected demand falls.
Naturally, the reverse holds when the period-2 price is below the expected value: increas-
ing the informed share of the population increases demand.


                                              19
   We now consider the effect of biased beliefs about the product’s value.

Remark 2. In the absence of gain-loss utility (R0 = 0), if households are not perfectly
informed (α1 < 1) and have biased beliefs about the value of the product (b 6= 0), then
reducing the price in period 1 (p1 = 0) will (a) reduce demand in period 2 (π2 ) if p2 >
v̄ − σUσ−σ
        I
          I
            b and (b) increase demand in period 2 if p2 < v̄ − σUσ−σ
                                                                  I
                                                                     I
                                                                       b.

                                                       σI
   The additional term in the price cutoff rule,     σU −σI b,   reflects the debiasing effect. In-
creasing the share of informed individuals not only reduces uncertainty but also reduces the
share of individuals with biased beliefs. This makes it more likely that demand in period 2
will decrease if beliefs are optimistic and more likely that demand will increase if they are
pessimistic.
   We are now in a position to make a prediction about the effect of free distribution on
purchase behavior.

Proposition 1. If individuals are fully informed about the value of the product (a1 = 1) and
there is no gain-loss utility (R0 = 0), then free distribution will have no effect on subsequent
demand relative to a distribution at a positive price.

   Intuitively, if individuals are already fully informed and there is no gain-loss utility,
then both channels through which prior prices can affect future demand will be shut down.
This leads immediately to a hypothesis regarding the presence of gain-loss utility (price
anchors) that we can test with the distribution of Panadol, a well-known product for which
we can reasonably assume that everyone knows the value.

Assumption 1. Price reference points are more sensitive to updating after a distribution
by an NGO than by a for-profit, that is, ∂ ptr /∂ pt−1 |d=N > ∂ ptr /∂ pt−1 |d=F .

   The justification for this assumption was described in the introduction: for-profit com-
panies may be known to offer free samples or steep introductory discounts, but no one

                                               20
expects them to keep giving the product away for free. It leads immediately to our first
prediction.

Prediction 1. In the presence of gain-loss utility, free distributions by an NGO will have a
relatively more negative effect on subsequent demand than free distributions by a for-profit.

    It will be useful to define the concept of scope for learning by which we mean that (i)
at a particular future price the expected demand for a currently informed individual differs
from that of an uninformed individual and (ii) not all individuals are informed. We say
there is scope for positive learning if E (π2 | In f ormed, p̃2 ) > E (π2 |Unin f ormed, p̃2 ), i.e.,
at a given price, individuals who are informed about the value of the product would be more
likely to purchase than those who are not. Note that this depends on the price. To see this,
consider the case where uninformed individuals have unbiased beliefs about the product’s
value but are simply more uncertain. When the period-2 price is below the average value, it
is only those with particularly negative idiosyncratic shocks (σbit ) to their beliefs about the
true value who do not buy. When more individuals are informed, it is relatively less likely
that any given individual will have received a negative shock large enough to stop her from
buying. Naturally, having a pessimistic bias implies that there is more scope for positive
learning.
    We say there is scope for negative learning if E (π2 | In f ormed, p̃2 ) <
E (π2 |Unin f ormed, p̃2 ), i.e., at a given price, individuals who are informed about the value
of the product would be less likely to purchase than those who are not. For example, again
consider the case where uninformed individuals have unbiased beliefs about the product’s
value but are simply more uncertain. When the period-2 price is above the average value,
demand for the product is coming from individuals with particularly positive idiosyncratic
shocks (σbit ) to their beliefs about the true value. When more individuals are informed, it
is relatively less likely that any given individual will have received a sufficiently positive


                                                 21
shock to induce her to buy and demand falls. Naturally, having an optimistic bias implies
that there is more scope for negative learning.
   As described in Section 2.1, we make the following assumption about the scope for
learning in the three products tested.

Assumption 2. There is no scope for learning with Panadol, scope for positive learning
with Zinkid, and scope for negative learning with Elyzole.

   Taken together, this leads to two additional predictions.

Prediction 2. The relative effect of the free distribution for Zinkid should be more positive
than for Panadol.

   When there is scope for positive learning, an increase in the share of uninformed in-
dividuals (a decrease in α1 ) will further increase the scope for positive learning. If unin-
formed individuals are generally pessimistic about a product’s true value and a relatively
high share of the population is uninformed (as we believe is the case for Zinkid), we expect
the effect of a free distribution to be relatively more positive (less negative) than for a free
distribution of a well-known product for which there is no scope for learning. Intuitively, as
described above, for the well-known product Panadol, if free distribution has any effect on
subsequent demand it will be through price anchoring, which will reduce demand. For the
product where we would expect to see positive learning, Zinkid, this effect would be offset
by increasing the share of informed individuals and hence increasing expected demand.

Prediction 3. The relative effect of free distribution for Elyzole should be more negative
than for Panadol.

   When there is scope for negative learning (e.g., uninformed individuals have optimistic
beliefs about the product’s value), an increase in the share of uninformed individuals (a
decrease in α1 ) will further increase the scope for negative learning and amplify the effects

                                              22
of free distribution. For example, if uninformed individuals are generally optimistic about a
product’s true value and a relatively high share of the population is uninformed, we expect
the effect of a free distribution to be relatively more negative than for a free distribution of
a well-known product for which there is no scope for learning. Intuitively, because there is
scope for negative learning for Elyzole, free distribution will tend to decrease subsequent
demand through the learning channel in addition to any effect of price anchors.
    These predictions highlight the potential importance of price anchors in determining the
optimal pricing for experience goods. Lowering the current price will increase the share of
individuals who purchase in the current period and hence who are informed about product
quality in the future. The effect of this learning depends on the share of uninformed, the
mean bias in the population and the value of the product relative to the price. However,
the price anchoring effect can offset the potential increase in demand from learning, thus
depressing demand in aggregate.



4    Results

In our setting, free health goods can affect demand through two different mechanisms:
price anchoring and learning. We generated exogenous variation along three dimensions:
whether a product was offered for free or for sale in Wave 1, whether it was offered by
an NGO or a for-profit company in Wave 1, and the product a household was offered.
The product price and the type of distributing organization were randomly assigned at the
village level, while the product type was assigned at the household level. To estimate our
treatment effects, we run the following basic specification for each product k


         yi jkt = βk0 + βk1 NGOi j + βk2 Freei j + βk3 Freei j × NGOi j + γk Xi j + εi jkt ,   (4)




                                                 23
where y is a measure of demand (either a binary indicator of take-up or the total quantity
purchased/received), i represents households, j represents villages, and t represents time
(Wave 1 or Wave 2). NGO is a dummy variable that takes the value 1 if a household was
approached by a representative of an NGO in Wave 1 and 0 if approached by a for-profit.
The dummy variable Free takes the value 1 if a household was offered the product for free
in Wave 1 and 0 otherwise. Coefficients of interest are the betas. β1 captures the effect of an
NGO being the distributing organization in Wave 1, β2 the effect of being offered a product
for free in Wave 1, and β3 the effect of the interaction, i.e., being offered a free product
by an NGO in Wave 1. Xi j is the vector cross product of the two stratification variables: a
price index and a remoteness index. εi jt represents the idiosyncratic error, which we cluster
at the village, the level of randomization.28 We estimate equation (4) for the pooled sample
and for each product individually.
    Inline with the core predictions of the theory and to facilitate interpretation, we also
estimate for each product k a specification that excludes the NGO terms


                                 yi jkt = βk0 + βk4 Freei j + γk Xi j + εi jkt .                                (5)



4.1     Take-up in Wave 1

Table 3 shows the results, by product, from estimating equation (4) for Wave 1. The odd
numbered columns show the effects of treatment assignment on take up defined as a binary
variable equal to 1 if a household purchased or accepted any quantity of the offered product
and 0 otherwise. The even numbered columns report the quantity effects as measured in
units of the product.29
  28 Stratification was primarily done to ensure balance. Although power is limited for subsample analyses,
we do examine whether results are heterogeneous regarding remoteness and price levels. The results do not
exhibit any significant heterogeneity along these dimensions.
   29 The unit for Panadol is a strip of ten pills, the unit for Elyzole is one dose for an adult, which corresponds

to three boxes of two tablets each, and the unit for Zinkid/ORS is a pill strip of ten Zinkid tablets combined

                                                        24
    Unsurprisingly, take up was much higher among those who were offered health prod-
ucts for free compared to those offered them for sale. As the odd-numbered columns show,
among households in the for-profit group, being offered the product for free increased bi-
nary take up by 46.3 percentage points for Elyzole, 23.7 percentage points for Panadol, and
69.9 percentage points for Zinkid. All coefficients are statistically significant with p-values
below 0.01.30
    The effect of free distribution on the quantity received follows a similar pattern for Ely-
zole and Zinkid: those in the Free treatment were not only more likely to receive any of the
assigned product but also received more of the product on average. However, the Sale treat-
ment increased the average quantity of Panadol obtained by 0.732 units (or 73.2 percent)
relative to the Free treatment. As described above, households in the Sale treatment could
purchase up to five units of the assigned product while distribution in the Free treatment
was limited to one unit per household. In the case of Panadol, this leads to a reversal in
the sign of the treatment effect between the binary and quantity regressions. While not all
of the households in the Sale treatment purchased the product, those who did so purchased
more than one unit on average.
    Table 3 also shows that in the case of the unknown product (Zinkid), households were
substantially more likely to purchase the product when it was offered for sale by a NGO
rather than a for-profit entity. This difference is both statistically and economically sig-
nificant: a 15.9 percentage point increase in take up and a 50.7 percent increase in total
quantity purchased. Recall that the marketing scripts differed only in their description of
the seller’s identity and motives. All information presented about the product itself was
identical across the four treatment arms. Differences in the take-up rate could result ei-
with one sachet of oral rehydration salts.
   30 The results in Table 3 for “any purchase” (the odd columns) are robust to using a Probit specification

for the binary outcome variable. Those for the quantity purchased (the even columns) are robust to the Tobit
specification, which accounts for left censoring of the dependent variable at zero and right censoring at 1 or
5 units, depending on the treatment group.


                                                     25
ther from differences in how households interpreted marketing information about product
quality (e.g., the NGO was considered more accurate or trustworthy) or from how they
perceived the offer prices (e.g., when offered by the NGO a price was considered a “better
deal”). For the more well-known products, no such difference is evident.
   Qualitative results from the post-marketing survey suggest a potential mechanism. Those
offered Zinkid for sale by the NGO were more likely than those in the for-profit treatment
to cite the product’s health benefits as a reason for purchase (p-value: 0.059); however,
they were no more likely to state “I purchased this because I trust you.” We speculate that
the results may still reflect a greater trust in the NGO when considering new products, but
individuals are not explicitly aware of the NGO’s role in forming their impressions. The
magnitude of this effect is large: take-up increases from 30 percent to 46 percent. This
is consistent with other emerging work that points to the potential role of non-profit or-
ganizations as trust builders and may have important policy implications for organizations
seeking to encourage the adoption of new technologies (Cole et al., 2013; Karlan, 2014).
While our study design does not allow us to speak further to the mechanisms behind this
effect, we believe future research into the role played by NGOs in stimulating demand for
new products would be valuable.


4.2    Demand in Wave 2

Next we investigate the core question of the study: what is the impact on future demand
of distributing the products for free. As described in Section 3, in our setting, the impact
of free distribution consists of two basic effects: a price anchoring effect that may depress
demand and an information effect whose direction depends on whether the potential for
learning is primarily positive or negative.
   First, we examine the results pooled across all three products. Table 4 column 1 presents



                                              26
the effect on the extensive (Panel A) and intensive (Panel B) margins. In both cases, we
find that the provision of free products depresses demand approximately ten weeks later,
with take-up after a free distribution 10 percentage points lower than after a distribution
at market prices. However, note that this result pools three products that we deliberately
chose, not some naturally occurring set of products. The pooled test demonstrates evidence
of price anchors, but cannot shed insight into the trade-off between learning and reference
points. For that, we must examine the products individually.
   For each of the three products offered in Wave 1, subsequent demand is lower in Wave
2 if the product was initially offered for free. For Panadol and Elyzole, the results are
substantial and statistically significant. As shown in Panel A, columns 2 and 3, those previ-
ously receiving the product for free are 9.1 percentage points (s.e.=2.8) and 12.0 percentage
points (s.e.=4.1) less likely to purchase any of the product in Wave 2. In the case of Zinkid,
for which there is scope for positive learning, the effect is muted. Demand for Zinkid in the
Free treatment group is 5.3 percentage points (s.e.=3.7) lower than in the Sale treatment,
but the difference is not statistically significant (column 4). Panel B displays results for
the quantity of units purchased. Again, the effect of prior free distribution is negative and
substantial for both Panadol and Elyzole, a reduction in the quantity purchased of 24.5%
and 23.0%, respectively; however, the effect for Elyzole is not statistically significant at
conventional levels (p-value: 0.116). The effect of prior free distribution of Zinkid, the
product with scope for positive learning, is negligible.
   We cannot compare the purchase rate across time in order to determine whether the free
distribution reduced demand in absolute terms or merely relative to a sales distribution.
Unfortunately, such an analysis would not be valid as the two distribution waves occurred
at different times in the year and demand is subject to seasonal variation. Furthermore,
when considering pricing policy, the counterfactual of no distribution at any price is not
relevant. Rather, the relative difference between high and low prices—or between positive

                                             27
and zero—represents the critical parameter of interest.
   Finally, we do not find evidence that the anchoring effect of free distributions spills
over to other health products. Column 4 reports the effect of Wave 1 treatment status on
the Wave 2 purchase decisions for a new product, Aquasafe. Note that because there is
no reason to suspect cross-product learning, this is a test of whether free distribution of
one health product moves the reference point for another. Naturally, this is not dispositive.
We are testing potential cross-product spillovers from one of three particular products to
another product offered by a different organization. We cannot reject the null of no effect.
While the 95%-confidence interval rules out a cross-product effect as large as the own effect
of free distribution for Panadol or Elyzole, it remains quite large with a 95%-confidence
interval from -8.7 to +6.7 percentage points. We also do not see statistically significant
differences between prior distribution by an NGO and prior distribution by a for-profit,
though our estimates are imprecise.


4.3   Discussion and alternative explanations

The empirical results show that demand following a free distribution can be lower than
following distribution at a market price. Here we first consider the qualitative evidence in
support of price anchors and then consider alternative mechanisms.
   Qualitative evidence from the post-marketing questionnaire supports the role of price
anchors in reducing relative demand following a free distribution. After the Wave 2 distri-
bution, the marketers asked all respondents why they made their purchase decisions. The
question was asked in an open-ended way without prompting, and surveyors coded the re-
sponses into predetermined categories based on piloting of survey questions. As is shown
in Figure 1, among those who decided not to purchase the offered good in Wave 2, 10.4
percent of respondents in the Free treatment stated that they did not purchase the prod-



                                             28
uct because either they or others whom they knew had previously been given it for free.
In contrast, only 2.2 percent of those in the Sale treatment responded similarly (p-value:
0.000). A further 4.1 percent of the Free treatment group stated that the product was too
expensive versus 1.7 percent in the Sale group (p-value: 0.027). While these responses are
subject to all the usual qualifications regarding self-reported explanations for behavior, the
Wave 2 distributors were affiliated with a different entity than either of those seen in Wave
1, ameliorating concerns over experimenter demand effects. Furthermore, there is little
reason to expect differential survey effects across treatment groups. Taken at face value,
these responses would explain the entire difference in Wave 2 purchase behavior between
the Free and Sale treatments.
    Next, we assess the plausibility of eight alternative mechanisms that could explain dif-
ferential effects between free and priced distributions. These include (i) stock on hand,
(ii) expectations of a pricing regime change, (iii) income effects, (iv) liquidity constraints,
(v) externalities, (vi) habit formation, (vii) prices as a signal of quality, and (viii) cognitive
costs. Below we consider each in turn.
    First, we consider what is perhaps the most obvious alternative mechanism through
which free distribution could reduce future demand: stock. Those people who received a
product for free in Wave 1 may not purchase in Wave 2 simply because they still have a
stock of the relevant product at home. Our usage measures and qualitative surveys were
designed to assess the importance of this mechanism. Both speak against stock driving the
results.
    Table 5 reports measures of experimentally-provided stock on hand before Wave 2.
For Panadol and Elyzole, the two products for which we saw a significant negative effect
from prior free distribution, stock in the Free treatment group is no higher than in the Sale
group. In fact, due to differences across treatments in the maximum quantity available per
household (see Section 4.1 for details), average experimentally-provided stock-on-hand in

                                               29
the Sale treatment of the Panadol group was actually larger than in the Free treatment. To
the extent that stock-on-hand did affect demand, it would have made households who were
offered Panadol for free in Wave 1 slightly more—not less—likely to purchase in Wave 2,
suggesting that our estimate is a lower bound on the magnitude of the effect.
    In the case of Zinkid, those in the Free treatment did have more tablets remaining. To
the extent that stock affects demand, this should lower relative demand for those in the Free
treatment. In contrast to the other two products, this suggests that our estimates would be
an upper bound on the magnitude of the effect. However, Zinkid, the product for which
we expected some scope for positive learning, is the product for which we do not find a
statistically significant negative effect of free distribution on Wave 2 demand.
    The preceding results examine only the remaining experimental stock and do not con-
sider the household’s overall stock, which could be obtained from other sources. To address
this, we asked respondents in a post-marketing survey why they did not purchase products
in Wave 2. As Figure 1 shows, we do not find a higher share of respondents in the Free
group giving “I already have enough of it” as reason for not purchasing. If anything, the
share is higher in the Sale group, but the differences are not statistically significant. Taken
together, we consider this convincing evidence that stock is not driving the reduction in
demand following a free distribution.31
    A second potential alternative mechanism is a regime change story. Suppose that prior
to our intervention people believed that Panadol was always sold and never given away for
  31 We  note that one potential drawback is that we do not have data on the purchases of the products outside
of our marketing visits; however, we do not see this as a risk to the study. The products we offered were
available for sale in local drug shops in 11%-36% of the study villages (see Table 1). While it is possible that
some individuals did not purchase in Wave 2 because they had purchased from a local shop, no respondent
indicated this a reason for not purchasing in the post-marketing surveys. Outside purchases were not an enu-
merated option in the post-marketing survey because they were not mentioned during piloting. The question
regarding the reasons for not purchasing was unprompted and, while an “other” option was available, outside
purchases were not mentioned. We also note that there is no distinguishable difference in the effect of prior
free distribution on subsequent demand between those villages where the product was available for outside
purchase and those where it was not.



                                                      30
free.32 Suppose further that there was significant uncertainty about the pricing regime for
Zinkid. Since it is a largely unknown product, people could believe it may or may not be
given away for free. If the individuals who received Panadol for free in Wave 1 believed
that this indicated a regime change—that Panadol would now be distributed occasionally
for free—this may have had a larger effect on their price reference point than for Zinkid.
While we consider this a plausible mechanism following free distribution by an NGO, we
do not find it credible in the case of for-profit distribution. There is no reason to think
that for-profits would shift to a give-it-away-for-free-always regime. Yet, we do not find a
difference in treatment effects between the NGO and the for-profit group for Zinkid (see
column 4 in Table 4). Thus, we rule out regime change.
    A third potential mechanism is income effects. People who received the health products
may have lost fewer work days due to illness during the ten weeks between the two waves
and thus may have had more disposable funds to purchase products in the second wave
of marketing. If an income effect existed, this would have increased relative demand in
the Free group and would therefore imply that we are underestimating the price anchoring
effect. It is worth noting that in contrast to insecticide-treated bed nets, where income ef-
fects could exist, we expect any income effects of the products in this study to be relatively
modest.
    Fourth, liquidity may have affected demand. Since households who received the prod-
uct for free effectively received a transfer, they may have had more money available when
marketers appeared in Wave 2. However, any effect along this dimension would tend to
increase demand in the Free treatment. We would also expect any effects to be quite small.
The magnitude of the transfer was low—about $0.80 per household. Moreover, villages
were revisited approximately ten weeks later and this future visit was not announced at the
  32 Indeed, according to our village leader survey, only in 1 out of 120 villages had Panadol ever been
distributed door-to-door for free.



                                                  31
time of the first. It seems implausible that people kept the funds they would have otherwise
spent on drugs in Wave 1 for a full ten weeks. Finally, to mitigate liquidity constraints,
flyers were distributed a few days prior to each marketing visit to allow respondents to get
money ready.
   A fifth possible mechanism affecting demand is positive externalities. The argument
here would be that higher take-up in Wave 1 reduced disease prevalence and hence the
utility from purchasing the product in Wave 2. However, an externality argument cannot
explain the negative effect on demand in Wave 2 from free distribution for Panadol, since
it is implausible that pain killers have externalities. In contrast, the deworming medicine
Elyzole does have positive externalities. Dewormed children are less likely to transmit
worms to their siblings and peers (Miguel and Kremer, 2004; Ozier, 2011), which could
explain a negative effect of free distribution on later demand. However, to the extent that
such effects were present in our study, we expect that they were quite small. On average,
we distributed Elyzole to only about five percent of households per village in Wave 1. As
such, any reduction in disease loads and hence the utility of purchase in Wave 2 would have
been quite small.
   Sixth, habit formation may have influenced demand. Suppose that upon receiving the
health products, households become habituated to using them. Habit formation would
make it more likely that households who received the product in Wave 1 then purchase
the product in Wave 2, regardless of the direction of learning effects. Since a higher share
of households received the products in the villages assigned to the Free treatment, habit
formation should have a positive effect on demand there. In contrast, our results move in
the opposite direction.
   Seventh, higher prices may signal higher quality (Milgrom and Roberts, 1986; Heffetz
and Shayo, 2009; Ashraf et al., 2013). All else equal, being offered a product for a higher
price should then increase later demand just as we would expect from the price anchoring

                                            32
model. However, the signaling mechanism should have a larger effect for products with
more uncertainty about the benefits and would have the exact opposite effect of our model
of experience learning, i.e., positive prices should increase relative demand for the least
well-known products. While our point estimates across products are in line with the an-
choring mechanism rather than the quality signal alternative, we again note that the differ-
ences in these estimates are not statistically significant. We cannot rule out the possibility
that prices as a signal of quality may explain some of the differences in demand following
free and sale distributions. Since these mechanisms have distinct policy implications, we
think further research to distinguish their effects would be useful.
    Finally, cognitive costs of determining a product’s value may influence our results.
Suppose that any time individuals are faced with a positive price on a less well established
product, they have some probability of being willing to incur the cognitive cost of deter-
mining their own valuation for the product. Without first having determined their valuation,
they do not buy, since they are uncertain whether the price is above or below their personal
valuation of the good. Then, being repeatedly exposed to a purchase decision should in-
crease purchase rates, since in every subsequent interaction fewer and fewer people need to
incur the cognitive cost. However, we find the negative effect of free distribution on Wave
2 purchase decisions also for Panadol, a product for which beliefs should be well estab-
lished, thus no cognitive costs should be necessary to determine its value. This suggests
that cognitive costs are not the only mechanism driving our results.



5    Conclusion

We examine the pricing policy trade-off between learning and price anchors. To do this, we
design and implement a field experiment in northern Uganda and find evidence of exactly
such a trade-off. Consistent with models of reference-dependent preferences (Kőszegi and


                                             33
Rabin, 2006; Mazar et al., 2013; Heidhues and Kőszegi, 2014), free distribution lowers
subsequent demand.
   To study the trade-off between learning and price anchors, we then examine individu-
ally three products specifically chosen to span a range of potential learning effects. For the
two products without potential for positive learning (Panadol & Elyzole, for pain relief and
deworming, respectively), we find that subsequent demand is lower after a free distribution
than after a sales distribution. For Zinkid, which we argue has potential for positive learn-
ing, we do not find such an effect. Positive learning appears to offset the price anchoring
effect. However, although each of the above stated results is statistically significant, the
differences across the products are not. We note that the predictions of our model match
the rank ordering of the demand effects when computed in percentage point terms, the
standard unit of measurement in this literature, which focuses on coverage rates for their
policy relevance. When calculated in percent terms, only two of the three pairwise com-
parisons match the theoretical predictions, with the negative effect from free distribution
of Zinkid being slightly larger than for Panadol despite the potential for positive learning
about Zinkid. We rule out plausible alternative mechanisms, most importantly stock, and
report additional, qualitative evidence supporting reference dependence as the mechanism
behind lower demand.
   Our results help reconcile empirical findings from marketing and psychology demon-
strating a large role for price anchors with those from recent field experiments in the context
of health goods in low-income countries, which find no evidence that prices have meaning-
ful non-budget-constraint effects. While lower prices today can dampen future demand by
setting low price reference points, opportunities to positively update one’s beliefs about a
product’s value may blunt this effect. We also examine whether price anchors for one prod-
uct spill over to the demand for another. While we do not find evidence of such spillovers,
we also note that this test is under-powered compared to the other tests put forward. Given

                                              34
the potential importance of categorical price judgments, such cross-product spillovers re-
main an important area for future research.
   Surprisingly and in contrast to our expectations, we find that the identity of the distrib-
utor does not affect the degree of price anchoring. The relative drop in demand following
free distributions is the same whether the product was offered by a for-profit entity or an
NGO.
   We find that the identity of the distributor does matter for the sale of the lesser-known
product, Zinkid, suggesting an important role for NGOs in providing quality signals for de-
veloping markets. Individuals offered this product for sale by the NGO were 16 percentage
points (over 50 percent) more likely to purchase than those who were offered it by the for-
profit. The effect does not persist to the subsequent distribution by a third-party, for-profit;
however, the immediate observed effect is economically large and further research along
this dimension could provide welcome insight into how to most effectively introduce new
products, particularly in low-income countries (Cole et al., 2013; Karlan, 2014).
   We contribute to three distinct strands of research. First, we provide additional evidence
for the importance of price anchors in an important, non-laboratory domain of economic
behavior. Second, we build on Dupas (2014) to contribute to the literature on experience
goods pricing (Nelson, 1970; Villas-Boas, 2004; Shapiro, 1983; Bergemann and Välimäki,
2006) by highlighting the essential tension between learning and the potential for prices
to directly affect potential consumers’ willingness to pay. Our study design highlights the
insight that the impact of free distribution on later demand depends critically on whether
users have a positive or negative experience with the product. This mechanism may be
particularly important in the case of pharmaceutical demand (Crawford and Shum, 2005)
but is also applicable to agricultural products and other goods where subsidies or discounts
are common policy instruments.
   Third, we directly inform the often controversial debate on subsidized distribution of

                                              35
health products, particularly in low-income countries. The motivations for free or sub-
sidized distribution are numerous: to account for positive externalities (Miguel and Kre-
mer, 2004), to provide people an opportunity to learn about the value of the good (Dupas,
2014), to account for behavioral biases that lead to suboptimal purchase rates (Baicker et
al., 2012), and to redress social injustices (Ponsar et al., 2011). The reasons against free
distribution typically focus on concerns about dampening long-term demand or generating
short-term sunk costs effects whereby a product received for free is not valued and hence
not used (Cohen and Dupas, 2010).
   We note several considerations regarding generalizability. The experimental setting of
northern Uganda has a large NGO presence and a history of free distribution. In principle,
this could either dampen the effect—because our marketing campaign is a small part of
individuals’ experience with free distributions—or amplify it if individuals have become
accustomed to the activities of NGOs and thus more attuned to any deviations from norms
regarding which specific products get subsidized. We also only examine only curative prod-
ucts, not preventive ones. For many reasons (mean reversion, attribution bias, frequency
and proximate nature of information, and salience, for example) individuals may update be-
liefs more rapidly after using curative products relative to preventive products (particularly
for infrequent illnesses).
   Finally, we note several methodological lessons from our exercise. First, this was a
fairly large study but still was hampered by statistical power concerns when testing sepa-
rately across products. This is often the case when examining heterogeneous treatment ef-
fects. For this particular question, having micro-level data on both consumers’ willingness-
to-pay at baseline (e.g., as done in Berry et al., 2015) or on consumers’ knowledge and
beliefs would have improved power. The methodological tradeoff is the loss of some of the
“naturalness” of the exercise as implemented in this study. Second, while it would entail
another tradeoff against naturalness, entrance into the sample frame should be done iden-

                                             36
tically for all treatment groups. Whereas in our setup we did not have differential attrition
from Wave 1 to Wave 2, the flyers distributed in anticipation of the study, intended to follow
normal marketing procedures, did generate a higher entrance-into-the-sample rate for the
free distribution versus the sale. Third, conducting this type of experiment in settings with
more diversity of market conditions (e.g., with respect to the presence and pricing of drugs)
would provide a valuable opportunity to examine how local market conditions influence the
results. Fourth, building this exercise on top of other long-term data collection would pro-
duce important economies of scale in operations and also provide access to richer baseline
and long-term data. This would allow researchers to examine everything from more nu-
anced heterogeneous treatment effects to long-term usage, welfare and market responses.
   Although the experiment was setup in a particular setting, integrating NGO and for-
profit activity in rural Uganda, the theory purposefully abstracts from this and other poten-
tially important factors in order to highlight the tension between learning and price anchor-
ing effects. The theoretical model could be extended and subsequent experiments designed
around testing such extensions. For instance, variation in income effects, externalities, du-
ration, information, cognitive costs and environmental factors such as prior pricing history
are all important considerations for pricing experience goods. This applies for firms aiming
to maximize the net present value of profits and policymakers aiming to increase social wel-
fare. These considerations as well as a number of other parameters from which we abstract
should influence pricing policy for a specific product type, in specific market conditions, to
specific household types. The question of whether “to charge or not to charge?” should not
be answered generically.




                                             37
References
Adaval, Rashmi and Kent B Monroe, “Automatic Construction and Use of Contextual
 Information for Product and Price Evaluations,” Journal of Consumer Research, 2002,
 28 (4), 572–588.

   and Robert S Wyer Jr, “Conscious and Nonconscious Comparisons With Price An-
  chors: Effects on Willingness to Pay for Related and Unrelated Products,” Journal of
  Marketing Research, 2011, 48 (2), 355–365.

Ahmed, Siraj F., Farheen A, Muzaffar A, and Mattoo G. M, “Prevalence of Diarrhoeal
 Disease, Its Seasonal and Age Variation in Under-Fives in Kashmir, India,” International
 Journal of Health Sciences, 2008, 2 (2), 126–133.

Alba, Joseph W., Carl F. Mela, Terence A. Shimp, and Joel E. Urbany, “The Effect of
  Discount Frequency and Depth on Consumer Price Judgments,” Journal of Consumer
  Research, 1999, 26 (2), 99–114.

Anderson, Eric T. and Duncan I. Simester, “Long-Run Effects of Promotion Depth on
 New Versus Established Customers: Three Field Studies,” Marketing Science, 2004, 23
 (1), 4–20.

Ariely, Dan, George Loewenstein, and Drazen Prelec, ““Coherent Arbitrariness": Sta-
  ble Demand Curves Without Stable Preferences,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  2003, 118 (1), 73–106.

Ashraf, Nava, B. Kelsey Jack, and Emir Kamenica, “Information and Subsidies: Com-
  plements or Substitutes?,” Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 2013, 88,
  133–139.

  , James Berry, and Jesse M. Shapiro, “Can Higher Prices Stimulate Product Use?
  Evidence from a Field Experiment in Zambia,” American Economic Review, 2010, 100
  (5), 2383–2413.

Baicker, Katherine, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Joshua Schwartzstein, “Behavioral
  Hazard in Health Insurance,” Working Paper 18468, National Bureau of Economic Re-
  search, October 2012.

Bergemann, Dirk and Juuso Välimäki, “Learning and Strategic Pricing,” Econometrica,
  1996, 64 (5), 1125–1149.

   and , “Dynamic Pricing of New Experience Goods,” Journal of Political Economy,
  2006, 114 (4), 713–743.

Berry, Jim, Greg Fischer, and Raymond Guiteras, “Eliciting and Utilizing Willingness-
  to-Pay: Evidence from Field Trials in Northern Ghana,” 2015. BREAD Working Paper.

                                           38
Chapman, Gretchen B and Eric J. Johnson, “Anchoring, activation, and the construction
 of values,” Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 1999, 79 (2), 115–
 153.

Cohen, Jessica and Pascaline Dupas, “Free Distribution or Cost-Sharing? Evidence from
  a Randomized Malaria Prevention Experiment,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  2010, 125 (1), 1–45.

Cole, Shawn, Xavier Giné, Jeremy Tobacman, Petia Topalova, Robert Townsend,
  and James Vickery, “Barriers to Household Risk Management: Evidence from India,”
  American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2013, 5 (1), 104–135.

Crawford, Gregory S. and Matthew Shum, “Uncertainty and Learning in Pharmaceutical
  Demand,” Econometrica, 2005, 73 (4), 1137–1173.

da Cunha, Ferreira RM and RA Cash, “History of the Development of Oral Rehydration
  Therapy,” Clinical Therapeutics, 1989, 12, 2–11.

Das, Jishnu, Jeffrey Hammer, and Kenneth Leonard, “The Quality of Medical Advice
  in Low-Income Countries,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2008, 22 (2), 93–114.

Dekimpe, Marnik G., Dominique M. Hanssens, and Jorge M. Silva-Risso, “Long-run
  Effects of Price Promotions in Scanner Markets,” Journal of Econometrics, 1998, 89 (1),
  269–291.

Doob, Anthony N, J Merrill Carlsmith, Jonathan L Freedman, Thomas K Landauer,
  and Soleng Tom Jr, “Effect of Initial Selling Price on Subsequent Sales,” Journal of
  Personality and Social Psychology, 1969, 11 (4), 345.

Dupas, Pascaline, “Short-Run Subsidies and Long-Run Adoption of New Health Products:
 Evidence from a Field Experiment,” Econometrica, 2014, 82 (1), 197–228.

Epley, Nicholas and Thomas Gilovich, “Putting Adjustment Back in the Anchoring
  and Adjustment Heuristic: Differential Processing of Self-Generated and Experimenter-
  Provided Anchors,” Psychological Science, 2001, 12 (5), 391–396.

Fitzpatrick, Anne, “Do Informed Consumers Reduce the Price and Prevalence of Coun-
  terfeit Drugs? Evidence from the Antimalarial Market,” 2014. University of Michigan
  Department of Economics Working Paper.

Freedman, Stephen B, Dennis Cho, Kathy Boutis, Derek Stephens, and Suzanne
  Schuh, “Assessing the Palatability of Oral Rehydration Solutions in School-aged Chil-
  dren: A Randomized Crossover Trial,” Archives of Pediatrics & Adolescent Medicine,
  2010, 164 (8), 696–702.



                                           39
Fudenberg, Drew, David K Levine, and Zacharias Maniadis, “On the Robustness of
  Anchoring Effects in WTP and WTA Experiments,” American Economic Journal: Mi-
  croeconomics, 2012, 4 (2), 131–145.

Hahn, Seokyung, S Kim, and Paul Garner, “Reduced Osmolarity Oral Rehydration
 Solution for Treating Dehydration Caused by Acute Diarrhoea in Children,” Cochrane
 Database of Systematic Reviews, 2002, 1.

Heffetz, Ori and Moses Shayo, “How Large Are Non-Budget-Constraint Effects of Prices
 on Demand?,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2009, 1 (4), 170–199.

Heidhues, Paul and Botond Kőszegi, “Regular Prices and Sales,” Theoretical Economics,
 2014, 9 (1), 217–251.

J-PAL Policy Bulletin, The Price is Wrong Abdul Latif Jameel Poverty Action Lab 2011.

Jacowitz, Karen E and Daniel Kahneman, “Measures of Anchoring in Estimation
  Tasks,” Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 1995, 21, 1161–1166.

Kalwani, Manohar U. and Chi Kin Yim, “Consumer Price and Promotion Expectations:
 An Experimental Study,” Journal of Marketing Research, 1992, 29 (1), 90–100.

Kalyanaram, Gurumurthy and John Little, “An Empirical Analysis of Latitude of
 Price Acceptance in Consumer Package Goods,” Journal of Consumer Research, 1994,
 pp. 408–418.

Karlan, Dean, “The Next Stage of Financial Inclusion,” Stanford Social Investment Re-
 view, Fall 2014, pp. 43–49.

Kopalle, Praveen K and Joan Lindsey-Mullikin, “The Impact of External Reference
 Price on Consumer Price Expectations,” Journal of Retailing, 2003, 79 (4), 225–236.

Kőszegi, Botond and Matthew Rabin, “A Model of Reference-Dependent Preferences,”
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2006, 121 (4), 1133–1165.

Larson, Charles P., Unnati Rani Saha, and Hazera Nazrul, “Impact Monitoring of the
  National Scale Up of Zinc Treatment for Childhood Diarrhea in Bangladesh: Repeat
  Ecologic Surveys,” PLoS medicine, 2009, 6 (11), e1000175.

Maniadis, Zacharias, Fabio Tufano, and John A. List, “One Swallow Doesn’t Make a
 Summer: New Evidence on Anchoring Effects,” The American Economic Review, 2014,
 104 (1), 277–290.

Mayhew, Glenn E and Russell S Winer, “An Empirical Analysis of Internal and External
 Reference Prices using Scanner Data,” Journal of Consumer Research, 1992.



                                         40
Mazar, Nina, Botond Kőszegi, and Dan Ariely, “True Context-Dependent Preferences?
 The Causes of Market-Dependent Valuations,” Journal of Behavioral Decision Making,
 2013.

Miguel, Edward and Michael Kremer, “Worms: Identifying Impacts on Education and
 Health in the Presence of Treatment Externalities,” Econometrica, 2004, 72 (1), 159–
 217.

Milgrom, Paul and John Roberts, “Price and Advertising Signals of Product Quality,”
 Journal of Political Economy, 1986, 94 (4), 796–821.

Ministry of Health, Republic of Uganda, “National Guidelines for Management of Com-
 mon Conditions,” The Ministry of Health Uganda 2012.

Nelson, Phillip, “Information and Consumer Behavior,” Journal of Politcal Economy,
  1970, 78 (2), 311–329.

Nunes, Joseph C. and Peter Boatwright, “Incidental Prices and Their Effect on Willing-
 ness to Pay,” Journal of Marketing Research, 2004, 41 (4), 457–466.

Ozier, Owen, “Exploiting Externalities to Estimate the Long-term Benefits of Early Child-
 hood Deworming,” 2011. Working Paper.

Ponsar, Frédérique, Michel Van Herp, Rony Zachariah, Mit Phillips Gerard Séco, and
  Guillaume Jouquet, “Abolishing User Fees for Children and Pregnant Women Trebled
  Uptake of Malaria-related Interventions in Kangaba, Mali,” Health Policy and Planning,
  2011, 26 (suppl 2), ii72–ii83.

Raghubir, Priya and Kim Corfman, “When Do Price Promotions Affect Pretrial Brand
  Evaluations?,” Journal of Marketing Research, 1999, 36 (2), 211–222.

Rao, Akshay R. and Kent B. Monroe, “The Effect of Price, Brand Name, and Store
  Name on Buyers’ Perceptions of Product Quality: An Integrative Review,” Journal of
  Marketing Research, 1989, 26 (3), 351–357.

Sanders, Emily, Kathryn Banke, Julie Williams, and Vicki MacDonald, “Introducing
  Zinc Through the Private Sector in Benin: Evaluation of Caregiver Knowledge Attitudes
  and Practices 2009 and 2011,” Technical Report, Abt Associates Inc., Bethesda, MD
  2013.

Shapiro, Carl, “Optimal Pricing of Experience Goods,” The Bell Journal of Economics,
  1983, 14 (2), 497–507.

Sherif, Muzafer, Daniel Taub, and Carl I. Hovland, “Assimilation and Contrast Effects
  of Anchoring Stimuli on Judgments,” Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1958, 55 (2),
  150.

                                           41
Simonsohn, Uri and George Loewenstein, “Mistake #37: The Effect of Previously En-
  countered Prices on Current Housing Demand,” The Economic Journal, 2006, 116 (508),
  175–199.

Tarozzi, Alessandro, Aprajit Mahajan, Brian Blackburn, Dan Kopf, Lakshmi Kr-
  ishnan, and Joanne Yoong, “Micro-loans, Insecticide-Treated Bednets, and Malaria:
  Evidence from a Randomized Controlled Trial in Orissa, India,” American Economic
  Review, 2014, 104 (7), 1909–41.

Tirole, Jean, The Theory of Industrial Organization, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1988.

Tversky, Amos and Daniel Kahneman, “Judgment under Uncertainty: Heuristics and
  Biases,” Science, 1974, 185 (4157), 1124–1131.

United Nations Secretary General, The Millennium Development Goals Report United
 Nations Secretary General 2009.

Villas-Boas, J. Miguel, “Consumer Learning, Brand Loyalty, and Competition,” Market-
  ing Science, 2004, 23 (1), 134–145.

Winer, Russell S., “A Reference Price Model of Brand Choice for Frequently Purchased
 Products,” Journal of Consumer Research, 1986, 13 (2), 250–256.

World Health Organization, The Treatment of Diarrhoea: A Manual for Physicians and
 Other Senior Health Workers World Health Organization, Geneva: WHO Press, 2005.




                                         42
                                   Figure 1: Reasons for Not Purchasing, Wave 2
                                                                            By Price
                            "Myself or others got it for free previously"                     "I already have enough of it"




                                                                                 0.25
                   0.25




                                                                                 0.20
                   0.20




                                                                                 0.15
 Share reporting
                   0.15




                                                                                 0.10
                   0.10




                                                                                 0.05
                   0.05




                                                                                 0.00
                   0.00




                          All         Panadol          Elyzole      Zinkid/ORS          All      Panadol          Elyzole     Zinkid/ORS

                                             Sale           Free                                       Sale           Free

                                                                            By Type
                            "Myself or others got it for free previously"                     "I already have enough of it"
                                                                                 0.25
                   0.25




                                                                                 0.20
                   0.20




                                                                                 0.15
                   0.15
 Share reporting




                                                                                 0.10
                   0.10




                                                                                 0.05
                   0.05




                                                                                 0.00
                   0.00




                          All         Panadol          Elyzole      Zinkid/ORS          All      Panadol          Elyzole     Zinkid/ORS

                                          For Profit         NGO                                     For Profit         NGO




Note. Share of respondents reporting a specific reason for not purchasing the offered product in Wave 2 conditional on
not purchasing. Multiple responses were allowed. Whisker bars represent 90%-confidence intervals
                                                       Table 1: Baseline Summary Statistics
                                                          Means & Standard Deviations
                                                             Wave 1 Treatment Assignment                                       p-value of
                                                        Free        Sale     NGO       For-Profit                        (1) vs (2) (3) vs (4)           N
                                                         (1)         (2)       (3)          (4)                              (5)         (6)             (7)
Panel A: Wave 1 Respondents
 Individual Level
 Female                                                 0.529           0.538            0.516           0.550             0.572          0.031        3879
                                                       (0.499)         (0.499)          (0.500)         (0.498)
 Respondent age                                        42.984           42.781          43.214          42.545             0.827          0.468        1016 a
                                                      (14.579)         (14.762)        (14.511)        (14.813)
 Number of children under 16                            4.475           4.339            4.378           4.457             0.363          0.596        1016 a
                                                       (2.417)         (2.287)          (2.368)         (2.356)
 Wealth proxy (cows owned)                              1.058           0.874            0.893           1.070             0.228          0.242        1016 a
                                                       (2.601)         (2.137)          (2.365)         (2.459)
 Visited for usage check                                0.080           0.090            0.085           0.085             0.249          0.980        3879
                                                       (0.271)         (0.287)          (0.279)         (0.279)
 Found in Wave 2                                        0.747           0.742            0.765           0.723             0.737          0.003        3879
                                                       (0.435)         (0.438)          (0.424)         (0.447)
 Village Level
 Number of drug outlets                                 1.167           1.367            1.167           1.367             0.483          0.483         120
                                                       (1.452)         (1.657)          (1.520)         (1.594)
 Panadol availableb                                     0.383           0.333            0.333           0.383             0.572          0.572         120
                                                       (0.490)         (0.475)          (0.475)         (0.490)
 Elyzole availableb                                     0.233           0.250            0.217           0.267             0.833          0.526         120
                                                       (0.427)         (0.437)          (0.415)         (0.446)
 Zinkid availableb                                      0.117           0.100            0.100           0.117             0.771          0.771         120
                                                       (0.324)         (0.303)          (0.303)         (0.324)
 Reports free distribution of any                       0.500           0.483            0.433           0.550             0.857          0.204         120
  drug in last 3 mo.      c                            (0.504)         (0.504)          (0.500)         (0.502)
 Reports free distribution of any                       0.467           0.450            0.383           0.533             0.856          0.101         120
  deworming drug in last 3 mo.           c             (0.503)         (0.502)          (0.490)         (0.503)
 Reports free distribution of                           0.050           0.050            0.033           0.067             1.000          0.406         120
    Elyzole in last 3 mo.     c                        (0.220)         (0.220)          (0.181)         (0.252)


Panel B: Wave 2 Respondents
 Female                                                 0.509           0.509            0.489           0.530             0.988          0.025        2887
                                                       (0.500)         (0.500)          (0.500)         (0.499)
 Respondent age                                        43.507           42.979          43.685          42.783             0.620          0.395         779 a
                                                      (14.783)         (14.601)        (14.184)        (15.307)
 Number of children under 16                            4.523           4.383            4.456           4.470             0.423          0.934         779 a
                                                       (2.461)         (2.346)          (2.413)         (2.413)
 Wealth proxy (cows owned)                              1.097           0.896            1.000           1.023             0.262          0.899         779 a
                                                       (2.628)         (2.273)          (2.577)         (2.361)
 Visited for usage check                                0.083           0.091            0.091           0.083             0.440          0.471        2887
                                                       (0.276)         (0.288)          (0.287)         (0.276)
Standard deviations reported in parentheses. (a) Variable available only for participants in accompanying methodological study (see Section 2.1.1). (b) A
product is "available" in a village if it is "mostly" or "always" available in at least one outlet/drugshop of the village. (c) Reports of free distribution based
on village chief's (LC1's) answer to the questions "Has [the product] been distributed for free in the past in this village?" and, if so, "When was the
product last distributed for free in this village?", where "yes" is coded as 1 and "no" or "I do not know" are coded 0.
                    Table 2: Summary Statistics of Respondents' Familiarity with Products

                                                           Percent of
                                      Percent reporting respondents who Percent giving a               Percent giving a
                                      they recognize a say they recognize price estimate                price estimate
                                        shown drug          the brand      (any brand)                  (same brand)            N
Drug                                         (1)                (2)             (3)                           (4)               (5)
Panadol                                    95.5%              10.2%           87.7%                          9.4%              1282
Elyzole                                    64.4%                 7.7%                 58.4%                  6.5%              1191
Zinkid/ORS                                 51.4%                 5.9%                 45.6%                  4.5%              1275
Zinkid (lower & upper bound)      a                                               16.3%-45.6%            1.3%-4.5%             1275
Aquasafe                                   71.4%                15.8%                 65.7%                 14.3%              2019

These data were collected during the Wave 1 by a marketer. Prior to marketing, we asked respondents about the two products that
would not later be marketed to them. Column 1 reports answers to the question "Do you recognize this product that I have here?
(Briefly describe what the product is, what it does)". Column 3 reports answers to the question, "How much would you expect to
pay for this product [there]?". The available choices were: (a) Don't know, (b) It is free, (c) It is sold at this price: UGX_____
(enter amount), (d) I am not certain, but I would estimate this price: UGX_____. (a) Zinkid and ORS were shown as bundle. In
order to unbundle familiarity with the two products, we exploited whether respondents gave the price estimate in the unit of sachets
or tablets. A respondent giving a price in the unit of sachets is taken to refer to ORS, since Zinkid is distributed in tablets. Since we
cannot rule out that people knew both drugs but only reported their perceived price of ORS, this estimate is a lower bound. The
upper bounds for familiarity levels with Zinkid are the joint levels presented for Zinkid/ORS.
                                                           Table 3: Demand in Wave 1
        Product Offered :               Pooled                        Panadola                       Elyzolea                      Zinkida
     Dependent Variables:         Take up Quantityb             Take up Quantityb              Take up Quantityb             Take up Quantityb
                                    (1)        (2)                (3)          (4)               (5)          (6)              (7)         (8)
Panel A: Full sample
  NGO in Wave 1                    0.053          0.023          -0.007        -0.136           0.001          0.002           0.159***      0.173***
                                  (0.033)        (0.064)         (0.038)       (0.145)         (0.045)        (0.061)         (0.044)       (0.049)
  Free in Wave 1                   0.469***       0.068           0.237***     -0.732***        0.463***       0.233***        0.699***      0.666***
                                  (0.023)        (0.045)         (0.024)       (0.097)         (0.029)        (0.040)         (0.033)       (0.038)
  Free*NGO                        -0.054         -0.019           0.011         0.141          -0.007         -0.012          -0.170***     -0.189***
                                  (0.034)        (0.066)         (0.039)       (0.150)         (0.047)        (0.062)         (0.046)       (0.050)
  Constant                         N/Ac           N/Ac            0.761***      1.826***        0.460***       0.657***        0.276***      0.309***
                                                                 (0.025)       (0.122)         (0.046)        (0.058)         (0.040)       (0.047)

  Observations                     3879           3879            1228          1228            1394           1394            1257          1257
  Mean of NGO*Sale                 0.580          0.945           0.754         1.599           0.539          0.774           0.460         0.508
  Mean of For-Profit*Free          0.999          0.999           0.997         0.997           1.000          1.000           1.000         1.000


Panel B: Households found in both waves
  NGO in Wave 1                    0.060*         0.077           0.010        -0.034          -0.008          0.024           0.170***      0.201***
                                  (0.035)        (0.073)         (0.043)       (0.168)         (0.051)        (0.078)         (0.052)       (0.053)
  Free in Wave 1                   0.461***       0.070           0.232***     -0.714***        0.443***       0.206***        0.702***      0.686***
                                  (0.023)        (0.050)         (0.028)       (0.115)         (0.034)        (0.048)         (0.036)       (0.035)
  Free*NGO                        -0.063*        -0.072          -0.008         0.045           0.002         -0.035          -0.180***     -0.213***
                                   (0.036)       (0.076)         (0.044)       (0.177)         (0.053)        (0.079)         (0.053)       (0.055)
  Constant                         N/Ac           N/Ac            0.781***      1.863***        0.480***       0.678***        0.281***      0.304***
                                                                 (0.040)       (0.167)         (0.049)        (0.064)         (0.046)       (0.050)

  Observations                     2887           2887              926           926           1027           1027              934           934
  Mean of NGO*Sale                 0.595          0.996           0.777         1.688           0.548          0.812           0.467         0.515
  Mean of For-Profit*Free          1.000          1.000           1.000         1.000           1.000          1.000           1.000         1.000
Village assignment to treatment was block randomized according to two variables. The first, price environment, included information about
pricing and drug availability with three possible categories: (1) no drug outlets or none of our drugs; (2) no prices above the median or
distributed for free; and (3) at least one price above the median. The second, remoteness, also had three categories: (1) easy to travel and close to
health center; (2) difficult travel or far from health center; and (3) difficult travel and far from health center. All regressions include controls for
stratification cell. Standard errors clustered by village in parentheses. * Denotes significance at the 10-percent level; ** at the 5-percent level; and
*** at the 1-percent level. (a) The generic names for the three drugs are: paracetamol for Panadol, albendazole for Elyzole, zinc for Zinkid. (b) The
"quantity" dependent variable is the number of units (defined as doses) received or purchased. Respondents in the Free group were offered one
unit, respondents in the Sale group were able to purchase up to five units. (c) Includes product-specific intercept.
                                                  Table 4: Demand in Wave 2
                    Product Offered in Wave 2           Pooled           Panadola          Elyzolea          Zinkida         Aquasafea
                            Same As Wave 1?              Same             Same              Same              Same           Different
                                                          (1)              (2)               (3)               (4)              (5)
Panel A: Take-up
     NGO in Wave 1                                       0.017             0.033            0.027            -0.002             0.054
                                                        (0.032)           (0.040)          (0.056)           (0.051)           (0.059)
     Free in Wave 1                                     -0.100***         -0.116***        -0.118*           -0.052             0.044
                                                        (0.036)           (0.036)           (0.061)          (0.054)           (0.060)
     Free*NGO                                            0.017             0.051           -0.004            -0.002            -0.106
                                                        (0.051)           (0.058)          (0.086)           (0.074)           (0.078)
     Constant                                            N/A
                                                               c           0.862***         0.388***          0.234***          0.457***
                                                                          (0.054)          (0.062)           (0.065)           (0.066)
     Observations                                        2150                687               786              677               737
     Test of equality of Free coefficient w.r.t.
      Panadol                                            0.094             N/A              0.980             0.228             0.003
      Elyzole                                            0.208             0.980            N/A               0.325             0.037
      Zinkid                                             0.798             0.228            0.325             N/A               0.176
     Mean of NGO*Sale                                    0.555             0.866            0.521             0.276             0.571
     Mean of For-Profit*Free                             0.480             0.709            0.379             0.233             0.566
     p-value of Free + Free*NGO = 0                      0.017             0.131            0.038             0.295             0.216
     Effect of Free in specification                    -0.091***         -0.091***        -0.120***         -0.053            -0.010
      excluding NGO terms                               (0.025)           (0.028)          (0.041)           (0.037)           (0.039)

Panel B: Quantity b
     NGO in Wave 1                                      -0.004            -0.086            0.048             0.022             0.052
                                                        (0.069)           (0.172)          (0.096)           (0.059)           (0.092)
     Free in Wave 1                                     -0.214***         -0.429***        -0.154            -0.060             0.101
                                                        (0.073)           (0.151)          (0.097)           (0.057)           (0.111)
     Free*NGO                                            0.110             0.376           -0.056             0.021            -0.176
                                                        (0.114)           (0.237)          (0.138)           (0.095)           (0.142)
     Constant                                            N/A
                                                               c           1.813***         0.510***          0.216***          0.512***
                                                                          (0.181)          (0.108)           (0.067)           (0.098)
     Observations                                        2150                687               786              677               737
     Test of equality of Free coefficient w.r.t.
      Panadol                                            0.006             N/A              0.099             0.010             0.000
      Elyzole                                            0.788             0.099            N/A               0.330             0.029
      Zinkid                                             0.258             0.010            0.330             N/A               0.129
     Mean of NGO*Sale                                    0.845             1.720            0.688             0.312             0.714
     Mean of For-Profit*Free                             0.729             1.363            0.495             0.240             0.762
     p-value of Free = 0                                 0.004             0.005            0.116             0.302             0.367
     p-value of Free + Free*NGO = 0                      0.198             0.754            0.031             0.607             0.370
     Effect of Free in specification                    -0.157***        -0.240**          -0.182***         -0.047             0.011
      excluding NGO terms                               (0.052)          (0.110)           (0.067)           (0.047)           (0.069)
Village assignment to treatment was block randomized according to two variables. The first, price environment, included
information about pricing and drug availability with three possible categories: (1) no drug outlets or none of our drugs; (2) no
prices above the median or distributed for free; and (3) at least one price above the median. The second, remoteness, also had three
categories: (1) easy to travel and close to health center; (2) difficult travel or far from health center; and (3) difficult travel and far
from health center. All regressions include controls for stratification cell. Standard errors clustered by village in parentheses. *
Denotes significance at the 10-percent level; ** at the 5-percent level; and *** at the 1-percent level. (a) The generic names for
the three drugs are: paracetamol for Panadol, albendazole for Elyzole, zinc for Zinkid, and sodium dichloroisocyanurate for Aquasafe.
(b) The "quantity" dependent variable is the number of units purchased. (c) Includes product-specific intercept.
                                 Table 5: Observed Usage Summary Statistics
                             Conditional on                                 % in Sale
                            receiving any in                                receiving     Scaled to include non-
                                  Wave 1                                      any in        takeup in Wave 1
                             Sale       Free            p-value     N        Wave 1          Sale        Free    p-value
                              (1)         (2)             (3)       (4)         (5)           (6)         (7)      (8)
Number of tablets distributed in Wave 1
  Panadol                   21.38       10.00            0.00       98        75.2%         16.08        10.00         0.00
  Elyzole                    8.76        6.00            0.00       84        54.4%         4.77         5.99          0.00
  Zinkid & ORS              11.03       10.00            0.12       67        39.2%         4.32         9.97          0.00

Mean tablets remaining from experimental stock
  Panadol                  2.53      1.03                0.05       98        75.2%          1.91         1.03         0.17
  Elyzole                  0.16      0.04                0.43       84        54.4%          0.09         0.04         0.64
  Zinkid & ORS             5.34      4.86                0.69       67        39.2%          2.09         4.84         0.00

Proportion of tablets used
   Panadol                 0.90              0.90        0.88       98        75.2%          N/A         N/A          N/A
   Elyzole                 0.99              0.99        0.66       84        54.4%          N/A         N/A          N/A
   Zinkid & ORS            0.53              0.51        0.90       67        39.2%          N/A         N/A          N/A

Share of respondents who have positive experimentally provided stock
   Panadol                 0.36       0.18       0.05      98      75.2%                     0.27         0.18         0.24
   Elyzole                 0.03       0.02       0.87      84      54.4%                     0.01         0.02         0.80
   Zinkid & ORS            0.59       0.61       0.88      67      39.2%                     0.23         0.60         0.00
Households that did not receive the a product in Wave 1 were not included in the sample for usage checks of
experimentally provided product. The share receiving the product in Wave 1 for the Free treatment is approximately 100%
for all products. In a previous version of this paper we misreported that 329 individuals were "selected" for usage checks
and 251 were "found," implying that "found" refereed to the usage checks. The variable "found" should have indicated
"found in Wave 2" and the variable "selected" should have indicated "contacted for usage checks". Because our interest in
usage checks is to understand the mechanism behind the Wave 2 results, we restrict the sample frame for analysis to only
those individuals reached in Wave 2. Results on the full sample of 329 households reached in the usage checks are
statistically identical (results available from the authors on request). We note that the attrition rate of 24% from the usage
check to Wave 2 is higher than often found in developing country studies and reflects a deliberate methodological decision
to adhere to a more "natural" marketing process, rather than persistently return to households to, in this case, adjudicate
their eligibility for a marketing prize. See Section 2 for more discussion of study design and attrition.
For Online Publication                                                                         A-1


A       Derivations and proofs

As described in Section 3, the key predictions of the model are all derived from differenti-
ating


         πt = αt E (πt | In f ormed) + (1 − αt )E (πt |Unin f ormed)
                                                         
                     v̄ − p̃t                  v̄ + b − p̃t
            = αt Φ              + (1 − αt )Φ
                        σI                         σU
                                        r
                     v̄ − pt − R (pt − pt )
                                                            
                                                               v̄ + b − pt − R (pt − ptr )
                                                                                           
            = αt Φ                            + (1 − αt )Φ
                                σI                                         σU

with respect to the price in the preceding period. This leads immediately to equation (3):

                                                            
               ∂ π2   ∂ α2      v̄ − p̃2           v̄ + b − p̃2
                    =        Φ             −Φ
               ∂ p1   ∂ p1         σI                  σU
                                                                         
                         ∂ R α2       v̄ − p̃2      1 − α2      v̄ + b − p̃2
                      −          φ               +         φ                    .
                        ∂ p 1 σI         σI           σU            σU

We can further expand the first term by noting that α2 , the share informed at the time
                                                                     
of the period-2 purchase decision, equals α1 + (1 − α1 )Φ v̄+b−pσU
                                                                    1
                                                                       . Hence, ∂ α2 /∂ p1 =
                   
− (1−α 1)
    σu φ
            v̄+b−p1
               σU     < 0. The intuition is natural: lowering the price in period 1 increases
the share of the population that is informed in period 2.
For Online Publication                                                                      B-2


B     Marketing scripts
B.1    Treatment-specific marketing information
    • [NGO] UHMG is a Ugandan-based non-governmental organization based in Kam-
      pala. UHMG believes that every person in Uganda should have access to affordable
      health products. UHMG is motivated by the desire to save lives. It is a charity, which
      means that it makes no profits, and it is funded by international donors.

    • [SALE] Today UHMG’s beneficiaries are asked to pay a small amount to share the
      cost of distribution, which allows the good work to be extended to a greater number
      of needy people.

         – [FREE] Today I am distributing health products for free throughout the village.

    • [FOR-PROFIT] Star Pharmaceuticals is a large for-profit company based in Kam-
      pala. We sell drugs and health products throughout Uganda. We believe everyone
      should pay for health products they want, and we believe making profits is a good
      way to drive progress. We want to become the most successful company in Uganda,
      and we do this by offering good prices to our customers.

         – [SALE] Today you have the opportunity to buy your normal products at the
           great prices Star Pharmaceuticals offers, right at your doorstep.
         – [FREE] Today, however, we are distributing our products for free, right at your
           doorstep, to raise our profile in Gulu.

B.2    Product-specific marketing information
PANADOL
Have you ever returned home from the garden with a pounding headache, or aches in your
muscles and joints? Has your child ever woken you in the middle of the night, complaining
that their head or stomach is aching? Imagine if one of these things occurred tomorrow,
what would you do? You have to run to a drug shop or medical center. But what if that is
far away, or there is a long queue, or they are closed or out of stock? That is a bad solution.
As both you and I know, one of the best pain killers is Panadol, and yet it is often hard to
find. So today, I have Panadol tablets for sale/for free right here! [Take out one unit] I am
selling this sheet of 10 tablets for the great price of 500 shillings. I am giving you one sheet
of 10 tablets. [Dosage/usage instructions] So, how many sheets will you buy? So, will you
accept this product?
For Online Publication                                                                      B-3


ELYZOLE
Do you sometimes drink water that has not been boiled or treated? Do you ever eat fruits
directly from the trees, without washing them first? This kind of behavior can lead to
worm infections of the stomach. Does anyone in your household ever complain about
stomach pains or itchy skin? These are symptoms experienced by someone who has worms.
But symptoms often take some time to appear, and so doctors usually advise people to
deworm once every three months. The only problem is that it is sometimes hard to access
deworming tablets. But today, I have Elyzole deworming tablets for sale/for free right here!
[Take out one unit] These three boxes contain a full dose of deworming tablets. There are
six tablets in here. These tablets can kill almost all types of worms that can attack humans.
I am selling them at the great price of 1500 shillings for one dose of three boxes. I am
giving you one dose of three boxes. [Dosage/usage instructions] So, how many full doses
do you want to buy? Will you accept this product?

RESTORS & ZINKID
Do you remember a time when your child suffered from diarrhea? Do you remember
how weak they became, and how worried that made you? When a child becomes ill with
diarrhea, it is important to quickly replenish all the salts and nutrients that they are losing.
I’m sure you have heard of oral rehydration salts. Giving these to a sick child is the first
stage of combating the effects of diarrhea. So for that, I am selling/giving away Restors
- a high quality brand of ORS. The second step is to provide them with zinc supplements
which can stop the diarrhea sooner and reduce the chance of diarrhea returning. For that, I
have a brand new product, Zinkid, which is to be taken in combination with ORS. Taking
these two products together is a great way to reduce the duration and severity of diarrhea
in children. Therefore I am selling one strip of 10 Zinkid tablets with one Restors sachet
in combination as one item for the great price of , to equip you with the means to combat
diarrhea in your children. Therefore I am giving away one strip of 10 Zinkid tablets with
one Restors sachet in combination as one item, to equip you with the means to combat
diarrhea in your children. [Dosage/usage information] So how many will you buy today?
So will you accept this product?

AQUASAFE
Today I am selling Aquasafe – a high quality brand of water treatment right at your door!
Often water from wells and boreholes is not suitable for drinking; it can contain harmful
bacteria, parasites and other contaminated substances. Drinking this water can cause var-
ious illnesses, including diarrhea which can be very damaging for children. I am offering
you a simple solution to this problem. Aquasafe is a fast and effective way of purifying
your water – you simply add it to a jerry-can of water and in no time it is safe to drink.
[Take out one unit] I am selling this sheet of 8 tablets for the great price of 800 shillings.
[Dosage/usage instructions] So, how many sheets will you buy?
For Online Publication                                                                B-4


Wave 2 introduction
Good morning/afternoon! [Generic pleasantries] My name is ____, I am from Surgipharm
Uganda Limited. Have you heard of Surgipharm Uganda Limited before? Surgipharm
Uganda Limited is a health care company specializing in the importation, exportation, dis-
tribution and marketing of pharmaceutical products. We believe everyone should pay for
health products they want, and we believe making profits is a good way to drive progress.
We want to become the most successful company in Uganda, and we do this by supplying
quality goods. I hope you will remember the name of Surgipharm Uganda Limited. [Move
on to Aquasafe Price Perception Survey if Aquasafe is not assigned product, then to the
sales pitch.]
For Online Publication                                                                                                                                       C-5
C Post-Marketing Survey
                                                     M A R K E T                F E E D B A C K
Intended Respondent’s Name: __________________________________________________                     Gender: M F       Date of Birth:_____________
I met: this person spouse Spouse Name: ___________________________ (If spouse was met)                     Enumerator Name:___________________________
Product:   Deworming   Panadol   ORS/Zinkid   Aquasafe     Date:          Subcounty:            Parish:           Village:

IN ADDITION TO CIRCLING THE RESPONSE, PLEASE WRITE COMPLETE SENTENCES TO EXPLAIN THE RESPONDENT”S ANSWER MORE THOROUGHLY

Before filling in this form, you must:
     1. Introduce yourself, conduct the Price Perception Survey, and deliver the sales pitch.
     2. Answer any questions the respondent may ask about the product to the best of your ability.
     3. Wait until the respondent has made a decision to purchase or not purchase. If they purchased, any change must be handed over.

Inform the respondent that you would now like to ask them a few brief questions that will help your organization improve in the future. To learn more
about why they did or did not buy the product, ask the following questions:

     1)    Did the respondent make a purchase?           Yes       No
           If ‘Yes’ move to Question 2.
           If ‘No’ move to Question 3.

     2)     [If they made a purchase] Ask Questions a) to c) below:
                  a. Can you tell me more about why you bought this product? CIRCLE ALL THAT APPLY
                                1---I ran out of my supply                                           __________________________________________
                                2--- I trust you (ASK WHY AND WRITE ANSWER OPPOSITE) __________________________________________
                                3---The price is cheaper than what I can get it for here            __________________________________________
                                4--- I want to sell it on to others                                 __________________________________________
                                5--- I would have to travel far to find this elsewhere              __________________________________________
                                6--- I want it in case someone becomes sick                         __________________________________________
                                7---Other (FILL IN OPPOSITE)
                                99--- Didn’t answer
                  b. For whom did you buy this for? CIRCLE ALL THAT APPLY
                                1--- Myself               2--- Adults                3---Grandparents / Elderly
                                4---Children/babies 4---Other: _______________________________________
                                99-- Didn’t answer
                  c. When do you expect to start using the product?
                                1---This week
                                2--- Next week
                                3---In the next month
                                4---In the next 2-3 months
                                5---6 months or more
                                6--- Other_________________________________
                                99—Didn’t answer

     3)    [If did not make a purchase] Can you tell me more about why you did not buy this? CIRCLE ALL THAT APPLY
                    1--- I got it for free previously, why should I buy it now?          7--- I need to ask my spouse.
                    2--- Other people in this village have previously got it for free.   8--- I don’t trust you or I’m uncomfortable buying this from you.
                    3--- I’d like to buy it, but don’t have the money here.              9--- Don’t know
                    4--- I think it is too expensive.                                    10--- Didn’t answer
                    5--- It’s not essential.                                             11--- Other: __________________________________________
                    6--- I already have enough of it.                                                   __________________________________________
                    99—Didn’t answer

     4)    [Ask everyone] Is this the type of product that people in your village would resell or trade?
                     1---Yes If yes, how much do you think they could sell/trade it for? |_________| UGX --or--- Item to trade with: ____________________
                     2---No
                     99—Didn’t answer

                                                  Leave the respondent’s home and fill out the Tracking Sheet
For Online Publication
                         Figure A1
For Online Publication

                                            Table A1: Entry into Sample & Attrition
                                                          Find Rate Conditional on
                                                             Row Variable Value     p-value of
                                                              Yes          No          Diff.
                                                              (1)          (2)          (3)
  Panel A: Wave 1, Entry into Sample
   N                                                              3,879           1,828
   NGO treatment                                                  0.691           0.669           0.384     a

                                                                 (0.462)         (0.471)
   Sale treatment                                                 0.654           0.705           0.040     a

                                                                 (0.476)         (0.456)
     Panadol Sale                                                 0.716           0.806           0.000
                                                                 (0.451)         (0.396)
     Elyzole Sale                                                 0.740           0.782           0.039
                                                                 (0.439)         (0.413)
     Zinkid Sale                                                  0.728           0.763           0.096
                                                                 (0.445)         (0.425)
   Female                                                         0.643           0.702           0.000
                                                                 (0.479)         (0.457)
   Village easy to reach and close                                0.651           0.699           0.062     a

    to health center                                             (0.477)         (0.459)
  Panel B: Wave 2, Attrition (conditional on entering into sample in Wave 1)
   N                                                              2,887           992
   Received product in wave 1                                     0.750           0.723           0.281     a

                                                                 (0.433)         (0.448)
   NGO treatment                                                  0.765           0.723           0.110     a

                                                                 (0.424)         (0.447)
   Sale treatment                                                 0.742           0.747           0.856     a

                                                                 (0.438)         (0.435)
     Panadol Sale                                                 0.783           0.765           0.517
                                                                 (0.412)         (0.424)
     Elyzole Sale                                                 0.762           0.755           0.793
                                                                 (0.427)         (0.431)
     Zinkid Sale                                                  0.774           0.741           0.241
                                                                 (0.419)         (0.439)
   Female                                                         0.710           0.783           0.000
                                                                 (0.454)         (0.412)
   Visited for usage check                                        0.763           0.743           0.418
                                                                 (0.426)         (0.437)
   Panadol availableb                                             0.729           0.753           0.378     a

                                                                 (0.445)         (0.431)
   Elyzole availableb                                             0.742           0.745           0.921     a

                                                                 (0.438)         (0.436)
                      b                                                                                     a
   Zinkid available                                               0.745           0.744           0.985
                                                                 (0.437)         (0.436)
   Reports free distribution of any                               0.760           0.729           0.221     a

    drug in last 3 mo.                                           (0.427)         (0.445)
   Village easy to reach and close                                0.734           0.751           0.524     a

    to health center                                             (0.442)         (0.433)
  Standard deviations reported in parentheses. (a) p-value of differences adjusted for clustering at the village level (b) A product is
  "available" in a village if it is "mostly" or "always" available in at least one outlet/drugshop of the village. (c) Reports of free
  distribution based on village chief's (LC1's) answer to the questions "Has [the product] been distributed for free in the past in this
  village?" and, if so, "When was the product last distributed for free in this village?", where "yes" is coded as 1 and "no" or "I do
  not know" are coded 0.
For Online Publication



                                Table A2: Prior Free Distribution Summary Statistics

Time since last free distribution (percent)
                                              Panadol     Deworming        ORS           Condoms             Any*
In past month                                    1           21             2               5                 26
1-3 months ago                                   0           26             1               1                 27
3-6 months ago                                   0           11             1               3                 13
6-12 months ago                                  0           11             3               3                 17
More than 1 year ago                             0           3              8               4                 14

Cumulative; Any distributions in prior period (percent)
                                          Panadol         Deworming        ORS           Condoms             Any*
In past month                                 1              21             2               5                 26
0-3 months ago                                1              47             3               6                 49
0-6 months ago                                1              58             3               8                 59
0-12 months ago                               1              69             7               12                73
Ever                                          1              72             15              16                77
Total sample size is 120 villages. Three had missing observations in deworming questions and are dropped from sample. *
Any free drug is indicator, equal to 1 if any of Panadol, deworming, ORS, or condoms have previously been distributed for
free in the village. No village had ever received prior free distributions of Zinkid or Restors.
For Online Publication

                                                                              Table A3: Heterogeneous efffects with respect to price index
                                Product Offered in Wave 2               Pooled                           Panadol                         Elyzole                          Zinkid                          Aquasafe
                                        Same As Wave 1?                  Same                             Same                            Same                             Same                           Different
                                     Dependent Variables:         Take up    Quantity              Take up    Quantity             Take up    Quantity              Take up    Quantity             Take up     Quantity
                                                                    (1)        (2)                   (3)         (4)                 (5)         (6)                  (7)        (8)                  (9)          (10)
               Temp Panel: using productAssignedInitial2
                 NGO in Wave 1                                      0.009         -0.026            0.056         -0.061            -0.002          0.000           -0.014         -0.002             0.023        -0.002
                                                                   (0.041)        (0.075)          (0.045)        (0.182)           (0.065)        (0.108)          (0.060)        (0.070)           (0.064)       (0.104)
                 Free in Wave 1                                    -0.105**       -0.214***        -0.100**       -0.394**         -0.126*        -0.171*           -0.072         -0.077             0.006         0.039
                                                                   (0.041)        (0.077)          (0.044)        (0.170)           (0.065)        (0.103)          (0.061)        (0.067)           (0.061)       (0.124)
                 Free*NGO                                           0.025          0.158            0.033          0.437*            0.029          0.017            0.000          0.027            -0.074        -0.107
                                                                   (0.053)        (0.114)          (0.062)        (0.243)           (0.087)        (0.138)          (0.077)        (0.101)           (0.079)       (0.143)
                 High price index                                  -0.004          0.110            0.114          0.489             0.002         -0.006           -0.116         -0.124            -0.086        -0.242
                                                                   (0.069)        (0.162)          (0.077)        (0.354)           (0.126)        (0.197)          (0.104)        (0.131)           (0.112)       (0.176)
                 High price*Free in Wave 1                         -0.026         -0.141           -0.066         -0.326            -0.055         -0.098            0.051          0.031            0.121          0.158
                                                                   (0.054)        (0.122)          (0.078)        (0.283)           (0.105)        (0.138)          (0.096)        (0.143)          (0.092)        (0.121)
                 High price*NGO                                     0.003         -0.106***        -0.065         -0.358             0.012         -0.071            0.043          0.096***         0.015          0.017***
                                                                   (0.259)        (0.014)          (0.076)        (0.285)           (0.738)        (0.135)          (0.428)        (0.016)          (0.009)        (0.001)
                 Constant                                           0.168          0.730***         0.738*         0.135***          0.523          0.672***         0.338***       0.245**          0.028          0.039
                                                                   (0.838)        (0.188)          (0.428)        (0.016)           (0.338)        (0.245)          (0.105)        (0.122)          (0.179)        (0.227)

                 Observations                                        2034           2034              643            643               751            751              640            640               695           695
                 Test of equality of Free coefficient w.r.t.
                  Panadol                                           0.195          0.268            N/A            N/A               0.000          0.000            0.000          0.000            0.000          0.000
                  Elyzole                                           0.000          0.000            0.000          0.000             N/A            N/A              0.000          0.000            0.000          0.000
                  Zinkid                                            0.000          0.000            0.000          0.000             0.000          0.000            N/A            N/A              0.000          0.000

                 Mean of NGO*Sale                                   0.551          0.827            0.870          1.701             0.511          0.661            0.280          0.317            0.562          0.691
                 Mean of For-Profit*Free                            0.477          0.732            0.708          1.380             0.377          0.497            0.229          0.236            0.564          0.762

                 p-value of Free = 0                                0.012          0.006            0.024          0.022             0.053          0.099            0.244          0.252            0.920          0.755
                 p-value of Free + Free*NGO = 0                     0.056          0.536            0.141          0.813             0.151          0.161            0.203          0.525            0.246          0.496


               High price indicates at least one drug price above the median. The generic names for all four drugs are: paracetamol for Panadol, albendazole for Elyzole, zinc for Zinkid, and sodium dichloroisocyanurate
               for Aquasafe. The "quantity" dependent variable is the number of units (defined as doses) received or purchased. Respondents in the Free group were offered one unit, respondents in the Sale
               group were able to purchase up to five units. Pooled regression includes product-specific intercepts and only those households offered the same product in both waves. Village assignment to
               treatment was block randomized according to two variables. The first, price environment, included information about pricing and drug availability with three possible categories: (1) no drug outlets
               or none of our drugs; (2) no prices above the median or distributed for free; and (3) at least one price above the median. The second, remoteness, also had three categories: (1) easy to travel and
               close to health center; (2) difficult travel or far from health center; and (3) difficult travel and far from health center. All regressions include controls for stratification cell. Standard errors clustered
               by village in parentheses. * Denotes significance at the 10-percent level; ** at the 5-percent level; and *** at the 1-percent level.
For Online Publication

                                                                             Table A4: Heterogeneous efffects with respect to remoteness
                               Product Offered in Wave 2               Pooled                          Panadol                         Elyzole                         Zinkid                         Aquasafe
                                       Same As Wave 1?                  Same                            Same                            Same                            Same                          Different
                                    Dependent Variables:         Take up    Quantity             Take up    Quantity             Take up    Quantity             Take up    Quantity            Take up     Quantity
                                                                   (1)        (2)                  (3)         (4)                 (5)         (6)                 (7)        (8)                 (9)          (10)
               Temp Panel: using productAssignedInitial2
                 NGO in Wave 1                                     0.017         -0.071            0.096        -0.080            -0.024        -0.130           -0.011          0.019           -0.010         -0.049
                                                                  (0.051)        (0.103)          (0.060)       (0.244)           (0.080)       (0.125)          (0.082)        (0.098)          (0.080)        (0.130)
                 Free in Wave 1                                   -0.089*       -0.239**          -0.067        -0.548**         -0.164**       -0.153           -0.019         -0.026            0.073          0.061
                                                                   (0.049)      (0.102)           (0.056)       (0.215)          (0.074)        (0.132)          (0.078)        (0.089)          (0.073)        (0.120)
                 Free*NGO                                          0.023          0.126            0.045         0.388*            0.006        -0.033            0.010          0.036           -0.085         -0.134
                                                                  (0.051)        (0.107)          (0.056)       (0.220)           (0.083)       (0.133)          (0.075)        (0.095)          (0.078)        (0.138)
                 Remote                                            0.024         -0.054            0.058        -0.130            -0.031        -0.083            0.055          0.071            0.048          0.051
                                                                  (0.047)        (0.094)          (0.049)       (0.212)           (0.075)       (0.125)          (0.075)        (0.083)          (0.074)        (0.115)
                 Remote*Free in Wave 1                            -0.025          0.031           -0.089         0.179             0.067         0.001           -0.063         -0.066           -0.050          0.034
                                                                  (0.052)        (0.106)          (0.060)       (0.231)           (0.083)       (0.133)          (0.079)        (0.099)          (0.081)        (0.134)
                 Remote*NGO                                       -0.008          0.095          -0.104*         0.011             0.073         0.252*          -0.008         -0.020            0.084          0.133
                                                                  (0.052)        (0.107)          (0.060)       (0.231)           (0.082)       (0.133)          (0.080)        (0.098)          (0.081)        (0.137)
                 Constant                                          0.848***       1.842***         0.868***      2.138***          0.545***      0.775***         0.224**        0.195*           0.585***       0.785***
                                                                  (0.054)        (0.121)          (0.056)       (0.226)           (0.084)       (0.142)          (0.091)        (0.105)          (0.074)        (0.126)

                 Observations                                       2150          2150               687           687               786           786              677            677              737            737
                 Test of equality of Free coefficient w.r.t.
                  Panadol                                          0.197          0.268            N/A           N/A               0.000         0.000            0.000          0.000            0.000          0.000
                  Elyzole                                          0.000          0.000            0.000         0.000             N/A           N/A              0.000          0.000            0.000          0.000
                  Zinkid                                           0.000          0.000            0.000         0.000             0.000         0.000            N/A            N/A              0.000          0.000

                 Mean of NGO*Sale                                  0.555          0.845            0.866         1.720             0.521         0.688            0.276          0.312            0.571          0.714
                 Mean of For-Profit*Free                           0.480          0.729            0.709         1.363             0.379         0.495            0.233          0.240            0.566          0.762

                 p-value of Free = 0                               0.072          0.021            0.233         0.012             0.028         0.250            0.804          0.771            0.316          0.614
                 p-value of Free + Free*NGO = 0                    0.147          0.203            0.704         0.459             0.038         0.085            0.892          0.917            0.881          0.545


               Remote indicates village is both difficult to reach and far from the nearest health center. The generic names for all four drugs are: paracetamol for Panadol, albendazole for Elyzole, zinc for Zinkid, and
               sodium dichloroisocyanurate for Aquasafe. The "quantity" dependent variable is the number of units (defined as doses) received or purchased. Respondents in the Free group were offered one unit,
               respondents in the Sale group were able to purchase up to five units. Pooled regression includes product-specific intercepts and only those households offered the same product in both waves.
               Village assignment to treatment was block randomized according to two variables. The first, price environment, included information about pricing and drug availability with three possible
               categories: (1) no drug outlets or none of our drugs; (2) no prices above the median or distributed for free; and (3) at least one price above the median. The second, remoteness, also had three
               categories: (1) easy to travel and close to health center; (2) difficult travel or far from health center; and (3) difficult travel and far from health center. All regressions include controls for
               stratification cell. Standard errors clustered by village in parentheses. * Denotes significance at the 10-percent level; ** at the 5-percent level; and *** at the 1-percent level.
For Online Publication

                                                                    Table A5: Heterogeneous efffects with respect to prior free distributions
                               Product Offered in Wave 2                Pooled                          Panadol                         Elyzole                         Zinkid                          Aquasafe
                                       Same As Wave 1?                   Same                            Same                            Same                            Same                           Different
                                    Dependent Variables:          Take up    Quantity             Take up    Quantity             Take up    Quantity             Take up    Quantity             Take up     Quantity
                                                                    (1)        (2)                  (3)         (4)                 (5)         (6)                 (7)        (8)                  (9)          (10)
               Temp Panel: using productAssignedInitial2
                 NGO in Wave 1                                      0.016         0.007             0.051         0.002             0.021         0.037            -0.019        -0.005             0.066         0.018
                                                                   (0.042)       (0.080)           (0.049)       (0.174)           (0.078)       (0.128)           (0.058)       (0.069)           (0.070)       (0.112)
                 Free in Wave 1                                    -0.075        -0.207**          -0.076        -0.369*           -0.110        -0.191            -0.023        -0.046             0.038         0.106
                                                                   (0.046)       (0.091)           (0.048)        (0.196)          (0.084)       (0.125)           (0.065)       (0.073)           (0.068)       (0.145)
                 Free*NGO                                           0.012         0.102             0.055         0.339            -0.010        -0.029            -0.019        -0.002            -0.070        -0.115
                                                                   (0.049)       (0.099)           (0.056)       (0.234)           (0.084)       (0.131)           (0.073)       (0.090)           (0.078)       (0.135)
                 Free distribution of any drug                      0.035         0.070             0.026         0.198             0.028         0.005             0.057         0.048             0.012        -0.018
                   in past three months                            (0.042)       (0.080)           (0.045)       (0.196)           (0.074)       (0.119)           (0.064)       (0.072)           (0.073)       (0.113)
                 Prior free distribution*Free in Wave 1            -0.054        -0.020            -0.082        -0.099            -0.020         0.049            -0.063        -0.031             0.001         -0.060
                                                                   (0.050)       (0.101)           (0.054)       (0.231)           (0.085)       (0.132)           (0.075)       (0.091)           (0.081)       (0.146)
                 Prior free distribution*NGO                        0.017        -0.003            -0.035        -0.089             0.019        -0.023             0.059         0.079            -0.065         -0.004
                                                                   (0.048)       (0.096)           (0.056)       (0.227)           (0.083)       (0.130)           (0.075)       (0.093)           (0.081)       (0.145)
                 Constant                                           0.844***      1.769***          0.931***      1.998***          0.483***      0.678***          0.201**       0.197**           0.545***      0.647***
                                                                   (0.058)       (0.118)           (0.069)       (0.220)           (0.100)       (0.158)           (0.079)       (0.087)           (0.093)       (0.139)

                 Observations                                       2150           2150               687           687               786           786               677           677               737           737
                 Test of equality of Free coefficient w.r.t.
                  Panadol                                           0.198         0.268             N/A           N/A               0.930         0.131             0.296         0.017             0.003         0.001
                  Elyzole                                           0.000         0.000             0.000         0.000             N/A           N/A               0.000         0.000             0.000         0.000
                  Zinkid                                            0.119         0.012             0.000         0.000             0.930         0.131             N/A           N/A               0.003         0.001

                 Mean of NGO*Sale                                   0.555         0.845             0.866         1.720             0.521         0.688             0.276         0.312             0.571         0.714
                 Mean of For-Profit*Free                            0.480         0.729             0.709         1.363             0.379         0.495             0.233         0.240             0.566         0.762

                 p-value of Free = 0                                0.107         0.025             0.117         0.062             0.190         0.129             0.729         0.533             0.577         0.466
                 p-value of Free + Free*NGO = 0                     0.091         0.200             0.675         0.878             0.067         0.036             0.481         0.496             0.645         0.935


               The generic names for all four drugs are: paracetamol for Panadol, albendazole for Elyzole, zinc for Zinkid, and sodium dichloroisocyanurate for Aquasafe. The "quantity" dependent variable is the
               number of units (defined as doses) received or purchased. Respondents in the Free group were offered one unit, respondents in the Sale group were able to purchase up to five units. Pooled
               regression includes product-specific intercepts and only those households offered the same product in both waves. Village assignment to treatment was block randomized according to two
               variables. The first, price environment, included information about pricing and drug availability with three possible categories: (1) no drug outlets or none of our drugs; (2) no prices above the
               median or distributed for free; and (3) at least one price above the median. The second, remoteness, also had three categories: (1) easy to travel and close to health center; (2) difficult travel or far
               from health center; and (3) difficult travel and far from health center. All regressions include controls for stratification cell. Standard errors clustered by village in parentheses. * Denotes significance
               at the 10-percent level; ** at the 5-percent level; and *** at the 1-percent level.
