                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       CULTURE: PERSISTENCE AND EVOLUTION

                                      Francesco Giavazzi
                                         Ivan Petkov
                                      Fabio Schiantarelli

                                      Working Paper 20174
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w20174


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2014




We would like to thank Alberto Alesina, Alberto Bisin, Rossella Greco, Luigi Guiso, Claudia
Olivetti, John Seater, Andrei Shleifer, Guido Tabellini and participants to the BC Macro Lunch
and the NBER Political Economy Program Spring 2014 Meeting, in particular Paola Giuliano, for
very useful comments and suggestions. We also thank Julia Schiantarelli for providing inspiration
for this paper through her Junior Thesis at Newton North High School, and Hayley Huffman.
Finally, we gratefully acknowledge the support of the Italian Ministry for Universities, PRIN
grant 2010TBXAXB008. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2014 by Francesco Giavazzi, Ivan Petkov, and Fabio Schiantarelli. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Culture: Persistence and Evolution
Francesco Giavazzi, Ivan Petkov, and Fabio Schiantarelli
NBER Working Paper No. 20174
May 2014, Revised August 2016
JEL No. A13,F22,J00,J61,Z1

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper documents the speed of evolution (or lack thereof) of a range of values and beliefs of
different generations of US immigrants, and interprets the evidence in the light of a model of
socialization and identity choice. Convergence to the norm differs greatly across cultural
attitudes. Moreover, results obtained studying higher generation immigrants differ from those
found when the analysis is limited to the second generation and imply a lesser degree of
persistence than previously thought. Persistence is also culture specific, in the sense that the
country of origin of one's ancestors matters for the pattern of generational convergence.


Francesco Giavazzi                              Fabio Schiantarelli
Universita' Bocconi and IGIER                   Department of Economics
Via Guglielmo Röntgen, 1                        Boston College
Milan 20136                                     140 Commonwealth Avenue
ITALY                                           Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
and NBER                                        and IZA
francesco.giavazzi@unibocconi.it                schianta@bc.edu

Ivan Petkov
Boston College
Department of Economics
140 Commonwealth Avenue
Chestnut Hill, MA 02160
petkovi@bc.edu
1       Introduction and Motivation
Learning how a person’s values and beliefs are formed and transmitted from one generation
to the next is the first step towards understanding the more general problem of how persistent
a society’s values and beliefs are – an issue on which there is abundant disagreement. Some
contributions argue that values and beliefs are deeply rooted in the country or ethnic group
to which a person belongs — being related for example to history or geography — and
evolve slowly over time.1 Others, instead, suggest that cultural attitudes can change rather
quickly in response to changes in economic incentives and opportunities, in technology, and
in institutions.2 Both views of culture (slow versus fast moving) have truth in them, in the
sense that while some cultural traits certainly go back to the distant past and affect today’s
economic and institutional outcomes, it is also true that many values and beliefs evolve in
response to changes in technology, economic environment, and in political institutions.
    An important distinction in understanding the process through which a person’s values and
beliefs are formed is that between “vertical” and “horizontal” transmission. Inside the family,
parents shape their children’s preferences balancing the desire to share common values with
them, with the concern for teaching traits that will make it easier for their children to function
in the social environment in which they will live: this is vertical transmission. But children
are also exposed to the world outside the family and thus are subject to a process of social
imitation and learning external to the family: this is horizontal transmission.3 Two different
models of cultural transmission are thus at work, as in the models of evolutionary biology4 .
Vertical transmission, like genetic inheritance, tends to be relatively more conservative, giving
rise to slow evolution of culture; horizontal transmission, as in an epidemic, may result in a
rapid change in the number of people who adopt a new cultural characteristic particularly if
it is attractive to the receiver. This can happen, not in historic time, but in the space of a
few generations.
    Thinking about these issues, immigrants jump out as an ideal group to study. The incen-
tives that give rise to vertical transmission could be particularly strong among immigrants, as
early-generations immigrants may want their children to share some of the values that they,
or their own parents, brought with them from their country of origin. But some of these
inherited values may be at odds with the culture of the new country in which they are living,
    1
     See Putnam (1993), Guiso, Sapienza and Zingales (2006, 2008, 2013), Tabellini (2008a, 2008b, 2010),
Alesina, Giuliano and Nunn (2013), Durante (2009), Roland (2004) and Alesina and Giuliano (2015) for a
recent review.
   2
     See Gruber and Hungerman (2008), Alesina and Fuchs-Schuendeln (2007), Di Tella, Galiani and Schar-
grodsky (2007), Giuliano and Spilimbergo (2014), Fernandez (2011), Fehr (2009), and Bowles (1998).
   3
     The transmission that occurs from a member of the previous generation who is external to the family to a
member of the present generation is often called oblique. We consider it as a part of horizontal transmission.
   4
     See Cavalli-Sforza (1981) and (2001, ch.6), Boyd and Richerson (1985, 2005).


                                                      2
possibly hindering productive exchange with other groups, and may be modified by social
interactions in the new environment: horizontal transmission could thus also be particularly
strong among immigrants.
    In this paper we investigate the speed of evolution of a wide range of cultural attitudes
for different generations of immigrants to the United States. We look at a variety of atti-
tudes, rather than a single one because we surmise there could be substantial heterogeneity
across cultural traits and immigrants’ origins in the speed with which attitudes evolve across
generations. We study the transmission of attitudes through four generations (a century)
because it is possible that some attitudes may appear to be quite persistent within a couple
of generations but change significantly by the fourth generation. We use data from the Gen-
eral Social Survey (GSS) to analyze the evolution of cultural attitudes about religion, family,
gender, sexuality, cooperation, redistribution, etc., distinguishing between first, second, third
and fourth (or higher) generations of British, Irish, German, Italian, Polish , Scandinavian
and Mexican immigrants to the United States. The focus on these groups is largely imposed
on us by the availability of sufficient data for multiple generations distinguished by country
of origin. We use the data contained in 21 waves (the exact number varies across attitudes)
of the GSS survey collected between the end of the 1970’s and 2014. Although the GSS is
far from being perfect, it is the only data source that allows a systematic investigation of the
evolution of cultural values for multiple generations, multiple countries of origin and multiple
traits.
    Immigrants provide a particularly useful laboratory for the study of the evolution of values
and beliefs because, as mentioned above, their cultural attitudes are likely to bear the mark
of the country from which they, their parents or their grandparents emigrated.5 However,
they are also influenced by their exposure to US society and its social, political, and economic
institutions, often very different from those of the country of origin. They thus provide an
interesting quasi-experiment for the effect on inherited cultural attitudes of a change in the
economic and social environment. The conditions under which this leads to integration of
immigrants or to the emergence of immigration clusters in which separate cultural traits
persist has been debated in the theoretical and empirical literature.6
    In order to provide some structure in discussing the results, we develop a simple model of
   5
     See Fernandez (2008).
   6
     See the seminal paper by Lazear (1999) on the incentives to and conditions for integration in heterogeneous
populations and the inter-temporal extension in Konya (2005). Bisin and Verdier (2000), (2001) provide
conditions under which heterogeneity in cultural values may be a stable equilibrium in an optimizing model
of cultural transmission under imperfect parental empathy. See also Bisin, Topa and Verdier (2004), Tabellini
(2008b), and Bisin and Verdier (2010) for a review. See also Guiso, Sapienza and Zingales (2008) for a model
of transmission of beliefs, Fernandez (2013) for a model of beliefs formation, and Doepke and Zilibotti (2008)
for a model of endogenous preference formation.



                                                       3
socialization and identity choice. The model builds on the contributions by Bisin and Verdier
(2001) on the choice of socialization by parents, and on Lazear (1999) and Konya (2005)
for a child’s choice of her cultural identity. Parents derive utility form the child retaining
their original cultural trait, but also consider the possibility that this may hinder the child’s
ability to interact productively with the majority. The child plays an active role in the model
and chooses her identity weighing the expected transaction gains from assimilation and a
switching cost that partly depends upon the parents’ socialization effort, and which also
contains a component that is randomly distributed across the population. Parents choose the
optimal level of socialization taking into account the child’s optimization problem, knowing
the distribution of the switching cost, but not the particular realization for their child. The
model yields two possible equilibria: one with complete assimilation and another with the
minority group not assimilating. The occurrence or not of assimilation, and its speed when
it happens, depend upon a set of parameters that are likely to vary across different cultural
traits and across different countries of origin, such as the child’s net transaction gains and the
switching costs from assimilating, the utility benefit to the parents from the child maintaining
the original trait, together with the costs of the socialization effort, and, finally, the discount
factor parents apply to the child’s utility.
    In studying how a person’s values and beliefs are formed and transmitted from one gener-
ation to the next, and whether or not they converge, we face a number of empirical challenges.
First and foremost, immigrants, even from the same country of origin, differ, depending on
when the first generation of the “dynasty” they belong to arrived in the US. Irish immi-
grants who arrived in the 1890s, for example, are clearly different, in terms of the values
they brought with them, from post World War II first generation Irish immigrants. One
has to account for this in empirical work, in order to separate convergence of values across
generations of immigrants from convergence of values over time across countries of origin. We
address this problem studying the transmission of values and beliefs within a single dynasty,
specifically the one that starts with first generation immigrants born at the end of the 19th
century/beginning of the 20th century. We then follow the cohort of the children of this
generation, and the cohorts of their grand children and of their grand-grand children.
    A second empirical challenge is that, once one allows for a general model which includes
generation effects that vary across cohorts for each country, one is left with relatively small
cell sizes for the first generation, particularly for some countries. We will address this problem
at the end of Section 4, yet one must recognize that the GSS is the only dataset contain-
ing information on a range of cultural attitudes for several countries of origin and multiple
generations of immigrants within a dynasty.7
  7
      One may wonder whether US Census or CPS data could be used to investigate the convergence of attitudes


                                                      4
    We are certainly not the first ones to analyze these issues8 . However, most existing con-
tributions focus on the persistence of cultural traits for second generation immigrants and on
their effect on economic and social outcomes. For instance, Giuliano (2007) presents evidence
that cultural heritage is important for living arrangements, Fernandez (2007) for female labor
force participation, and Fernandez and Fogli (2009) for female labor force participation and
fertility outcomes, all using US census data. Fernandez and Fogli (2006), using the GSS,
finds results that are also supportive of an effect of the culture of the country of ancestry
on fertility outcomes for US immigrants, although no distinction is made between second
and higher generation immigrants. Guiso, Sapienza and Zingales (2006), using the GSS, find
evidence suggesting that the trust of US immigrants (not distinguished according to the gen-
eration they belong to) strongly depends upon the country of origin. Exceptions, in the sense
that they use generations beyond the second, are Antecol (2000) – who finds that culture
matters for the gender gap in labor force participation, for both the first, second and higher
generations of US immigrants, although less for the latter – and Borjas (1992) who shows
that ethnic capital (measured as average ethnic-specific education, professional achievement
or wages) has a greater effect on children’s education, occupation and wages for both the
second and the third generation, although the effect tends to be higher for the second. Algan
and Cahuc (2010) show that inherited trust of descendants of immigrants in the US is signif-
icantly associated with the level of trust in the country of origin. This results holds even if
one limits the analysis to fourth generation immigrants.9
    The paper has three main findings. Our first result is that time since the original im-
migration of the ancestors matters: results obtained studying higher generation immigrants
differ from those obtained limiting the analysis to the second generation. Thus, finding that
the attitudes of second generation immigrants have not converged yet and still closely reflect
over multiple generations. The answer is unfortunately no. When using these data sets one could think , for
instance, of focusing on the effect of the country of origin on female labor force participation (an outcome of
cultural attitudes about gender roles, in addition to other factors). In the Census or the CPS, however, one
can identify, at best, only the birthplace of the respondent and of her parents (available in the Census only
up to 1970 and in the CPS from 1971 to 1975). This gives us information on the country of origin of the
first and second generation immigrants. In order to identify the birthplace of the ancestors of third or higher
generation immigrants, one must rely on self reported ancestry (available in the Census since 1980 and in the
CPS since 1994). Note that the periods for which ancestry information is available together with information
on the respondent’s and her parents’ birthplace are not overlapping, making an investigation of convergence
across multiple generations (first, second, third and beyond) not possible even for this single outcome.
    8
      Earlier contributions in the sociological literature use early waves of the GSS, and focus on the assimilation
process of specific groups, such as Italian immigrants in Greeley (1974, ch.4) and Alba (1985, ch.6). The
results in Greeley are based on a sample of males only. Both studies emphasize the change, as opposed to the
persistence of cultural attitudes, but do not distinguish among different generations.
    9
      Rice and Feldman (1997) distinguish the level of civic attitudes for Italian immigrants on the basis of the
number of grandparents born in the US and reach the surprising conclusion that the descendants of earlier
immigrants are more likely to give less civic responses than the descendants of later immigrants.



                                                         5
those of the country of origin, does not imply per se that attitudes are very persistent. For in-
stance, we find that the beliefs that shape trust of second generation immigrant towards other
members of society remain different from the prevailing US norm and still bear strongly the
mark of the country of origin. However, such differences become smaller when one considers
fourth or higher-generation immigrants.
    Second, we provide evidence of heterogeneity across cultural traits in the speed with which
they evolve across generations and the degree to which converge to the prevailing norm. We
find, for instance, that attitudes towards cooperation (the trustworthiness, helpfulness and
fairness of others) display the highest degree of convergence by the fourth generation, as
successive generations adapt to the norms of the new society in which they live. Attitudes
towards politics and the role of government, sexual morality and abortion exhibit the lowest
degree of convergence, followed by religious attitudes. Attitudes towards gender roles occupy
an intermediate position, with attitudes towards the role of women in the labor market
converging faster than those related to the role of women in politics. Family attitudes also
display on average an intermediate level of convergence, but there is substantial heterogeneity
among them.
    Many of these results are largely consistent with one prediction of our simple model: faster
convergence is observed for attitudes that are likely to generate larger transaction gains from
assimilation, such as attitudes towards cooperation. Convergence is also slower for attitudes
for which the utility gain to the parents from the child retaining the original trait (or the cost
for the child to abandon them) is likely to be higher, such as some moral and religious values
and political orientation .
    Third, we find that persistence is “culture-specific” in the sense that the country from
which one’s ancestors came from matters in defining the pattern of integration (or lack thereof)
with respect to the entire set of cultural traits. Moreover, the strength of the family in each
country of ancestry and the degree of difficulty in learning English are (negatively) correlated
with the fraction of attitudes for which we observe faster convergence. These results too could
be interpreted in the light of our model: switching costs, for instance, are likely to be related
to language proximity and to the strength of family ties. However, given the small number
of countries in our sample, this results must be taken with a grain of salt.
    The plan of the paper is as follows. In Section 2 we illustrate a simple model of parents’
socialization and children’s identity choice. In Section 3 we discuss how we measure cultural
attitudes in the GSS, how we define generations and ethnic origin and which countries (or
groups of countries) we use in our analysis. In Section 4 we describe how we recover the
country of origin effect for different generations, dynasties and time periods, while in Section
5 we illustrate our measure of cultural “convergence”. In Section 6 we present and discuss our


                                                6
main empirical results. Section 7 contains several robustness checks and extensions. Section
8 concludes.


2       Why Persistence Can Differ Among Cultural Traits
        and Countries of Origin : A Model of Cultural Trans-
        mission
This section contains a simple model that will help interpret our main empirical findings,
namely that different cultural traits may converge at varying speed, or not converge at all.
Moreover, the dynamics of cultural convergence may differ across cultures i.e. in terms of our
empirical work, across countries of origin. The model is based on the idea that a person’s traits
evolve through two parallel processes: vertical transmission within the family and horizontal
transmission associated with social interactions outside the family. The model draws on the
vast literature carefully reviewed in Bisin and Verdier (2010).10
    The model is set up as follows. Assume there is one cultural trait in the population
that can take two values: one associated with the minority, denoted by m and the other
associated with the majority, denoted by M . Think of the two traits as representing, for
instance, the attitude towards pre-marital sex, one of the attitudes whose evolution we study
in our empirical analysis. Recent immigrants (the minority) might still carry their cultural
attitudes of the country of origin, which could be quite different from those of the majority
in the United States, the new social environment in which they live.
    We normalize the population to 1 and assume that the initial size of the minority is q.
Consider a second-generation immigrant belonging to the minority group. Personal attitudes
are shaped by two forces: “vertical” transmission within the family and “horizontal” trans-
mission from social interactions outside the family. Traits are first transmitted inside the
family from parents to their children. As children interact with people outside the family,
they may realize that the traits acquired from their parents are not ideal (in a sense that we
shall make precise in a moment) for social interactions outside the family. For instance, if the
norm in society (the norm of the majority) is that young people live together before deciding
whether or not to get married, excluding pre-marital sex will make it more difficult for the
child to find a partner and get married. However, breaking with a more traditional view of
sexual morality may also generate a costly conflict with one’s family, the more so the greater
the parents’ effort to educate the child.
    We shall proceed in three steps. First we study the child’s identity choice problem: what
 10
      See also Pichler (2010), Vaughan (2013), and Panebianco (2014).


                                                     7
determines her decision whether or not to “assimilate”, that is to abandon the minority trait
and acquire the majority trait.11 Building on Lazear (1999) and Konya (2005), we assume
that switching from the old to the new trait allows a minority member to interact more
productively with the majority. However, it also generates a transaction cost in dealing with
members of the minority. Moreover, abandoning the original family trait implies a utility
cost for the child that, in part, depends upon the effort the parents have put in socializing
her. Then we shall go back and analyze the parent’s socialization problem: parents prefer
children with their own cultural trait and hence educate them to this trait, as in Bisin and
Verdier (2001). The parent however also “empathizes” with her child, in the sense that she
understands that the trait she is trying to transmit may hinder the child’s opportunities in
the new society. Her educational decision will balance these two incentives.
    To keep the problem simple, we assume that each individual lives two periods. In the
first period she is socialized to the family’s values by her parents and interacts with the
other young people in society. In the second period she becomes the single parent of a child
and decides how much effort to put in socializing the child to her own trait – for instance
spending time teaching her ancestors’ values. Finally, having analyzed the child’s decision
whether or not to assimilate, given the education effort optimally chosen by her parent, we
shall study how the size of the minority evolves over time, given that the cost of assimilation
is distributed randomly in the population.
    We show that there are two possible equilibria: one in which no child assimilates and
the size of the minority group remains constant at the initial level, and one in which instead
children assimilate and the minority trait eventually disappears from society. Which of these
two equilibria occurs and the speed of convergence to the full assimilation equilibrium depend
upon a set of parameters that capture the cost and benefits of assimilation for the child and
of the socialization effort for the parent, and that are likely to vary across cultural traits, and
also across countries of origin.


2.1     The Child’s Identity Choice Problem
The child’s problem is a simple variant of Lazear (1999)12 : V i , (i = m or M ) denotes the
surplus produced by a social interaction between two persons both belonging to the same
group — minority or majority. We assume that the two surpluses are identical (V m = V M =
V ), a simplifying assumption which is irrelevant for our results. The interaction between two
persons with different cultural traits implies a loss. More specifically, V (1−θM ) is the surplus
  11
     See also the seminal paper on identity choice by Akerlof and Kranton (2000), as well as Bisin, Pattachini,
Verdier, and Zenou (2011).
  12
     See Konya (2005) for a dynamic extension.


                                                      8
produced by a social interaction between a person, whose parents belong to the minority and
who has not assimilated, with another person belonging to the majority, with 0 < θM < 1.
V (1 − θm ) is the surplus of the interaction between a person whose parents belong to the
minority and who has acquired the majority trait, with another person from the minority,
with 0 < θm < 1. We will assume that θM > θm because it is plausible that the child of
a minority parent retains some ability to interact with members of the minority even if she
assimilates. There is no loss in the transaction when two people have the same trait, that is
in this case the surplus is V . The proportion of the minority group in the population is q < 21
(we omit the time subscript here to keep the notation light). d(τ, zi ) is the utility cost for a
member of the minority for abandoning the parent’s trait: it is increasing with the parent’s
socialization effort τ and also includes an additive person specific stochastic component zi
that can be interpreted as the cost of learning the new (majority) trait for individual i, so
                                        0
that d(τ, zi ) = d(τ ) + zi , with d(τ ) > 0. We assume zi to be distributed randomly in the
population according to the distribution function G(.). The child knows zi , while the parent
does not observe it, but knows its distribution G(.).
    The child meets at random individuals from the minority or majority groups with prob-
ability q and 1 − q respectively. Following Lazear (1999) we assume that the child decides
whether or not to assimilate at the beginning of the period, knowing the probability of meet-
ing a minority or a majority member, but before having actually met them. Her expected
utility is therefore equal to qV + (1 − q)(1 − θM )V when the child does not assimilate, and
to q(1 − θm )V + (1 − q)V − d(τ ) − zi when she assimilates. Children are myopic, in the sense
that they do not look ahead to when they will become parents. A child i assimilates if the
expected gain from assimilation is higher than the expected gain from non-assimilation:

                              (1 − q)V θM − qθm V − d(τ ) − zi ≥ 0                             (1)

Defining the cumulative density of zi , with support [z, z], the proportion of minority individ-
uals that assimilate after a draw of zi is given by:

                                G (1 − q)V θM − qθm V − d(τ )
                                                             
                                                                                               (2)

If (1 − q)V θM − qθm V − d(τ ) > z the child will always decide to assimilate (G (.) = 1).
If (1 − q)V θM − qθm V − d(τ ) < z the child will never assimilate (G (.) = 0). When z ≤
(1 − q)V θM − qθm V − d(τ ) ≤ z , the child will assimilate with some probability. Assume for
simplicity that zi is uniformly distributed on [z, z]. In this case the probability of assimilation




                                                9
and the proportion of minority individuals who assimilate is given by:
                                            ˆ   (1−q)V θ M −qθ m V −d(τ )
                                                                             1       (1 − q)V θM − qθm V − d(τ )
 P rob zi ≤ (1 − q)V θM − qθm V − d(τ ) =
                                       
                                                                                dt =
                                            z                               z−z                 z−z
                                                                                                               (3)




2.2    The Parent’s Socialization Problem
Each family is a single-parent family and produces only one child. As in Bisin and Verdier
(2001) the parent can socialize the child at a cost c(τ ), increasing in τ , and she derives utility
ϕ(τ ) if the child maintains the family trait, which occurs with a probability she can affect
through her educational effort. The parent also cares about her child’s utility and how it
is affected by her actions that contribute to determining, through d(τ ), the probability of
assimilation, and, hence, how productively the child will relate with the majority (and the
minority). The extent of empathy is described by β: for β = 0 the parent doesn’t care
about the child’s utility and only cares about her wish that the child does not assimilate. We
abstract from all components of the parent’s utility that do not depend upon the costs and
benefits of educating the child. Finally we also assume that the parent only cares about her
immediate descendants.
    Thus the parent maximizes her expected utility w(τ ) given by:

          w(τ ) = −c(τ ) + ϕ(τ )P rob(no child assimilation) +
                  +βP rob(no child assimilation) qV + (1 − q)V (1 − θM )
                                                                       
                                                                                                              (4)
                     +βP rob(child assimilation ) [q(1 − θm )V + (1 − q)V − d(τ )] −
                        ˆ (1−q)θM V −qθm V −d(τ )
                                                   zi
                     −β                               dzi
                         z                        z−z

Let us assume that c(τ ) = 2c τ 2 , ϕ(τ ) = ϕ0 , and d(τ ) = dτ .13 The parent’s optimal socializa-
tion effort is determined by the following first order condition:

                                    (1 − q)θM V − qθm − dτ − z   ϕ0 d
                          cτ + βd                              =                                              (5)
                                               z−z               z−z

The interpretation is simple: the left hand side is the marginal cost to the parent from
varying τ , composed by the marginal direct socialization/education cost and by the expected
change in the assimilation cost for the child, discounted by β (the parent’s imperfect empathy
  13
   We could allow ϕ(τ ) to equal ϕ0 + ϕ1 τ with ϕ1 > 0, but this would complicate the algebra without
improving the intuition.



                                                       10
parameter); the right hand side is the change in the expected direct benefit for the parent
from non-assimilation. Solving for the optimal level of τ , τ ∗ , one obtains:

                                   ϕ0 − β[(1 − q)θM V − qθm V − z]
                            τ∗ =               c(z−z)
                                                                                              (6)
                                                  d
                                                        − βd

                                           2             βd    2
For concavity of the objective function ∂∂τw2 = −c + z−z     < 0 and hence the denominator in
(6) is positive. We assume that ϕ0 − β[(1 − q)θ V − qθm − z] > 0 to guarantee that the
                                                     M

parent’s effort is non negative. The comparative static for τ ∗ is intuitive. The parent’s effort
is increasing in ϕ0 , her benefit if the child does not assimilate. It is instead decreasing in c,
the cost of the effort put into educating the child. It is also increasing in θM , the penalty for
the descendant of a minority parent in interacting with members of the majority, if she holds
on to the family trait, and decreasing in θm , the penalty for the descendant of a minority
parent in interacting with members of the minority, if she adopts the majority trait. In the
former case the benefit of assimilating for the child increases, while in the latter it decreases.
A strong educational effort by the parent is thus a hindrance for the child, the more so the
larger is θM and the smaller is θm . The empathic parent internalizes this and reduces her
socialization effort the larger is θM and increases it the smaller is θm .
    For given values of θM and θm , an increase in q has a positive effect on the parent’s
socialization effort because it decreases the probability of meeting a member of the major-
ity, diminishing the expected penalty for descendants of minority parents associated with
interacting with the majority (when not assimilated) and increases the cost of interacting
with members of the minority (when assimilated). Note that our model does not display the
“cultural substitutability property” of Bisin and Verdier (2001), whereby a minority parent
makes a greater effort at socialization when q is small.
    The effect on the parent’s socialization effort of an increase in the total surplus from
transactions is negative, as we have assumed that q < 12 and θM > θm , so that the transaction
net gains from assimilation are positive and the (partly) empathic parent takes this into
account, therefore reducing τ ∗ . The effect of the parameter d, that captures the cost for the
child of assimilating, and that depends on the parent’s educational effort, is positive: the
higher is d , the more effective is the socialization technology and this induces the parent to
use it more intensely (increasing her effort). The effect of the discount factor β is ambiguous
and the reason is simple: if β increases, it means that the parent gives more weight both the
the child’s net transaction benefits of assimilation ((1 − q)θM V − qθm ) and to the switching
cost of assimilation (dτ ). The first effect leads the partly emphatic parent to decrease τ ∗ ,
so that the child can reap those benefits; the second leads to an increase in τ ∗ . Hence the
effect of β is ambiguous. Finally, for a given spread of the distribution, z − z, a decrease in


                                                11
z, which generates a leftward shift of the distribution, decreasing its mean, but keeping the
variance constant, is associated to a decrease in τ ∗14 : again, this is because the probability of
assimilation increases, which increases the penalty for the child of dropping the family trait,
a penalty that is greater the larger the parent’s educational effort. Given z, an increase in
z − z has the opposite effect by a similar logic.


2.3     Assimilation and Non-Assimilation Equilibria and Dynamics
Let us assume that z ≤ (1−q(0))θM V −q(0)θm V −dτ ∗ ≤ z , where q(0) is the initial proportion
of the minority group in the population, so that there is an incentive to assimilate for at least
some members of the minority. In this case the probability of assimilation evaluated at the
optimal parent’s effort, τ ∗ , is15 :
                                                                                               !!
                               M        m              ϕ0 − β[(1 − qt )θM V − qt θm − z]
                 G (1 − qt )θ V − qθ V − d                           c(z−z)
                                                                                                        (7)
                                                                        d     − βd

 This is also the proportion of minority members in the population that assimilate. It is easy
to see that this proportion is unambiguously increasing in V and θM , and decreasing in d,
θm and q. This is the result of the direct effect of these parameters on G (.) and their effect
through τ ∗ . The effect of the remaining parameters mimics the effect on τ ∗ with the opposite
sign: the proportion of minority members that assimilates, increases in c and decreases in ϕ0 ;
the effect of the discount factor β is again ambiguous; for a given spread of the distribution,
z − z, a decrease in z, which generates a leftward shift of the distribution, decreasing its
mean, but keeping the variance constant, is associated with an increase in G(.); given z , an
increase in z − z , instead, decreases G(.).
    The decrease in the proportion of the minority between t+1 and t , −(qt+1 −qt ) equals the
proportion of the minority that assimilates between these two dates G (1 − qt )θM V − qt θm V − dτt∗ ,
                                                                                                    

times the size of the minority at t, qt 16 :

                           qt+1 − qt = − G (1 − qt )θM V − qt θm V − dτt∗ qt
                                                                         
                                                                                                        (8)
                                            (1 − qt   )θM V     θm V
                                                              − qt       −    dτt∗   −z
                                     =−                                                   qt
                                                              z−z

 with τt∗ defined in (6). Equation (8) represents the dynamics of the system when z ≤

      Recall that the mean of the uniform distribution is t̄+2 t , while the variance is (t̄−12t) .
                                                                                                 2
  14
   15
      If (1 − q(0))V θM − q(0)θm V − dτ ∗ > t̄ , the model would generate an uninteresting and implausible
dynamics with instantaneous full assimilation.
   16
      Assuming that no member of the majority acquires the minority trait is equivalent to assuming that
qθm,M V − (1 − q)θM,M V − dM τ M < tM , where the superscript M (second superscript for the θ parameter)
denotes the parameters for the majority. In other terms, for all members of the majority, the gain from more
efficient transactions is exceeded by the combined costs of acquiring the minority trait.


                                                        12
(1 − qt )θM V − qt θm V − dτt∗ ≤ z . When (1 − qt )θM V − qθtm V − dτ ∗ ≤ z nobody assimilates,
G(.) = 0 and qt+1 − qt = 0. This observation allows us to determine the possible steady state
equilibria (where qt+1 − qt = 0) and their stability properties. Consider first the value of qt ,
q̃, such that (1 − q̃)θM V − q̃θm V − dτ ∗ = z so that there is no gain from assimilation. For
greater (smaller) values of q the net gain is negative (positive). It is easy to show that (see
Appendix 2, available online, for details on the dynamics and on the steady-state equilibria):

                                                          ϕ0 d2
                                                θM V −   c(z−z)
                                                                −   z
                                         q̃ =                                                           (9)
                                                  θM V   + θm V

Moreover, 0 < q̃ < 1. If qe < q0 < 12 , then the initial proportion of the minority is an
equilibrium because there is no net gain from assimilation. Recall that the equation of motion
assumes that no member of the majority adopts the minority trait, which is reasonable
if indeed we are dealing with a minority (q0 < 12 ). If q0 < Min( 21 , q̃), the steady state
equilibrium implies full integration (q = 0). The full integration equilibrium is locally stable
with the minority in this case gradually shrinking in size. All this is summarized in Figure
1a and Figure 1b, where the steady state(s) and dynamics of the system are represented.
The phase line is upward-sloping and convex and it intersects the 45 degree line at 0 and
q̃. In Figure 1a we present the phase diagram for the case in which qe < 21 , so that two
types of equilibria exist, one with full integration and one with no integration (associated, for
instance, with an initial size of the minority equal to q0a and q0na respectively). In Figure 1b,
we present the case in which q̃ ≥ 12 so that only the full integration equilibrium exists. Finally,
it is easy to see that q̃ increases and hence the range of initial values of q0 for which the full
assimilation equilibrium occurs becomes larger with the loss for a non assimilated person in
her dealing with the majority, θM , with the size of the total surplus from the transaction, V ,
with the cost to the parents for the socialization effort, c, with an increase in z − z for a given
z (so that both its mean and variance increase). q̃ instead decreases with the penalty for an
assimilated child of a minority parent from dealing with members of the minority , θm , with
the effectiveness of the socialization technology, d, with the direct benefit to the parent of the
child maintaining the original trait, ϕ0 , and with a shift to the right of the distribution of zi
(so that the mean increases for a given spread of the distribution). Note that the parent’s
discount factor, β, has no effect on q̃. This is because at q = q̃, the probability of assimilation
is zero, so the second term on the left hand side of the first order condition for τ , equation
(5), is zero, i.e. there is no expected cost for the parent from the child assimilating. As a
result, at q = q̃, β does not matter for τ ∗ and, hence, for q̃.17
  17
     In the model the decision whether or not to assimilate is along a single dimension, that is a single
attitude. The results however directly extend to the contemporaneous choice of more than one trait, provided



                                                    13
    Summarizing, our simple model can help us think about the different speed of convergence
of various attitudes, as they are shaped by vertical and horizontal transmission. Cultural
attitudes differ in the advantage that assimilation confers to the child in transacting with
the majority and in the costs that assimilation implies for her, partly shaped by the parent’s
socialization effort. They also differ in the utility gain they imply for the parent when a
child retains the minority cultural trait and in the cost that the parent’s educational effort
entails. For attitudes related to cooperation, such as trust and views of other being helpful
and fair, there are likely to be large transaction gains for the child from assimilating. Trust,
for instance, plays an important role in economic and social interactions and one can easily
imagine, how, for instance, it may pay for an individual to trust others, even if starting from
a relatively low trust level. Indeed, in the context of repeated interactions, the gain from
defecting from the norm is likely to be short lived. For other traits, such as such as those
related to moral values concerning abortion or sexuality, religious attitudes, general political
views, and some family or gender attitudes, the transaction payoff from converging to the
majority trait is likely to be smaller. Moreover, for such attitudes there may be large gains
for the parents if the child maintains the minority trait, or a large cost for the child if she
abandons her family’s traditional values and beliefs. The model also suggests that patterns of
integration may differ depending on the country of origin of each immigrant group because of
cross country variation, for each cultural attitude, in the costs and benefits of integration. For
instance, cross country variation in the strength of family ties may be reflected in differences
in the perceived benefit for the parents from the child not dropping the trait transmitted
within the family. Similarly, the cost for the child of acquiring a new trait may differ across
countries. We will use these insights in discussing the empirical evidence on the heterogeneity
across attitudes in the speed of convergence of values and beliefs of successive generations of
immigrants to the US, and how it varies across countries of origin.
we exclude interactions across attitudes. Assume there are two traits a = 1, 2, each one of them dichotomous,
as we have assumed so far. Assume that costs and benefits are additive and that there is no interaction
between the two trais, that is socialization c(τ1 ) + c(τ2 ) costs for the parents are and direct socialization
benefits are ϕ(τ1 ) + ϕ(τ2 ). Assume that switching costs are also additive for the child, d(τ1 ) + d(τ2 ), and,
to avoid multivariate distributions, that the two stochastic terms z1 and z2 are independent. Finally assume
that the net benefits associated with each attitude are θaM ∗ (1 − qa )Va − θam∗ qa Va − d(τa ) − za , a = 1, 2 again
assuming lack of interaction. In this simple case the conditions for τ1∗ and τ2∗ are identical to those we have
derived and simply need to be indexed by a = 1, 2. Of course the model would be more complicated if we
allowed for cross affects across attitudes, but this is not central to our paper and we leave this extension for
future research.




                                                         14
3      Measuring Cultural Attitudes and Defining Genera-
       tions and Country of Origin in the GSS
Our measurement of cultural attitudes is based on the General Social Survey (GSS). We use
multiple (22) waves of the GSS, starting in 1978 and ending in 2014. Each wave includes a
core set of questions that remains in the survey in each year in which it was conducted. This
core includes personal information such as age, income, region of residence and family origin,
as well as information on personal views on a variety of topics such as family values, gender
roles, religious beliefs, sexual behavior, cooperation, role of government, etc.
    One of the advantages of the GSS is that it allows us to analyze a wide variety of attitudes
over several generations of immigrants. We have selected the attitudes for which data were
available over a relatively long span of time, up to three decades (or slightly more). For ease
of interpretation we have grouped attitudes (or questions) into several broad categories.18
The list of categories, variables, and coding choices is provided in Table 1. Group A deals
with views on cooperation and social interactions. It includes questions about trustworthiness
(trust), fairness (fair) and helpfulness of others (helpful). Group B includes attitudes towards
government intervention – should the government redistribute income (eqwlth), or provide a
safety-net for the poor (helppoor ) – and overall political views (polviews). Group C surveys
different religious attitudes such as the frequency of attendance to religious services (attend ),
the frequency of personal prayer (pray), the strength of affiliation with one’s religion (reliten),
the belief in afterlife (postlife) and the approval of prayer in public schools (prayer ). Group
D includes attitudes about family and children. Questions in this group elicit views on the
degree of parental consent in teenage access to birth control (pillok ), on the restrictiveness
of divorce law (divlaw ), on the co-residence of multiple generations (aged ) – i.e. whether one
approves of children living with their parents beyond a certain age, and on the frequency
of evenings spent with relatives (socrel ). Furthermore, this group also includes views on
preferred qualities in children such as obedience (obey) and independence (thnkself ). Group
E surveys views on gender roles. Participants in the GSS are asked to express their opinion
concerning various statements describing the role of women in the labor market, in politics and
at home: should a woman work even if the husband can support her (fework )?; can working
mothers have a warm relationship with their children (fechild )?; women should take care of
running the home while men run the country (fehome); women are not suited for politics
(fepol ). Group F reports views on legalized abortion for any reason (abany) or restricted to
cases of risk for the mother’s health, defects in the fetus, or rape (abrisk ). Group G covers
  18
   For the choice of groups, we have followed one of the available codebooks for the GSS. See Muennig, Kim,
Smith, and Rosen (2011).



                                                    15
attitudes towards sexual behavior such as pre-marital sex (premarsx ) and homosexual sex
(homosex ). Group H is a residual group: it contains views on whether social mobility is the
result of hard work versus help or luck (getahead ), a belief that could not be easily classified
in any of the other groups.
    The premise of our study is that values and beliefs are formed in part as a result of one’s
upbringing, and in part through the influence of factors external to the family such as peers,
institutions, and economic circumstances. Consequently, values and beliefs depend both on
the country of origin of a person’s ancestors, as well as on her generation (to be defined below).
The country of origin is an important determinant of culture as it encodes the history of a
people, encompassing past technological, economic, institutional and cultural environments.
The generation of a person is important given that the temporal “distance” from the country
of ancestry may be associated with a dilution of the original cultural trait through longer
exposure to a different set of economic and social opportunities, to different institutions, and
cultural influences.
    We consider the evolution of attitudes over multiple generations (up to the fourth). As
a result, we are constrained by data availability to focus on immigrants to the US from a
limited number of European countries and from Mexico. We focus on countries for which we
have relatively numerous observations: Great Britain (GB), comprising England, Wales and
Scotland, Germany, (GER), Poland (POL), Ireland (IRE), Italy (ITA) and Mexico (MEX). In
addition we consider Scandinavian immigrants from Denmark, Norway, Sweden and Finland
as a single group (SCA) on the basis of a relatively common cultural background.19
    We define the generation to which an immigrant belongs following what is typically as-
sumed in this literature. We define a person to be a first-generation immigrant if he/she was
born outside of the United States. Immigrants are defined to be second-generation if they are
born in the US and at least one of their parents was born abroad, and third-generation if they
are born in the US, all of their parents are born in the US and at least two of their grandpar-
ents were born abroad. Lastly, a person is said to be of fourth-generation-or-more if he/she
is born in the US, all his/her parents are born in the US and at most one grandparent was
born abroad.20 With this definition the last category includes fourth generation immigrants
as well as people of a higher generation who still declare a specific European country of origin.
In defining the country of origin we use the answer to the question: “From what countries
or part of the world did your ancestors come? ”. If more than one country is indicated, the
respondent is asked: “Which one of these countries do you feel closer to? ”. 79% percent of
the sample can identify a main country of origin affiliation. The definition could, in principle,
  19
     For other Southern and Eastern European countries and for the French we do not have enough observations
to reliably estimate country-generation-cohort specific effects.
  20
     See Algan and Cahuc (2010).


                                                    16
be made tighter by limiting our analysis to respondents who indicate only one country. This,
however, would reduce substantially the number of observations, as only 50% percent of the
sample chooses just one country. Therefore we will not pursue this option here.


4        Recovering Country of Origin Effects for Different
         Generations within a Single Dynasty
The way an individual perceives the world is shaped by the values and beliefs of his/her
parents. The attitudes of one’s parents are, in turn, shaped by their parents. This implies
that an individual’s ancestral origin is an important factor determining his/her values and
beliefs. In order to capture the extent to which someone’s country of origin impacts his/her
attitudes, we estimate a Probit model which includes indicator variables for one’s ancestry.21
We allow the effect of ancestry to depend upon the temporal “distance” from the country
of origin. This distance is measured by whether the immigrant is first, second, third, or
fourth or higher generation. Moreover the ancestry effect will depend upon the birth cohort
of an individual, since the cultural heritage brought by immigrants and transmitted to their
descendants depends upon when they left the mother country and came to the US (we will
also assume a 25 year interval between cohorts). We allow the effect of the country of origin
to depend on generation and cohort in a multiplicative fashion, imposing as little restrictions
as possible on the data. We will use these effects to chart the evolution of attitudes within the
only complete “dynasty” we observe in our sample. More precisely, we estimate the following
Probit model:
                         XXX
        P r(yti = 1) =                 βo,g,c I(Origini =o) × I(Generationi =g) × I(Cohorti =c) + θXti
                                                                                               
                                                                                                         (10)
                         o∈O g∈G c∈C


where yti takes the value of 1 if a certain event has occurred for individual i in wave t. I( . ) are
indicator functions that take the value of 1 if the condition in the subscript is satisfied, 0 oth-
erwise. The sums are defined over three different sets: set O includes all possible countries of
origin as defined in Table 2; set G includes each of the four possible generations of immigrants;
set C includes four groups of respondents – those born in the periods 1892-1916, 1917-1941,
1942-1966 and after 1967. The set of controls includes: income, education, mother’s edu-
cation, father’s education, age, age2 , year-of-the-survey dummy, gender, number of children,
marital status, work status, religion, regional indicators, and urbanization indicators. Clearly
variables such as income and education may be related to the country of origin: immigrants
  21
       Responses to each of the GSS questions are re-coded to produce a binary outcome (see Table 1).



                                                        17
and descendants of people from different countries of origin, may, for instance, attribute dif-
ferent importance to education. Yet, we prefer to define country of origin effects net of these
factors, in an attempt to capture deeper cultural values and beliefs that go beyond personal
characteristics and circumstances.22 Consequently, the evolution of attitudes that this paper
analyzes is not explained by changes in the level of education or income of immigrants over
time. These individual controls are held constant when we compare changes of attitudes
across different immigrants. Finally, note that we include survey-year effect common to all
respondents to capture general variations of attitudes over time. Summarizing, the country-
generation effect is based on the estimated value of βo,g,c with o ∈ {1, .., 7}; g ∈ {1, .., 4};
c ∈ {1892 − 1916, 1917 − 1941, 1942 − 1966, > 1967}.
    Our sample includes responses of immigrants whose ancestors moved to the U.S. during
different periods. For example, the ancestors of some of our respondents arrived with the
large migration waves around the turn of the twentieth century, while the ancestors of others
immigrated more recently. In order to avoid mixing dynasties of immigrants that started at
different points in time, and hence brought with them different attitudes, in our empirical
work we focus on the four generations of the only full dynasty of immigrants observable in
our data – the one that starts with the first generation arriving between 1892 and 1916 and
ending with the last generation being born after 1967. The attitudes of the first generation
of this dynasty is captured by βo,1,1892−1916 , those of the second generation by βo,2,1917−1941 ,
those of the third generation by βo,3,1942−1966 , and, finally, those of the fourth generation
(or higher) by βo,4,>1967 . For some countries the GSS does not have many respondents who
are both first generation and belong to the cohort of 1892-1916. In order to have enough
observations for the first generation of each country, we assume that the first generation of
the 1892-1916 cohort and of the 1917-1941 cohort are characterized by the same coefficient
(βo,1,1892−1916 = βo,1,1917−41 ). In Table 3, Part 1 , we report, as an example, the number of
observations for each country, generation and cohort for the respondents to the question about
trust. In Part 2 of the table we summarize the number of observations available to identify
the country-generation-cohort effects for the 1892-1916 dynasty (allowing for the effects of
the first generation of the 1892-1916 and 1917-1941 cohorts to be identical)


5      Measuring Convergence in Cultural Attitudes
In this section we illustrate how we measure and assess whether or not there is convergence
in the cultural attitudes of different generations of immigrants towards the norm set by the
  22
    See also Algan and Cahuc (2007, 2010) and Giavazzi, Schiantarelli, and Serafinelli (2013). In our robust-
ness section we also experiment with a more minimalist list of controls, including only age, age squared, year
of the survey, gender, religion, regional indicators, and urbanization indicators.


                                                     18
more established and dominant groups. We start by calculating the deviation of the attitude
of a given respondent from the average attitude of the respondents considered to represent
the dominant culture. For each of the countries of origin we define

                                        βe(o,g,c) = β(o,g,c) − β(ave,4,c)                                 (11)

where βeo,g,c represents the difference of the country-origin effect, βo,g,c , from the norm (β 0 s here
denote estimated values). To capture the multi-cultural nature of the U.S., we assume that
the “norm” is represented by the weighted average of the attitudes of the fourth generation (or
higher) of British, Irish, German, Italian, Polish and Scandinavian immigrants in our sample,
βave,4,c . We calculate the appropriate weights by using information from the 2000 U.S. Census
about the ancestral composition of the non-foreign born population across different cohorts.23
In the robustness section we will experiment with different definitions of the norm.
     To examine the experience of immigrants from different origins for the dynasty starting
in the 1892-1916 period, we focus on two relationships. First, we compare βeo,1,1892−1916 to
βeo,2,1917−1941 , i.e. how the distance from the norm for members of the first generation of the
dynasty compares to the distance from the norm for members of the second generation of
the same dynasty. This relationship allows us to characterize the level of assimilation that
occurs from the first to the second generation of immigrants of the same origin. We then
compare βeo,1,1892−1916 to βeo,4,>1967 . We use this relationship to capture how the particular
attitude of descendants changes from the first generation all the way to the fourth generation
of the 1892-1916 dynasty, relative to the respective norms.24
     This methodology follows and extends the approach proposed by in Algan, Bisin, Manning,
and Verdier (2012).25 However, whereas they focus on the changes between the first and
second generation, we analyze the evolution of attitudes over multiple generations. Most
importantly, we keep the dynasty constant – only consider descendants of a “common original
immigrant”. This approach provides a rich, country of origin specific, picture of the process of
cultural transmission, which is not contaminated by changes in attitudes of successive cohorts
of immigrants.
     It is useful to characterize the various patterns of convergence or non-convergence us-
ing a graph. Assume one plots the generation-1 deviation on the horizontal axis and the
  23
      Although we can obtain the cohort specific frequency, we do not have the information to make it cohort
and generation specific.
   24
      One could also analyze the process of convergence between the first and third generation by comparing
βeo,1,1892−1916 to βeo,3,1942−1966 . We choose to focus on evolution between the first and fourth generation in
order to allow as much time as possible for attitudes to evolve further, beyond the change that occurs between
the first and second generation.
   25
      See, in particular, Figure 1.4 on p. 25.



                                                       19
generation-4 deviation on the vertical axis (i.e. βeo,1,1892−1916 and βeo,4,>1967 ). We can parti-
tion the four quadrants in regions by drawing a 45 degree line and a 135 degree line going
through the origin (see Figure 2a). Focusing on Quadrant I, with positive initial and final
deviations from the norm, points between the x-axis and the 45 degree line represent mono-
tonic convergence from above, in the sense that the deviation is larger in generation 1 than in
generation 4, while those between the line and the y-axis capture monotonic divergence from
above. Points between the (continuation of the) 45 degree line and the x-axis in Quadrant
III represent monotonic converge from below, while points between the 45 degree line and
the y-axis monotonic divergence form below. In Quadrant II, in which the difference relative
to the norm is first negative then positive, the 135 degree line separates points of divergent
leapfrogging (above it) from those representing convergent leapfrogging (below the line). Sim-
ilarly, in Quadrant IV, where the difference from the norm is first positive and then negative,
points below the (continuation of the) 135 degree line are points of divergent regression and
those above the line are points of convergent regression. This graph is useful to understand
how the pattern of convergence differs for each cultural trait and each country.
    We construct an overall index of convergence for each attitude by counting the proportion
of countries that fall in the monotonic convergence from above or below, and in the convergent
regression and convergent leapfrogging regions. In other terms we are counting, in this case,
the points outside the hourglass defined by the 45 and 135 degree lines through the origin
that represent a decrease in the absolute value of the distance from the norm going from the
1st to the 4th generation. Alternatively, we can do this for the 1st and the 2nd generation. We
define the proportion of countries within these convergent region as π45 .
    The drawback of π45 is that it may not be a strict enough criterion. In particular it does
not allow us to distinguish between slow-converging attitudes that feature country-generation
effects close to the 45 degree line (or its reflection), and fast-converging ones clustered closer
to the origin, along the y-axis. To this end, we define π22.5 as the proportion of countries
situated between the x-axis and the 22.5 degree line (or its reflection). In other terms, we are
now squeezing the hour-glass from above and count as convergent only those country-wave
observations for which the absolute value of the distance from the norm in generation 1 has
been cut at least in half by generation 4 (see Figure 2b). This is our preferred measure of
convergence. One could use a somewhat tighter or looser criterion. As a robustness exercise,
we will document in Section 7 that the ranking of attitudes obtained using the π22.5 criterion
is very similar to the one obtained when we require that the absolute value of the distance
from the norm for generation 1 is cut by a third (π30 ) or two thirds by generation 4 (π15 ).
    Note that this approach, particularly when using the π45 criterion, is related to β con-
vergence as the latter focuses on whether the slope of the regression line of βeo,4,>1967 on


                                               20
βeo,1,1892−1916 is between zero and one (so that the regression line lies in the monotonic con-
vergence region). Yet, it is less parametric, less exposed to the influence of outliers, and it
allows for convergent leapfrogging and convergent regression as well.


6       Results
In this section we present our results, using the definition of convergence based on the hour-
glass. We start by calculating the percentage of countries whose distance from the norm
in generation 4 is less than half of the distance for their ancestor in generation 1. We use
this fraction to quantify the convergence that occurs in a particular attitude (or group of
attitudes) between the first and the fourth generation of the dynasty. As explained in the
previous section, in the basic set of results we define the “norm” as the weighted average of
the attitudes of the fourth (or higher) generation European immigrants in our sample. We
compare the convergence that occurs by the fourth generation with that occurring between
the first and the second generation.
    After presenting the basic results we will explore in the next section several robustness
exercises and extensions, such as tightening or relaxing the convergence criterion, using a
reduced set of controls in the Probit equation, and changing the definition of the norm. We
shall also present evidence on the changing strength of the relationship between attitudes
in the country of origin and immigrants’ attitudes across multiple generations. This issue is
different, although is related, to the question whether or not attitudes converge to the norm.
Moreover, it is an issue worth addressing because it has been studied by a number of authors
in a context similar to ours, although with a focus limited to the second generation.26
    The main results are summarized in Table 4 for groups of attitudes, and in Table 5 for
individual attitudes and countries. In Table 4 we sort attitudes by the main groups shown in
Table 1: Cooperation, Family, Gender, Religion, etc.. We denote with Gen4 π22.5 the average
across the attitudes in a given group of the fraction of convergent cases for each attitude   .
For example, 81% for ”Cooperation” means that by the fourth generation (Gen4 π22.5 ) the
initial gap for the three attitudes related to cooperation (trust, fair and helpful ) on average
has been cut at least in half in 81% of all countries of origin. In the next column we show
the same statistics for convergence by the second generation (Gen2 π22.5 ) , and in the third
column the difference between the two, denoted by ∆.
    A number of common patterns emerge. First, whether a cultural trait can be considered
persistent or not crucially depends upon whether one considers the change between the 1st
and 2nd or the 1st and 4th generation. This point is very important: focusing only on the 2nd
 26
      See the discussion and references in the Introduction.


                                                       21
generation, as the literature has done so far, would miss the greater convergence of a number
of attitudes.
    Attitudes toward cooperation are slow moving initially, but eventually converge. By
generation 2 the initial gap in these attitudes has been cut at least in half in only 33% of
all countries of origin. By generation 4 this number has risen to 81%, the largest percentage
of convergent cases across all groups of attitudes. This suggests that while there is much
to be gained in economic and social interaction from sharing attitudes towards cooperation
— which is the reason why these attitudes eventually converge — it takes a long time for
immigrants to realize this and change their attitudes. But convergence eventually occurs in
most cases. Limiting the analysis to what happens between the 1st and the 2nd generation
would lead to incorrect conclusions on the evolution of attitudes towards cooperation. Note
that the 95% bootstrapped confidence interval for ∆ does not include zero: we can thus reject
the hypothesis of no change between the second and fourth generation in the attitudes toward
cooperation.
    A similar pattern emerges on average for attitudes toward the family (although, as we
shall see, there are differences across individual attitudes): by generation 4 the percentage
of convergent cases for the family category is 67% , while it was 43% by generation 2. As
for attitudes toward cooperation, the 95% confidence interval for ∆ does not include zero.
For gender roles too there is a sizeable change in the percentage of convergent cases (64%
versus 43%), but the 95% confidence interval now includes zero. Other groups of attitudes,
while changing somewhat in the first two generations — which is natural following the shock
of being exposed to a new society – remain quite different across country of origin and do
not move much after the 2nd generation. By generation 4 the convergence percentage is
57% for abortion and the role of luck versus effort in determining social mobility, 43% for
sexual behavior and views about the role of government, each essentially unchanged between
Gen2 and Gen4. It is interesting that the groups that converge more slowly by the fourth
generation are those connected with general political views, moral values concerning sexuality
and abortion, and religion, while the fastest changing group of attitudes is the one related to
cooperation, followed, perhaps surprisingly, by attitudes about the family (we shall discuss
this result later in this section) and gender roles.
    Sorting attitudes in our eight groups, as we have done in Table 4, helps get an overall
picture of the way various types of attitudes evolve (if at all). Yet, there are (varying) degrees
of heterogeneity within each group and the pace of convergence of individual attitudes, while
more noisy, in some cases helps to better understand the mechanisms that may result in
attitudes converging fast or slowly. The convergence of individual attitudes by generation
4 is shown in Table 5, which also contains information on convergence by country. The


                                               22
attitudes that converge less (with convergence proportions of less than 57%) by the fourth
generation are those that describe political views: helppoor (government should improve the
standard of living of the poor), and polviews, but also eqwlth (should income be equalized
between rich and poor) is rather slow moving. Attitudes towards sexual morality (premarsx,
homosex), as well as abortion without restrictions (abany), are also among the slowest to
converge. Interestingly, when one qualifies the access to abortion (abrisk: abortion restricted
to cases of risk for the mother’s health, defects in the fetus, or rape) there appears to be
faster convergence. Most of the attitudes towards religion are in the next slower group
(with convergence proportions of 57%). There is instead heterogeneity among various family
attitudes, with approval of sharing home with grown-up children (aged ), frequency of evenings
spent with relatives (socrel) and valuing children’s independence (thnkself ) converging more
slowly, while attitudes towards divorce (divlaw ) being the single fastest moving attitude. 27
The slow convergence of getahead ( work, help or luck as a source of social mobility) mirrors
the slow convergence of general political attitudes and attitudes towards redistribution.
    Among the attitudes that show the highest degree of convergence by generation 4 one
finds all three attitudes about cooperation (helpful, trust, and fair). Interestingly, trust and
fair are two of the slow moving attitudes when one focuses on the change between the first
and second generation: for both attitudes by generation 2 the initial gap has been cut at least
in half in only 14% of all countries of origin, while this percentage rises to 71% by generation 4
(it goes from 57% to 100% for the third attitude towards cooperation, helpful ). The group of
converging attitudes also contains one attitude towards religion (postlife), which is somewhat
puzzling. Interestingly, the attitudes towards gender roles are split between those that are
related to the labor market versus those that capture the role of women in politics: fechild
(whether a child suffers when the mother works) is fast converging, while fepol ( suitability
of women for politics) is slow converging.
    The behavior of individual attitudes, as mentioned above, is somewhat noisy: of the 26
attitudes we study a handful are hard to rationalize. Beyond the case of postlife, mentioned
above, why do thnkself and obey converge at different speeds ?. Beyond this handful of cases,
however, the overall picture that emerges from analyzing both the 8 groups and the 24 indi-
vidual attitudes, seems consistent with the predictions of our model of cultural transmission.
Lazear (1999) and Konya (2005), from which we borrow our model of child identity choice,
emphasize that cultural assimilation is more likely the greater the gain from sharing a cul-
  27
     Inglehart and Baker (2000), using the World Value Survey (WVS), suggest that economic development
is associated with shifts away from absolute norms and values toward more rational, tolerant, trusting, and
participatory ones. However, they argue that cultural change is path dependent and is affected by the broad
religious and cultural heritage of a society. Notice that many of the values and attitudes that we identify as
slow moving are considered by Inglehart and Baker (2000) as characteristics that distinguish preindustrial
from industrial societies.


                                                     23
tural trait with the majority, and the greater the inefficiency of not doing so. Cavalli-Sforza
(2001) also suggests that a trait is more likely to spread horizontally if it is beneficial (see also
Tabellini 2008b). Our simple model indeed captures and further clarifies this effect, allowing
for a parents’ socialization choice, as in Bisin and Verdier (2001). In our model both the
range of initial size of the minority for which full assimilation is the steady state equilibrium,
and the speed of assimilation in each period, increase with the net transaction gain. This
mechanism seems to be at work with many of the attitudes in our sample that appear to
converge. For instance, there is much to be gained in economic and social interactions from
sharing attitudes towards cooperation. One, however, has to wait the fourth generation for
such attitudes to display a high level of convergence, a result which suggests that although
there could be an initial gain from taking advantage of the trust of others, such gain is likely
to be short-lived, followed by punishment if one is discovered cheating and not conforming to
the social norm.28 .
    Within the gender group, the convergence of views regarding the cost of women working
in terms of the quality of the relationship with their children can be explained by the large
economic gains from having women participate in market work and the fact that generations
of women have gradually learned about it.29 Conversely, it is interesting that attitudes that
have to do with women’s role in politics (fepol) display low convergence by generation 4. We
should not be surprised by the mixed results on gender norms, since many complex forces
act on them. Previous empirical results are also mixed. Some authors (for instance, Goldin
2006 and Albanesi and Olivetti 2016) emphasize that technological innovations, structural
change accompanying economic development, and medical improvements have had a powerful
effect on gender roles in the labor market; instead, Alesina, Giuliano and Nunn (2013) find
a persistent impact on gender norms today of the use of the plough as far back as a few
millennia, even after accounting for the other factors mentioned above.
    It also makes sense, in the light of our model, that general political orientation, attitudes
towards redistribution and the role of effort versus luck in achieving success (also a com-
ponent of one’s overall ideological view) converge more slowly as they do not confer direct
transactional advantages. Moreover, in a pluralistic and democratic society like the US, dif-
ferences in political and ideological views are perfectly legitimate and can persist over time.
  28
      The idea of attitudes towards cooperation as an important ingredient and lubricant of economic activity
is a very old one and has received great attention recently. See, for instance, Fehr (2009) and the references
therein on theoretical, econometric and experimental evidence on the consequences and determinants of trust.
There is also an extensive literature on the role of schools in shaping attitudes towards cooperation. See, for
instance, Algan, Cahuc and Shleifer (2013). Note that in deriving the country-generation effects we control
for education of the respondent and of his/her parents.
   29
      In our model, we do not allow for learning, See, however, Fernandez (2013) for a model of beliefs formation
in which it takes time for people to update their beliefs about the implications for children’s welfare of women
working outside the home.


                                                       24
The empirical evidence on the evolution/persistence of attitudes towards redistribution is
mixed: Alesina and Fuchs-Schuendeln (2007), focus on German reunification and find that
preferences concerning redistribution differ between East and West and that East Germans’
preferences converge towards those of West Germans after unification; Luttmer and Singhal
(2011), instead, suggest that preferences towards redistribution of immigrants still bear the
hallmark of the country of origin. Our evidence is consistent with the results in the later
paper in the sense that attitudes towards government redistributive intervention (particu-
larly as summarized by helpoor) and general political beliefs display slow convergence.The
process of ideology formation and the mechanisms through which views concerning the role
of government in redistributing income can persist over time and can differ across countries
have been studied in a related vast literature (see, for instance, Piketty (1995), Alesina and
Glazer (2004), Alesina and Angeletos (2005), Benabou and Tirole (2006), Benabou (2008),
and, for reviews, Alesina and Giuliano (2011) and Benabou and Tirole (2016)).
    It is also understandable that attitudes towards sexuality, abortion, religion and some
family attitudes should display slow convergence as it is plausible that these attitudes, may
imply large gains for the parents if the child maintains the minority trait and, conversely,
a large cost for the child if she abandons her family’s traditional values and beliefs. Again,
transactional gains are likely to be less important.
    Our model is suggestive of the reasons why private attitudes towards religion or attitudes
that do not imply an outward manifestation of one’s convictions (such as pray and prayer )
should display slow convergence. But the same argument does not apply to attitudes that
are embodied or likely to be embodied in public, rather than private, manifestations of one’s
beliefs (such as attend ): the reason could be that conforming (for instance attending a service
on Sunday independently of one’s religion) may confer social benefits. Gruber and Hungerman
(2008) indeed find that changes in shopping hours had a large impact on church attendance
and conclude that this validates economic models of religiosity that highlight the importance
of economic influences, such as the opportunity cost of church-going for religious participation.
    An interesting question is whether the probability that a cultural attitude converges or
not depends upon how spread out across countries of origin is the distribution of the trait in
the first generation. Here the arguments go both ways: large differences in the first generation
may make a movement towards the norm more advantageous; on the other hand, reducing
distances may be more difficult if distances are more spread out. In our results the median
initial standard deviation of the seven faster moving attitudes is only slightly larger than
the median standard deviation for the slower moving ones (.41 versus .39). Thus the initial
dispersion of opinions among first generation immigrants regarding each attitude does not
seem to play a role in the ensuing convergence in subsequent generations.


                                               25
    Our results have implications for the debate between the views that emphasize the as-
similation of immigrants, versus those that highlight the preservation of a separate identity,
and for the question whether the melting pot metaphor is an accurate description of immi-
grants’ experience in the US. We find that by the fourth generation, for all countries but one
(Poland ), the majority of cultural attitudes of descendants of European and Mexican immi-
grants has converged, consistently with Assimilation Theory (see the bottom row of Table
5 that reports the total fraction of convergent attitudes by the fourth generation for each
country). However, contrary to the prediction of that theory, and consistently with Multi-
culturalism, descendants of immigrants from different countries of ancestry have maintained
over several generations a degree of cultural distinctiveness along some traits. In other words,
the temperature in the melting pot is hot, but not uniform throughout, as one would expect
given the model of cultural transmission we have developed that points to the fact that the
speed of convergence is likely to differ across attitudes.
    Are there interesting country specificities in the pattern of convergence? In addition to
Great Britain, the country with the largest weight in defining the norm, Ireland and Germany
show the highest number of converging attitudes. Poland is at the bottom with Mexico, Italy
and Scandinavia. Which factors could explain the number of convergent attitudes by country?
One would expect, on average, that in countries of origin in which the family is a weaker social
institution, direct transmission of traits would be relatively less important or effective. This
is captured in our model by the parameters representing the benefit to the parent from the
child maintaining the original trait, and by the effectiveness of the socialization technology
embodied in the portion of the child’s switching cost related to the parent’s educational
efforts. To investigate the role of the family we use a measure of the strength of family ties
proposed by Alesina and Giuliano (2010). This measure captures beliefs on the importance of
the family in a person’s life, the duties and responsibilities of parents and children, and the
love and respect for one’s own parents. The data come from answers to a set of World Value
Service questions.30 This measure yields the following ranking for our countries (from the
weakest to the strongest ties): Germany, Scandinavia, UK, Ireland, Poland, Italy, Mexico.
With the exception of Scandinavia, this ranking of family ties is very similar to the ranking
for the proportion of convergent attitudes: indeed the rank correlation coefficient is positive
(r = .62). This suggests that family strength plays an important role in reducing the speed
of convergence of immigrants’ attitudes to the prevailing norm. However, it is not the only
factor. The ease to learn English may also matter for convergence to the norm. In our model
this is captured by the distribution of the stochastic component of the child switching costs.
As a proxy for the ability to acquire English proficiency we use the average, for each country of
 30
      See Section 2.1.2 for details and Figure 1 for the ranking of countries.


                                                        26
origin, of the number of words (out of ten) of which 1st generation immigrants can identify the
meaning31 . The rank correlation with the number of convergent attitudes for the countries in
our sample is positive and equal to .43. Finally, the number of convergent attitudes by country
is negatively correlated (r = −.56) with the measure of residential segregation used in Borjas
1995.32 Although our model is silent on this issue, as it does not include a residential choice,
this is what one would expect since a neighborhood characterized by a high concentration of
individuals from the same ancestry is likely to contribute to perpetuating the culture of the
country of origin and to a slowing down of the process of cultural integration. The issue of
how the composition of the neighborhood affects the evolution of individuals’ attitudes is a
very important and interesting topic that we leave for future research.


7      Robustness and Extensions
In this section we discuss several robustness exercises. Are our results robust, for instance,
to a change in the tightness of the convergence criteria in terms of the definition of the
convergence region? Are they robust to the menu of controls included in the Probit model
used to measure the country-generation-cohort effects or to changes in the definition of the
norm to which attitudes converge? The answer to these questions, as we shall see in the next
three sub-sections, is mostly yes.
    Finally, in the last sub-section we extend our analysis to a related, but quite distinct
issue: how do the cultural attitudes of succeeding generations of immigrants relate to those
of individuals who have not migrated and kept living in the country of origin? In particular,
do we observe a weakening of the relationship as the temporal distance from the country of
origin increases over generations? We will also ask how the attitudes of various generations
of immigrants are related to those prevailing in the country of origin for the cohort from
which the first generation of immigrants was drawn. Although the issue of distance from the
contemporary or ancestral culture in the country of origin and the main question addressed
in this paper — convergence to the prevailing norm in the country of immigration — are
different, we address it since it has been studied by a number of authors in a context similar
to ours.
  31
    The GSS includes a series of questions that identify the respondent’s vocabulary ability.
  32
    More precisely, see Borjas (1995), Table 2. We use the measure based on the percentage of first and
second generation immigrants in the neighborhood of the same ethnicity as a first-generation immigrants.
Similar results are obtained using figures for the second generation.




                                                  27
7.1    Changing the Definition of the Convergence Region
In our baseline results we have measured convergence focusing, for each attitude, on the index
we called π22.5 , which measures the proportion of countries that have cut the absolute value of
the distance of generation 4 from the norm by at least half relative to generation 1. In Table
A1 of Appendix 1 we present detailed results for the 4th generation based on less or more
stringent criteria for convergence: reducing that distance by any amount (π45 ), by at least
a third (π30 ), and by at least two thirds (π15 ). The (Spearman) rank correlation coefficients
between the proportions of converging country-wave observations (by generation 4) in the
baseline and those obtained using these alternative criteria are reported at the bottom of the
table. Using π30 or π15 , instead of π22.5 , leaves the ranking of the degree of convergence
of the different groups of attitudes by and large unchanged. Correlation coefficients with
the ranking in our baseline case for individual attitudes are also very high (in excess of
72%). Moreover, the conclusion that it is important to go beyond the second generation in
assessing convergence also still holds. The correlation with the ranking obtained when using
π45 is instead smaller (.54) and the difference in convergence speed across groups less sharp
(although cooperation remains the fastest convergent group). This is not surprising and, as
we have already argued, we find convergence by any amount the least convincing criterion.


7.2    Reducing the Set of Controls in the Probit Equation
In Table A2 we limit the set of common controls only including age, age squared, year-of-the-
survey dummy, gender, religion, regional indicators, and urbanization indicators. Income,
education, mother’s education, father’s education, number of children, marital status, and
work status are excluded: in the case of income and education level of a respondent because
they are very likely to influence some of his/her attitudes. In turn, both income and education
(as well as the rest of the excluded individual controls) can be viewed as an outcome of factors
encoded in the country of origin fixed effects. The main results in the paper focus on the an-
cestral influence on attitudes that are not explained by variations in income, education, etc..
In Table A2, instead, one allows for the ancestral influence to affect attitudes both directly
and through changes in these endogenous individual characteristics. While the convergence
rates by generation four of attitudes about cooperation, political views, religion, family and
reasons for success are similar, now attitudes towards gender, sexuality and abortion display
a higher convergence proportion. The Spearman rank correlation coefficients with our orig-
inal ranking for individual attitudes is rather low and equal to 0.25, which emphasizes the
importance of controlling for income, education, etc.. For the cooperation, gender, family and
sexual behavior groups, the change between generation 2 and generation 4 convergence is now


                                              28
larger, which is what one would expect since now the change captures also the convergence
in education levels across groups.


7.3    Changing the definition of the Norm
In Table A3 we return to our baseline specification and experiment changing the definition
of the norm. More specifically, instead of defining the norm as the weighted average of the
attitudes of the fourth (or higher) generation European immigrants in our sample, we choose
as reference point the fourth generation descendants of immigrants from Great Britain. The
rank correlation coefficient with our original ranking is .57 and our conclusions remain largely
the same. This should not be surprising since descendants of British immigrants represent
a large share (around 40%) of the immigrants who are fourth generation (or higher). Our
conclusions are also unchanged when we include Mexico in the calculation of the norm,
together with the other European countries (see Table A4). The correlation coefficient with
the ordering in the basic specification is now 0.88.


7.4    Immigrants’ Attitudes and Attitudes in the Country of Origin
When assessing the strength of the association between immigrants’ culture and the culture
of the country of ancestry — which, as we explained, is a question different but related to
the one addressed in this paper — there are two possible ways to proceed. We could focus
on the relationship of immigrants’ attitudes with those of the corresponding cohort in the
country of origin. Alternatively we could compare immigrants’ attitudes with attitudes in
the country of origin for the cohort to which the first generation of immigrants belonged and
from which the various generations descend. In the former case the reference point is the
”contemporary” (same cohort) culture. In the alternative it is the ”ancestral” culture of the
country of origin, that is the culture the founder of the dynasty brought with him/her when
he/she first migrated to the US. We shall conduct both exercises for different generations of
immigrants.
    We measure attitudes in the countries of origin using the European Value Survey (EVS)
and the World Value Survey (WVS) which ask very similar questions, some of which coincide
– often are almost identical – to those asked in the GSS and used in our baseline results. The
match between the two surveys is very close for the questions regarding some of the cultural
attitudes we have used in our empirical work, such as trust, attend, postlife, and homosex, and
a fairly close (but not perfect) for pray, thnkself, obey, fechild, fework, and abany (See Table
A5). The match is not close for the remaining attitudes we have examined. We have pooled
the EVS and WVS data for all the relevant countries for the periods matching those defined


                                              29
in our baseline model. In the first stage, we have estimated the coefficient of country-cohort
specific dummies in a Probit model for each attitude, controlling for survey-year effects, age,
age squared, gender, and marital status.33 In the second stage, we have then associated these
country-cohort-specific effects with the data in each GSS survey, so that each individual as
been matched with the culture in the country of origin of the cohort she/he belongs to.
We have then estimated the Probit models for each cultural attitude on the GSS data, as
we did before, but replacing the period-origin-generation and origin-cohort dummies with
the time-varying and country-specific cultural proxies obtained in the first stage, interacted
with generation dummies. We continue to control for all the individual specific variables
used before and for common year effects. Essentially, we are assuming that the country of
origin and cohort specific movements in culture for US immigrants are proportional to the
cultural proxy estimated in the first stage, and that its effect may vary across generations. In
particular, we are interested in assessing the significance of the generation-specific coefficients
and whether the effect of the culture of origin decreases (or not) going from the 1st to the 4th
generation. We have then repeated this exercise by matching to each respondent the country
of origin specific effects of the cohort of first emigration immigrants, to capture the ancestral
culture of the founder of each dynasty of immigrants.
    The results for both experiments are reported in Table 6, Part 1 (same cohort), and Part
2 (cohort of dynasty founder). First, considering all attitudes, in eight out of ten cases the
coefficients of the culture of the country of origin for the first generation are significant at
conventional levels or nearly so, whatever the reference point of the country of origin. The
association is closest for the attitudes that bear a close correspondence in the actual question
surveyed in the GSS and in the EVS-WVS. This emphasizes the fact that an imperfect
match between the EVS-WVS and the GSS questions is likely to lead to underestimating
the strength of the association with the culture of the country of origin. In four cases the
association is significant for the second generation at the 5% level and for one case at the
10% level (or nearly so), both in Part 1 and in Part 2. Although, in the case of trust, attend,
pray, fechild, and homosex, there are differences in the significance level, depending upon the
reference point. Most interestingly, from our point of view, the value of the generation specific
coefficients decreases in most cases as we go from the first to higher generations, implying
a weakening of the effect of the culture of the country of origin, whether contemporary or
ancestral. For instance, in the case of trust the coefficients for all generations are always
significant, but decrease (when the reference point is the corresponding generation in the
country of origin) from .39 to .34, .27, .23 as we go from the 1st to the 4th generation. This
means that, when assessing the strength of association with the culture of the country of
 33
      The results that follow are not sensitive to the choice of the controls.


                                                        30
origin across generations, it is important to go beyond the second generation to have a full
picture, as it was the case when analyzing convergence.
    When we compare attitudes of the same cohort (one living in the US, the other in the
country of origin), a weakening of the association from the first to higher generations does
not imply nor is implied by convergence to the norm in the US. For instance, differences
in attitudes across immigrants of distinct ethnicity (the issue investigated in this paper)
could persist, and still the attitudes of immigrants could drift away from those prevailing in
the country from which their ancestors originally came. Alternatively, one’s cultural traits
may remain close to those of the country of origin, but convergence to the norm across
generations may be observed because over time values across countries become more similar.
Analogous considerations apply when we use, as reference point, the culture that the founder
of the dynasty brought with him/her when he/she first migrated to the US. In practice, a
weakening of the association with the founder’s ancestral culture is likely to be a precondition
for convergence to the norm for successive generations of immigrants within a dynasty.


8     Conclusions
Are immigrants’ values and beliefs deeply rooted in the culture of the country of origin, so
that they persist relatively unchanged across generations, or do change in response to the
new economic and social environment and converge rather rapidly to the prevailing norm of
the recipient country? Answering this question is an important step in addressing the more
general problem of how persistent a society’s values and beliefs are – an issue on which there
is abundant disagreement In this paper we have presented new evidence on this question by
analyzing cultural attitudes of different generations of European and Mexican immigrants to
the US, and we have provided a simple model to shed light and interpret the evidence on the
speed of convergence.
    We find that persistence is not the same across cultural traits. Some show a higher
degree of convergence to the prevailing norm: this is true, for example, for attitudes towards
cooperation (the trustworthiness, helpfulness and fairness of others), and towards the effect
of women’s work on the child-mother relationship, and some family attitudes, such as views
on divorce. Other traits, instead, show a lower degree of convergence: for instance attitudes
towards politics and redistribution, sexuality, abortion, religious values, and some family
attitudes such as sharing home with grown-up children and frequency of evenings spent with
relatives. A higher degree of convergence appears to characterize attitudes for which the
benefits of assimilation are likely to be greater; instead, attitudes that are either characterized
by lower benefits or for which direct transmission within the family is likely to be more


                                                31
important and effective show slower convergence.
     Importantly we also find that one would not come to these conclusions if one limited the
analysis to just the first two generations of immigrants, as the literature has so far mostly
done. Focusing only on the first two generations biases the conclusion in favor of persistence.
Finally, we show that persistence is “culture specific” in the sense that the country from which
one’s ancestors came matters for the pattern of generational convergence (or lack thereof).
The strength of family ties, the ability to learn English and residential segregation appear to
be important factors in this respect.
     The implication of our results for the debate about the “melting pot” is that for many-
cultural traits and beliefs a melting-pot effect was certainly at work among immigrants.
For other traits, however, descendants of immigrants from different countries of ancestry
have maintained over several generations a degree of cultural distinctiveness. Thus, the
temperature in the melting pot was hot, but not uniform throughout, as suggested by our
model that emphasizes how the effectiveness and importance of the socialization mechanism
by parents and of the benefits from assimilation for their children is likely to vary across
attitudes and countries.
     Finally, one may ask whether the evidence provided in this paper has any relevance for the
question concerning the likelihood of success of reforms designed to change practices within a
country. Are such reforms doomed because a country’s culture cannot be changed, or can they
succeed because they can change cultural attitudes by altering incentives? This paper neither
intends to, nor can provide an answer to this question. What we have shown, however, is that
the large shock represented by the new social and economic environment faced by immigrants
can eventually lead to a change in many cultural traits. We have also found that the process
of change depends upon cultural characteristics of the country of origin, so that any answer
is likely to be country specific. These issues are fertile ground for future research.




                                              32
9     Tables and Figures

                     Table 1: List of Attitudes: Groups, Abbreviations, Descriptions
                                 trust         can people be trusted or cannot be too careful? (y=1 for yes if xGSS = 1)
Group A – Cooperation            fair          will people take advantage of you? (y=1 for no if xGSS = 2)
                                 helpful       people are mostly helpful or looking out for themselves (y=1 for yes if xGSS = 1)
                                 eqwlth        government should equalize income between poor and rich (y=1 for yes if xGSS < 5)
Group B – Government/Politics
                                 helppoor      government should improve the standard of living of the poor (y=1 for yes if xGSS < 4)
                                 polviews      political views (y=1 for liberal if xGSS < 4)
                                 attend        frequency of religious services attendance (y=1 for less often if xGSS < 5)
                                 pray          frequency of prayer (y=1 for less often if xGSS > 4)
Group C – Religion               reliten       intensity of religious affiliation (y=1 for not strong if xGSS > 1)
                                 postlife      belief in life after death (y=1 for no if xGSS = 2)
                                 prayer        approval of prayer in public schools (y=1 for disapprove if xGSS = 2)
                                 thnkself      independence of a child is highly important quality (y=1 for important if xGSS < 3)
                                 obey          obedience of a child is a highly important quality (y=1 for not important if xGSS > 2)
Group D – Family                 pillok        birth control available to teenagers without parental consent (y=1 for ok if xGSS < 3)
                                 aged          approval of sharing home with grown children (y=1 for disapproval if xGSS > 1)
                                 divlaw        should divorce be easier? (y=1 for yes if xGSS = 1, 3)
                                 socrel        frequency of social evenings with relatives (y=1 for less often if xGSS > 3)
                                 fechild       working mother can have a good relationship with children (y=1 for yes if xGSS < 3)
Group E – Gender Roles
                                 fepol         women not suited for politics (y=1 for no if xGSS = 2)
                                 abany         approval of abortion for any reason (y=1 for yes if xGSS = 1)
Group F – Abortion
                                 abrisk        approval of abortion for health/defect/rape reasons (y=1 for yes if xGSS = 0)
                                 premarsx      approval of premarital sex (y=1 for yes if xGSS = 4)
Group G – Sexual Behavior
                                 homosex       approval of same-sex sexual relations (y=1 for yes if xGSS > 2)
Group H – Mobility/Success       getahead      work, help, luck as a source of social mobility (y=1 for work if xGSS = 1)
Notes: The responses from the GSS survey have been recoded to have a binary outcome. y denotes the indicator variable in the Probit.
Variable abrisk does not exist in the GSS. abrisk = abhlth ∪ abrape ∪ abdef ect. xGSS denotes the numerical value of the answers to the
GSS questions, as ome allow for a gradation of response.




                                     Table 2: Countries and Country Groups
                                            Country Group                       Countries
                                   British origin (GB)             England, Wales, Scotland
                                   German origin (GER)             Germany
                                   Irish origin (IRE)              Ireland
                                   Italian origin (ITA)            Italy
                                   Polish origin (POL)             Poland
                                   Scandinavian origin (SCA)       Denmark, Finland, Sweden, Norway
                                   Mexican origin (MEX)            Mexico




                                                                    33
Table 3: Number of Respondents for the Question on Trust by Origin, Cohort, and Generation
 Part 1 :       Cohort 1892-1916              Cohort 1917-1941                  Cohort 1942-1966                        Cohort 1967+
            Gen1 Gen2 Gen3 Gen4           Gen1 Gen2 Gen3 Gen4               Gen1 Gen2 Gen3 Gen4                  Gen1   Gen2 Gen3    Gen4
 GER         13    71     60     118        46     78       302     632       66    87         345     1,579     29      38    57    536
 POL         13    48      4      1         14      81      59       14      26      30        207       81       6      7     17     62
 SCA         12    57     15      4         10     72       124     71       16     28         183      307       6      3     17    112
 IRE          8    33     28     121        11      53      158     493      26     44         233     1,153      11    19     48    445
 ITA         20    54      3      1         37     180       74      13      37     86         387      173       7     28     71    186
 GB          21    43     49     237        59      82      123    1,017     69     83         166     1,501     21      17    25    420
 MEX          2     3      0      3         27      45       13      12      151    110         86       73      263    165    42     76

 Part 2:       Dynasty 1892-1916
            Gen1 Gen2 Gen3 Gen4
 GER         59   78      345    536
 POL         27   81      207     62
 SCA         22    72     183    112
 IRE         19   53      233    445
 ITA         57   180     387    186
 GB          80   82      166    420
 MEX         29   45      86      76
 Notes: In part 2 we assume that of the first generation of the 1892-1916 and 1917-1941 cohort share the same attitude towards trust.




 Table 4: Convergence of Cultural Attitudes (by Groups): Comparing Generation 4 and 2
                                                             Gen 4 π22.5   Gen 2 π22.5    4           90% CI       95% CI
                                                 trust
                  Group A - Cooperation          fair             81%         33%         48%    (14%, 48%)      (10%, 52%)
                                                 helpful
                                                 eqwlth
                  Group B - Government           helppoor         38%         43%         -5%        (0%, 43%)    (0%, 43%)
                                                 polviews
                                                 attend
                                                 pray
                  Group C - Religion             reliten          60%         46%         14%        (3%, 34%)    (0%, 37%)
                                                 postlife
                                                 prayer
                                                 thnkself
                                                 obey
                                                 pillok
                  Group D - Family                                67%         43%         24%    (10%, 38%)       (7%, 40%)
                                                 aged
                                                 divlaw
                                                 socrel
                                                 fechld
                  Group E - Gender Roles                          64%         43%         21%    (-7%, 43%)      (-7%, 50%)
                                                 fepol
                                                 abany
                  Group F - Abortion                              57%         50%         7%     (-7%, 36%)      (-7%, 43%)
                                                 abrisk
                                                 premarsx
                  Group G - Sexual Behavior                       43%         43%         0%         (0%, 43%)   (-7%, 50%)
                                                 homosex
                  Group H - Mobility/Success     getahead         57%         57%         0%     (-29%, 43%)     (-29%, 57%)
                  Notes: Convergence is achieved when the absolute value of the deviation from the norm has been
                  cut at least in half between generation 1 and generation 4 or 2 (π22.5 criterion). Gen 4 π22.5 denotes
                  the average percentage of convergent cases by generation 4 within each group, and Gen 2 π22.5 by
                  generation 2. 4 denotes the difference in the percentage of convergent cases between generations 4
                  and generation 2. The last two columns report the bootstrapped 90% and 95% confidence intervals
                  for 4, based on 500 replications estimating the Probit equation, based on stratified sampling with
                  replacement in the country-generation-cohort cells.




                                                                     34
                   Table 5: Convergence by Each Cultural Attitude and Country
                                                        Gen 4 π22.5     GER      POL    SCA         IRE    ITA      GB    MEX
                                             trust          71%           1       1         1        1       0       1        0
              Group A - Cooperation          fair           71%           1       0         1        1       1       1        0
                                             helpful        100%          1       1         1        1       1       1        1
                                             eqwlth         57%           1       0         1        1       1       0        0
              Group B - Government           helppoor       29%           1       0         0        0       0       1        0
                                             polviews       29%           0       0         0        0       0       1        1
                                             attend         57%           1       0         0        1       1       0        1
                                             pray           57%           1       0         0        1       0       1        1
              Group C - Religion             reliten        57%           1       0         0        1       1       1        0
                                             postlife       71%           1       0         1        1       1       0        1
                                             prayer         57%           0       0         0        1       1       1        1
                                             thnkself        57%          1       1         0        0       1       1        0
                                             obey            71%          0       1         0        1       1       1        1
                                             pillok         71%           1       0         1        1       0       1        1
              Group D - Family
                                             aged           43%           0       0         0        1       1       0        1
                                             divlaw         100%          1       1         1        1       1       1        1
                                             socrel          57%          1       0         0        0       1       1        1
                                             fechld         71%           1       1         1        0       1       0        1
              Group E - Gender Roles
                                             fepol          57%           1       1         1        0       0       1        0
                                             abany          43%           1       0         0        1       0       1        0
              Group F - Abortion
                                             abrisk         71%           1       1         1        1       0       0        1
                                             premarsx       43%           1       0         1        0       0       0        1
              Group G - Sexual Behavior
                                             homosex        43%           0       1         1        1       0       0        0
              Group H - Mobility/Success     getahead       57%           1       0         1        0       1       1        0
                                                                         79%     38%       54%      67%    58%      67%      58%
              Notes: The figures in the table represent the number of times we observe convergence for each country
              and each attitude (1 denotes convergence). Convergence is achieved when the absolute value of the
              deviation from the norm has been cut at least in half between generation 1 and generation 4 (π22.5
              criterion). Gen 4 π22.5 denotes here the percentage of convergence cases for each attitude.




Table 6: Relationship between Attitudes in the Country of Origin and Attitudes of US Im-
migrants across Generations
                                        Part 1: Relationship with contemporary attitudes

        Variable                           trust   attend   pray      postlife   thnkself        obey     fechild   abany         homosex
        ContemporaryCultureo × I(g=1)      0.39      0.31   0.39        0.77       0.42           0.36     0.18       0.00          0.09
                                          (5.12)   (4.47) (4.91)      (3.55)     (3.83)         (2.04)    (3.76)    (-0.08)        (1.81)
        ContemporaryCultureo × I(g=2)      0.34      0.10   0.17        0.08       0.11           0.08     0.10      -0.04          0.11
                                          (4.96)   (1.94) (2.49)      (0.65)     (1.36)         (0.59)    (2.61)    (-0.96)        (2.41)
        ContemporaryCultureo × I(g=3)      0.26      0.10   0.05        0.22       0.02           0.08     0.08       0.01          0.03
                                          (4.25)   (3.39) (0.97)      (2.91)     (0.24)         (1.05)    (2.22)    (0.39)         (0.79)
        ContemporaryCultureo × I(g=4)      0.22     -0.02   0.04       -0.05      -0.02          -0.14     0.10      0.03           0.09
                                          (3.59)   (-1.00) (1.16)     (-1.08)    (-0.28)        (-2.90)   (2.63)    (0.86)         (2.26)

                                           Part 2: Relationship with ancestral attitudes

        Variable                           trust   attend   pray      postlife   thnkself        obey     fechild   abany         homosex
        AncestralCultureo × I(g=1)         0.52      0.35   0.41        0.66       0.56          0.38      0.21      0.08           0.14
                                          (4.72)   (4.91) (4.93)      (3.07)     (3.65)         (2.06)    (2.52)    (1.17)         (1.58)
        AncestralCultureo × I(g=2)         0.49      0.20   0.21        0.08       0.13          0.09      0.08      0.05           0.11
                                          (4.90)   (3.34) (2.53)      (0.63)     (1.22)         (0.51)    (1.42)    (0.85)         (1.52)
        AncestralCultureo × I(g=3)         0.32      0.09   0.04        0.10      -0.01          0.27      0.04      0.05           0.02
                                          (3.71)   (2.16) (0.64)      (1.11)     (-0.18)        (1.60)    (0.95)    (0.93)         (0.45)
        AncestralCultureo × I(g=4)         0.31     -0.12   0.02       -0.09       0.02          -0.07     0.02      0.09           0.10
                                          (3.22)   (-2.89) (0.37)     (-1.10)    (0.36)         (-0.41)   (0.62)    (1.62)         (2.04)
        Notes: ContemporaryCultureo denotes the culture of the corresponding cohort of the country of origin.
        AncestralCultureo denotes the culture of the cohort from the country of origin which originates the dynasty which
        the immigrant belongs to. Generation specific coefficients are reported. z statistics in parentheses.



                                                               35
Figure 1a: Dynamics and Equilibria: Full Assimilation and Non-assimilation Equilibrium




       Figure 1b: Dynamics and Equilibria: Only Full Assimilation Equilibrium


                                         36
Figure 2a: Generational Convergence and Non-convergence Regions (by type)




     Figure 2b: Convergence Region Implied by the 22.5o Cut-off Rule


                                   37
References
 [1]

 [2] Alba, Richard D. (1985). Italian Americans: Into the Twilight of Ethnicity. Prentice Hall,
     Englewood Cliffs.

 [3] Albanesi, Stefania, and Claudia Olivetti (2016). “Gender roles and medical progress.” Jour-
     nal of Political Economy 124.3 650-695.

 [4] Akerlof, George A. and Rachel E. Kranton (2000). “Economics and Identity.” Quarterly
     Journal of Economics, 115(3): 715–753.

 [5] Alesina, Alberto and Paola Giuliano (2010). “The Power of the Family,” Journal of Economic
     Growth, June 2010, Vol 15, 93-125.

 [6] Alesina, Alberto and Paola Giuliano (2011).“Preferences for Redistribution” in A. Bisin and
     J. Benhabib (eds.), Handbook of Social Economics, North Holland, 2011, Ch.4, 93-132.

 [7] Alesina, Alberto and Paola Giuliano (2015). “Culture and institutions.” Journal of Economic
     Literature 53.4: 898-944.

 [8] Alesina, Alberto, Paola Giuliano, and Nathan Nunn (2013). “On the Origins of Gender
     Roles: Women and the Plough. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128(2): 469–530.

 [9] Alesina, Alberto and Nicola Fuchs-Schuendeln (2007). “Good bye Lenin (or not?): The Effect
     of Communism on People’s Preferences. The American Economic Review 97(4): 1507-1528.

[10] Alesina, Alberto and George-Marios Angeletos (2005). “Fairness and Redistribution: US vs.
     Europe,” American Economic Review, September 2005, 95: 913-35

[11] Alesina, Alberto and Edward Glazer (2004). ”Fighting Poverty in the US and Europe: A
     World of Difference”, Oxford University Press, Oxford UK.

[12] Algan, Yann and Pierre Cahuc (2007). “The Roots of Low European Employment: Family
     Culture?” in NBER International Seminar on Macroeconomics 2005, MIT Press, 65–109.

[13] Algan, Yann and Pierre Cahuc (2010). “Inherited Trust and Growth.” American Economic
     Review, 100(5): 2060–2092.

[14] Algan, Yann, Pierre Cahuc, and Andrei Shleifer (2013). “Teaching Practices and Social
     Capital.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 5(3): 189–210.

[15] Algan, Yann, Alberto Bisin, Alan Manning, and Thierry Verdier (2012). Cultural Integration
     of Immigrants in Europe. Oxford University Press.

[16] Antecol, Heather (2000). “An Examination of Cross-Country Differences in the Gender Gap
     in Labor Force Participation Rates.” Labour Economics, 7(4): 409–426.

[17] Benabou, Roland (2008). ”Ideology”, Journal of the European Economic Association, 6(2-3):
     321-352



                                              38
[18] Benabou, Roland and Jean Tirole (2006). ” Belief in a Just World and Redistributive Poli-
     tics”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121(20:699-746.

[19] Benabou, Roland and Jean Tirole (2016). ”Mindful Economics: The Production, Consump-
     tion, and Value of Beliefs”, Journal of Economic Perspectives: 30(3), Summer, 141-164.

[20] Bisin, Alberto and Thierry Verdier (2000). “Beyond the Melting Pot: Cultural Transmission
     and Dynamics of Preferences.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115(3): 955-988.

[21] Bisin, Alberto and Thierry Verdier (2001). “The Economics of Cultural Transmission and
     the Evolution of Preferences.” Journal of Economic Theory, 97(2): 298–319.

[22] Bisin, Aberto and Thierry Verdier (2010). “The Economics of Cultural Transmission and
     Socialization.” Handbook of Social Economics, Elsevier

[23] Bisin, Alberto, Giorgio Topa, and Thierry Verdier (2004). “Cooperation as a Transmitted
     Cultural Trait.” Rationality and Society 16: 477–507.

[24] Bisin, Alberto, Eleonora Pattachini, Thierry Verdier, and Yves Zenou (2011). “Formation
     and Persistence of Oppositional Identities.” European Economic Review, 55(8): 1046–1071.

[25] Borjas, Geroge J. (1992). “Ethnic Capital and Intergenerational Mobility.” Quarterly Jour-
     nal of Economics, 107(1): 123–150.

[26] Borjas, George J. (1995). “Ethnicity, Neighborhoods, and Human-Capital Externalities.”
     American Economic Review, 85(3): 365–390.

[27] Bowles, Samuel (1998). “Endogenous Preferences: The Cultural Consequences of Markets
     and Other Economic Institutions.” Journal of Economic Literature, 36(1): 75–111.

[28] Boyd, Robert and Peter J. Richerson (1985). Culture and the Evolutionary Process. Univer-
     sity of Chicago Press.

[29] Boyd, Robert and Peter J. Richerson (2005). The Origin and Evolution of Culture. Oxford
     University Press.

[30] Cavalli-Sforza, Luigi L. and Marcus W. Feldman (1981). Cultural Transmission and Evolu-
     tion: A Quantitative Approach. Princeton University Press.

[31] Cavalli-Sforza, Luigi L. (2001). Genes, Peoples, and Languages. University of California
     Press.

[32] Di Tella, Rafael, Sebastian Galiani and Ernesto Schargrodsky (2007). “The Formation of
     Beliefs: Evidence from the Allocation of Land Titles.” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
     122(1): 209–241.

[33] Doepke, Matthias and Fabrizio Zilibotti (2008). “Occupational Choice and the Spirit of
     Capitalism.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(2): 747–793.

[34] Durante, Ruben (2009). “Risk, cooperation and the economic origins of social trust: an
     empirical investigation.” MPRA Paper No. 25887.



                                              39
[35] Fehr, Ernst (2009). “On the Economics and Biology of Trust.” Journal of the European
     Economic Association, 7(2-3): 235–266.

[36] Fernandez, Raquel (2007). “Women, Work and Culture.” Journal of the European Economic
     Association, 5(2-3): 305–332.

[37] Fernandez, Raquel (2008). “Culture and Economics.” in S.N Durlauf and L.E. Blume, New
     Plagrave Dictionary of Economics, 2nd edition, Palgrave Macmillan.

[38] Fernandez, Raquel (2011). “Does Culture Matter.” in, J. Benhabib, M. O. Jackson and A.
     Bisin, Handbook of Social Economics, 1A, North-Holland, 481–510.

[39] Fernandez, Raquel (2013). “Culture change as Learning: The Evolution of Female Labor
     Force Participation over a Century” American Economic Review, 103(1): 472-500.

[40] Fernandez, Raquel and Alessandra Fogli (2006).“Fertility: the role of Culture and Family
     Experience.” Journal of the European Economic Association, 4(2-3): 552–561.

[41] Fernandez, Raquel and Alessandra Fogli (2009), “Culture: An Empirical Investigation of
     Beliefs, Work and Fertility.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 1(1): 146–177.

[42] Giavazzi, Francesco, Fabio Schiantarelli, and Michel Serafinelli (2013) “Culture, Policies and
     Labor Market outcomes.” Journal of the European Economic Association, 11(6): 1256–1289.

[43] Giuliano, Paola (2007). “Living Arrangements in Western Europe: Does Cultural Origin
     Matter?” Journal of the European Economic Association, 5(5): 927–952.

[44] Giuliano, Paola and Antonio Spilimbergo (2014). “Growing up in a Recession.” The Review
     of Economic Studies 81(2): 787-817.

[45] Goldin, Claudia (2006). “The Quiet Revolution that Transformed Women’s Employment,
     Education, and Family.” American Economic Review 96(2): 1–21.

[46] Greeley, Andrew M. (1974). “Ethnicity in the United States: A Preliminary Reconnais-
     sance.” John Wiley & Sons.

[47] Gruber, Jonathan and Daniel M. Hungerman (2008). “The Church Versus the Mall: What
     Happens When Religion Faces Increased Secular Competition?” Quarterly Journal of Eco-
     nomics, 123(2): 831–862.

[48] Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales (2006). “Does Culture Affect Economic
     Outcomes?” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 20(2): 23–48.

[49] Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales (2008). “Alfred Marshall Lecture: Social
     Capital as Good Culture.” Journal of the European Economic Association, 6(2-3): 295–320.

[50] Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales (2013). “Long-Term Persistence.” Journal
     of the European Economic Association, forthcoming

[51] Inglehart, Ronald and Wayne E. Baker (2000). “Modernization, Cultural Change, and the
     Persistence of Traditional Values.” American Sociological review, 65(1): 19–51.



                                                40
[52] Konya, István (2005). “Minorities and Majorities: A Dynamic Model of Assimilation.”
     Canadian Journal of Economics, 38(4): 1431–1452.

[53] Lazear, Edward P. (1999). “Culture and Language.” Journal of Political Economy, 107(6):
     95–126.

[54] Luttmer, Erzo F. P. and Monica Singhal (2011). “Culture, Context, and the Taste for
     Redistribution.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 3(1): 157–79.

[55] Muennig P, Johnson G, Kim J, Smith T, Rosen Z. (2011) “The General Social Survey-
     National Death Index: an innovative new dataset for the social sciences.” BMC Research
     Notes. 2011; 4:385.

[56] Panebianco, Fabrizio. (2014) “Socialization networks and the transmission of interethnic
     attitudes.” Journal of Economic Theory 150 (2014): 583-610.

[57] Pichler, Michael M. (2010) “The economics of cultural formation of preferences.” No. 431.
     Working papers. Institute of Mathematical Economics.

[58] Piketty, Thomas (1995). ”Social Mobility and Redistributive Politics”, Quarterly Journal of
     Economics, 110(3); 551-584.

[59] Putnam, Robert D. (1993). “Making Democracy Work.” Princeton University Press.

[60] Rice, Tom W. and Jan L. Feldman (1997). “Civic Culture and Democracy from Europe to
     America.” The Journal of Politics, 59(4): 1143–1172.

[61] Roland, Gerard (2004). “Understanding Institutional Change: Fast-Moving and Slow-
     Moving Institutions.” Studies in Comparative International Development, 38(4): 109–131.

[62] Tabellini, Guido (2008a). “Presidential Address: Institutions and Culture.” Journal of the
     European Economic Association Papers and Proceedings, 6(2–3): 255–294.

[63] Tabellini, Guido (2008b). “The Scope of Cooperation: Values and Incentives.” The Quarterly
     Journal of Economics, 123(3): 905–950.

[64] Tabellini, Guido (2010). “Culture and Institutions: Economic Development in the Regions
     of Europe.” Journal of the European Economic Association, 8(4): 677–716.

[65] Vaughan, Daniel (2013). “Nurture vs. nurture: Endogenous parental and peer effects and
     the transmission of culture.” (No. 2013-04). Working Papers, Banco de México.




                                              41
Appendix 1: Robustness (For Online Publication Only)

        Table A1: Sensitivity of Convergence Across Different Criteria

                                                        Gen 4 π45   Gen 4 π33   Gen 4 π22.5   Gen 4 π15
                                      trust
       Group A - Cooperation          fair                   86%         86%          81%          67%
                                      helpful
                                      eqwlth
       Group B - Government           helppoor               76%         52%          38%          38%
                                      polviews
                                      attend
                                      pray
       Group C - Religion             reliten                77%         69%          60%          40%
                                      postlife
                                      prayer
                                      thnkself
                                      obey
                                      pillok
       Group D - Family                                      86%         69%          67%          50%
                                      aged
                                      divlaw
                                      socrel
                                      fechld
       Group E - Gender Roles                                71%         71%          64%          64%
                                      fepol
                                      abany
       Group F - Abortion                                    71%         57%          57%          50%
                                      abrisk
                                      premarsx
       Group G - Sexual Behavior                             71%         50%          43%          36%
                                      homosex
       Group H - Mobility/Success     getahead               71%         57%          57%          14%

                                                                      Rank Correlation
                                                        Gen 4 π45   Gen 4 π33 Gen 4 π22.5     Gen 4 π15
                                      Gen   4   π45       1.00
                                      Gen   4   π33       0.59           1.00
                                      Gen   4   π22.5     0.54           0.88          1.00
                                      Gen   4   π15       0.43           0.76          0.72        1.00

       Notes: The table shows different orderings of the speed of convergence according to the
       percentage of country-wave observations for which the absolute value of the deviation from
       the norm in the first generation has been cut by any amount (Gen 4 π45 ), by a third (Gen 4
       π30 ), by half (Gen 4 π22.5 ), and by two thirds (Gen 4 π15 ) by generation 4. The second table
       lists the rank correlations between the different convergence criteria.




                                                        42
Table A2: Limited Controls: Convergence of Cultural Attitudes (by Groups), Comparing
Generation 4 and 2
                                                  Gen 4 π22.5    Gen 2 π22.5    4       90% CI          95% CI
                                       trust
        Group A - Cooperation          fair           81%           14%        67%    (19%, 52%)      (14%, 57%)
                                       helpful
                                       eqwlth
        Group B - Government           helppoor       52%           67%        -14%   (5%, 40%)       (0%, 48%)
                                       polviews
                                       attend
                                       pray
        Group C - Religion             reliten        57%           43%        14%    (0%, 29%)       (-3%, 31%)
                                       postlife
                                       prayer
                                       thnkself
                                       obey
                                       pillok
        Group D - Family                              64%           24%        40%    (10%, 43%)      (14%, 40%)
                                       aged
                                       divlaw
                                       socrel
                                       fechld
        Group E - Gender Roles                        79%           50%        29%    (0%, 43%)       (-7%, 50%)
                                       fepol
                                       abany
        Group F - Abortion                            79%           79%        0%     (-14%, 29%)     (-14%, 29%)
                                       abrisk
                                       premarsx
        Group G - Sexual Behavior                     71%           50%        21%    (-7%, 50%)      (-7%, 57%)
                                       homosex
        Group H - Mobility/Success     getahead       57%           57%        0%     (-29%, 43%)     (-29%, 43%)
        Notes: This table replicates Table 4 using a limited set of controls. Gen 4 π22.5 (Gen 2 π22.5 ) denotes the
        average percentage of country observations for which the absolute value of the deviation from the norm has
        been cut at least in half between generation 1 and generation 4 (2) within each group.




                                                            43
Table A3: GB Benchmark: Convergence of Cultural Attitudes (by Groups), Comparing
Generation 4 and 2
                                                  Gen 4 π22.5   Gen 2 π22.5    4       90% CI        95% CI
                                       trust
       Group A - Cooperation           fair          78%           28%        50%    (14%, 48%)    (14%, 57%)
                                       helpful
                                       eqwlth
       Group B - Government            helppoor      50%           39%        11%    (10%, 43%)     (5%, 48%)
                                       polviews
                                       attend
                                       pray
       Group C - Religion              reliten       57%           43%        13%    (0%, 31%)      (-3%, 34%)
                                       postlife
                                       prayer
                                       thnkself
                                       obey
                                       pillok
       Group D - Family                              64%           25%        39%    (12%, 38%)    (10%, 40%)
                                       aged
                                       divlaw
                                       socrel
                                       fechld
       Group E - Gender Roles                        75%           75%        0%     (-7%, 43%)     (-7%, 43%)
                                       fepol
                                       abany
       Group F - Abortion                            58%           42%        17%    (-7%, 36%)    (-14%, 43%)
                                       abrisk
                                       premarsx
       Group G - Sexual Behavior                     58%           42%        17%    (0%, 43%)      (-7%, 50%)
                                       homosex
       Group H - Mobility/Success      getahead      33%           50%        -17%   (-29%, 43%)   (-29%, 43%)
       Notes: This    table replicates Table 4 using the attitude of the fourth generation of GB immigrants as a
       benchmark.     Gen 4 π22.5 (Gen 2 π22.5 ) denotes the average percentage of country observations for which
       the absolute   value of the deviation from the norm has been cut at least in half between generation 1 and
       generation 4   (2) within each group.




                                                           44
Table A4: Including Mexico in Benchmark: Convergence of Cultural Attitudes (by Groups),
Comparing Generation 4 and 2
                                                   Gen 4 π22.5    Gen 2 π22.5    4       90% CI        95% CI
                                        trust
          Group A - Cooperation         fair           71%           33%        38%    (14%, 48%)    (10%, 52%)
                                        helpful
                                        eqwlth
          Group B - Government          helppoor       43%           43%        0%     (0%, 43%)     (-5%, 43%)
                                        polviews
                                        attend
                                        pray
          Group C - Religion            reliten        57%           46%        11%    (3%, 31%)      (0%, 34%)
                                        postlife
                                        prayer
                                        thnkself
                                        obey
                                        pillok
          Group D - Family                             67%           43%        24%    (10%, 36%)     (7%, 40%)
                                        aged
                                        divlaw
                                        socrel
                                        fechld
          Group E - Gender Roles                       71%           43%        29%     0%, 43%)     (-7%, 50%)
                                        fepol
                                        abany
          Group F - Abortion                           64%           50%        14%    (-7%, 36%)    (-14%, 43%)
                                        abrisk
                                        premarsx
          Group G - Sexual Behavior                    43%           43%        0%     (0%, 43%)     (-7%, 50%)
                                        homosex
          Group H - Mobility/Success    getahead       57%           71%        -14%   (-29%, 43%)   (-29%, 43%)
          Notes: This table replicates Table 4 using a benchmark that includes the attitudes of Mexican immigrants.
          Gen 4 π22.5 (Gen 2 π22.5 ) denotes the average percentage of country observations for which the absolute
          value of the deviation from the norm has been cut at least in half between generation 1 and generation 4
          (2) within each group.




Table A5: List of Matched Attitudes between the General Social Survey (GSS) and the
European Values Survey/World Values Survey (EVS/WVS)
    GSS         EVS/WVS Question Description of EVS variable
                Number
    trust       a165                   Most people can be trusted (y=1 for yes if xEV S = 1)
    attend      f028                   How often do you attend religious services (y=1 for less often if xEV S > 3)
    pray        f063                   How important is God in your life (y=1 for less important if xEV S < 7)
    postlife    f051                   Believe in life after death (y=1 for no if xEV S = 0)
    thnkself a029                      Important child qualities: independence (y=1 for important if xEV S = 1)
    obey        a042                   Important child qualities: obedience (y=1 for not important if xEV S = 0)
    fechild     d061                   Pre-school child suffers with working mother (y=1 for yes if xEV S > 2)
    abany       f120                   Justifiable: abortion (y=1 for yes if xEV S = 10)
    homosex f118                       Justifiable: homosexuality (y=1 for yes if xEV S > 7)
    Notes: The responses from the EVS/WVS have been recoded to have a binary outcome. We indicate the correspondence
    between GSS and EVS/WVS and the original value(s) from the EVS/WVS that are matched with the recoded GSS
    variables. y denotes the indicator variable in the first stage Probit. xEV S denotes the answer number to the EVS/WVS
    questions.




                                                             45
Appendix 2: Phase Diagram and Location of q̃ (For On-
line Publication Only)
Re-writing equation (8) in the text, the dynamics of assimilation is determined by:
                                                                                                                       
                                            M                m                ϕ0 −β[(1−qt )θM V −qt θm V −z]
                             (1 − qt )θ V − qt θ V − d                                 c(z−z)                          − z
                                                                                         d
                                                                                              −βd
                  1 −
           qt+1 =                                                                                                         qt                   (A1)
                                                                         z−z                                              



                                                                                  
                                                ϕ0 −β[(1−qt )θ M V −qt θ m V −z]                                       [θ M V −qt θ m V ]
                                                                                                                                          
              (1 − qt )θM V − qt θm V − d                 c(z−z)                       −z           θM V + θm V + βd     c(z−z)
dqt+1                                                       d
                                                                 −βd                                                      d
                                                                                                                                −βd          
       1 −
      =                                                                                    +                                             t  qt
                                                                                                                                                    >0
 dqt                                        z−z                                                              z−z

                                                                                                                                                     (A2)




                                            d2 qt+1   2c(θM V + θm V )
                                                    =                  >0                                                                        (A3)
                                             dqt2      c(z − z) − βd2
    Therefore the relationship between qt+1 and qt (the phase line) starts at zero and it is
increasing and convex. It intersects the 45 degree line also at q̃, where q̃ satisfies (1− q̃)θM V −
q̃V θm V −dτ ∗ = z ,so that there are no gain from assimilation and G (1 − q̃)θM V − q̃θm V − dτ ∗ =
                                                                                                     

0. Our parametrization implies:

                                                                          ϕ0 d2
                                                            θM V −       c(z−z)
                                                                                −       z
                                                    q̃ =                                                                                         (A4)
                                                                θM V     +θ V m


   The numerator of the first line on the right hand side of (A4) is strictly positive, because we
                                                                                      ϕ0 d2
assume that (1−q)θM V −qθm V −dτ ∗ ≥ z which implies that (1−q)θM V −qθm V − c(z−z)         −z ≥ 0.
Hence q̃ > 0 . The numerator and denominator of (A4) also imply that q̃ < 1. Therefore,
0 < q̃ < 1 as claimed in the text.




                                                                    46
