UNDER-INVESTMENT IN A PROFITABLE TECHNOLOGY:
THE CASE OF SEASONAL MIGRATION IN BANGLADESH
Gharad Bryan
Shyamal Chowdhury
Ahmed Mushfiq Mobarak
WORKING PAPER 20172

NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

UNDER-INVESTMENT IN A PROFITABLE TECHNOLOGY:
THE CASE OF SEASONAL MIGRATION IN BANGLADESH
Gharad Bryan
Shyamal Chowdhury
Ahmed Mushfiq Mobarak
Working Paper 20172
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20172
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2014

We are grateful to AusAID, the International Growth Centre and the U.S. Department of Labor for
financial support. We thank, without implicating, Tim Besley, Abhijit Banerjee, Judy Chevalier, Esther
Duflo, Andrew Foster, Ted Miguel, Rohini Pande, Ben Polak, Chris Woodruff, John Gibson, Chris
Udry, Dean Yang, Michael Clemens, Francisco Rodriguez, Chung Wing Tse, Angelino Viceisza, David
Atkin, Peter Schott, Jonathan Feinstein, Mark Rosenzweig, Andrew Zeitlin, Jean-Marc Robin, conference
participants at the 20th BREAD conference, 2010 ASSA conference, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta,
2011 NEUDC Conference, 2nd IGC Growth Week 2010, 2013 World Bank ABCDE Conference,
and seminar participants at Yale University, UC-Berkeley, MIT/Harvard, Stanford University, London
School of Economics, University of Toulouse, Columbia University, Johns Hopkins University, InterAmerican Development Bank, UC-Santa Barbara, World Bank, U.S. Department of Labor, IFPRI,
Sacred Heart University and Brown University for comments. Julia Brown, Laura Feeney, Alamgir
Kabir, Daniel Tello, Talya Wyzanski, Tetyana Zelenska provided excellent research assistance. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Gharad Bryan, Shyamal Chowdhury, and Ahmed Mushfiq Mobarak. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Under-investment in a Profitable Technology: The Case of Seasonal Migration in Bangladesh
Gharad Bryan, Shyamal Chowdhury, and Ahmed Mushfiq Mobarak
NBER Working Paper No. 20172
May 2014
JEL No. J61,O1,O15,R23
ABSTRACT
Hunger during pre-harvest lean seasons is widespread in the agrarian areas of Asia and Sub-Saharan
Africa. We randomly assign an $8.50 incentive to households in rural Bangladesh to temporarily out-migrate
during the lean season. The incentive induces 22% of households to send a seasonal migrant, their
consumption at the origin increases significantly, and treated households are 8-10 percentage points
more likely to re-migrate 1 and 3 years after the incentive is removed. These facts can be explained
qualitatively by a model in which migration is risky, mitigating risk requires individual-specific learning,
and some migrants are sufficiently close to subsistence that failed migration is very costly. We document
evidence consistent with this model using heterogeneity analysis and additional experimental variation,
but calibrations with forward-looking households that can save up to migrate suggest that it is difficult
for the model to quantitatively match the data. We conclude with extensions to the model that could
provide a better quantitative accounting of the behavior.
Gharad Bryan
London School of Economics
Houghton Street
London WC2A 2AE
United Kingdom
g.t.bryan@lse.ac.uk
Shyamal Chowdhury
Suite 210, Biomedical Building (C81),
1 Central Av
Australian Technology Park,
Eveleigh, NSW 2015
Australia
shyamal.chowdhury@sydney.edu.au

An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w20172

Ahmed Mushfiq Mobarak
Yale School of Management
135 Prospect Street
Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520
and NBER
ahmed.mobarak@yale.edu

1

Introduction
This paper studies the causes and consequences of internal seasonal migration in

northwestern Bangladesh, a region where over 5 million people live below the poverty line, and
must cope with a regular pre-harvest seasonal famine. This seasonal famine – known locally as
monga – is emblematic of the widespread lean or “hungry” seasons experienced throughout South
Asia and Sub-Saharan Africa, in which households are forced into extreme poverty for part of the
year.1 The proximate causes of the famine season are easily understood – work opportunities are
scarce between planting and harvest in agrarian areas, and grain prices rise during this period
(Khandker and Mahmud 2012). Understanding how a famine can occur every year despite the
existence of potential mitigation strategies is, however, more challenging. We explore one obvious
mitigation option – temporary migration to nearby urban areas that offer better employment
opportunities. We randomly assigned a cash or credit incentive (of $8.50, which covers the roundtrip travel cost) conditional on a household member migrating during the 2008 monga season. We
document very large economic returns to migration. To explore why people who were induced to
migrate by our program were not already migrating despite these high returns, we build a model with
risk aversion, credit constraints and savings.
The random assignment of incentives allows us to generate among the first experimental
estimates of the effects of migration. Estimating the returns to migration is the subject of a very
large literature, but one that has been hampered by difficult selection issues (Akee 2010; Grogger
and Hanson 2011).2 Most closely related to our work are a small number of experimental and quasiexperimental studies of the effects of migration, many of which are cited in McKenzie and Yang

Seasonal poverty has been documented in Ethiopia (Dercon and Krishnan 2000), where poverty and
malnourishment increase 27% during the lean season, Mozambique and Malawi (Brune et al. 2011) – where people refer
to a “hungry season”, Madagascar, where (Dostie et al. 2002) estimate that 1 million people fall into poverty before the
rice harvest, Kenya, where (Swift 1989) distinguishes between years that people died and years of less severe shortage,
Francophone Africa (the soudure phenomenon), Indonesia (Basu and Wong 2012) (‘musim paceklik’ or ‘famine season’
and ‘lapar biasa’ or ‘ordinary hunger period), Thailand (Paxson 1993), India (Chaudhuri and Paxson 2002) and inland
China (Jalan and Ravallion 2001).
2 Prior attempts use controls for observables (Adams 1998), selection correction methods (Barham and Boucher
1998), matching (Gibson and McKenzie 2010), instrumental variables (Brown and Leeves 2007; McKenzie and
Rapoport 2007; Yang 2008; Macours and Vakis 2010), panel data techniques (Beegle et al. 2011) , and natural policy
experiments (Clemens 2010; Gibson et al. 2013) to estimate the causal impact of migration.
1

1

(2010) and McKenzie (2012). These studies often exploit exogenous variation in immigration
policies to study the effects of permanent international migration.3
Migration induced by our intervention increases food and non-food expenditures of
migrants’ family members remaining at the origin by 30-35%, and improves their caloric intake by
550-700 calories per person per day. Most strikingly, households in the treatment areas continue to
migrate at a higher rate in subsequent seasons, even after the incentive is removed. The migration
rate is 10 percentage points higher in treatment areas a year later, and this figure drops only slightly
to 8 percentage points 3 years later.
These large effects on migration rates, consumption, and re-migration suggest that a policy
of encouraging migration may have substantial benefits. However, to understand the settings to
which these results might apply, and optimal policy responses, it is necessary to confront an
important puzzle: why didn’t our subjects already engage in such highly profitable behavior? An
answer to this question would allow a characterization of settings in which encouragement to adopt
new technologies or behaviors is likely to lead to similar positive outcomes, and provide some policy
guidance. The puzzle is not limited to our sample: according to nationally representative HIES 2005
data only 5 percent of households in monga-prone districts receive domestic remittances, while 22
percent of all Bangladeshi households do. Remittances under-predict out-migration rates, but the
size and direction of this gap is puzzling. The behavior also mirrors broader trends in international
migration. The poorest Europeans from the poorest regions were the ones who chose not to
migrate during a period in which 60 million Europeans left for the New World, even though their
returns from doing so were likely the highest (Hatton and Williamson 1998). Ardington et al (2009)
provide similar evidence of constraints preventing profitable out-migration in rural South Africa.
The second part of our paper rationalizes the experimental results using a simple benchmark
model in which experimenting with a new activity is risky, and rational households choose not
migrate in the face of uncertainty about their prospects at the destination. Given a potential
downside to migration (which we show exists in our data), households may fear an unlikely but
disastrous outcome in which they pay the cost of moving, but return hungry after not finding
employment during a period in which their family is already under the threat of famine. Inducing
the inaugural migration by insuring against this devastating outcome (which our grant or loan with

3 A related literature studies the effects of exogenous changes in destination conditions on remittances, savings and
welfare at the origin (Martinez and Yang 2005; Aycinena et al. 2010; Chin et al. 2010; Ashraf et al. forthcoming).

2

implied limited liability managed to do) can lead to long-run benefits where households either learn
how well their skills fare at the destination, or improve future prospects by allowing employers to
learn about them. This last aspect of our model means that it is important for individuals to
experience migration for themselves, they cannot learn about returns from others. Such frictions
may be part of what keeps workers in agriculture despite the persistent productivity gap between
rural agriculture and urban non-agriculture sectors (Gollin et al. 2002; Caselli 2005; Restuccia et al.
2008; Vollrath 2009; Gollin et al. 2011; McMillan and Rodrik 2011).
Experimentation is deterred by two key elements: (a) individual-specific risk, and (b) the fact
that individuals are close to subsistence, making migration failure very costly. The model is related
to the “poverty as vulnerability” view (Banerjee 2004) – that the poor cannot take advantage of
profitable opportunities because they are vulnerable and afraid of losses (Kanbur 1979; Kihlstrom
and Laffont 1979; Banerjee and Newman 1991). A model with these elements may also shed light
on a number of other important puzzles in growth and development.

Green revolution

technologies led to dramatic increases in agricultural productivity in South Asia (Evenson and Gollin
2003), but adoption and diffusion of the new technologies was slow, partly due to low levels of
experimentation and the resultant slow learning (Munshi 2004; BenYishay and Mobarak 2013).
Smallholder farmers reliant on the grain output for subsistence may not experiment with a new
technology with uncertain returns (given the farmer’s own soil quality, rainfall and farming
techniques), even if they believe the technology is likely to be profitable. This is especially true in
South Asia where the median farm is less than an acre, and therefore not easily divisible into
experimental plots (Foster and Rosenzweig 2011).4

Similarly, to counter the surprisingly low

adoption rates of effective health products (Mobarak et al. 2012; Meredith et al. 2013), we may need
to give households the opportunity to experiment with the new technology (Dupas 2014), perhaps
with free trial periods and other insurance schemes. Aversion to experimentation can also hinder
entrepreneurship and business start-ups and growth (Hausmann and Rodrik 2003; Fischer 2013).
In the third part of the paper, we return to our data to assess whether empirical relationships
are consistent with some of the qualitative predictions of the model. Much of the evidence supports
our structure. We show that households that are close to subsistence – on whom experimenting
4 The inability to experiment due to uninsured risk has been linked to biases towards low risk low-return technologies
that stunt long-run growth (Mobarak and Rosenzweig 2013), and to reduced investments in agricultural inputs and
technologies such as new high-yield variety seeds and fertilizer (Rosenzweig and Wolpin 1993; Dercon and Christiaensen
2011).

3

with a new activity imposes the biggest risk – start with lower migration rates, but are the most
responsive to our intervention. The households induced to migrate by our incentive are less likely to
have pre-existing network connections at the destination, and exhibit learning about migration
opportunities and destinations in their subsequent choices on whether and where to re-migrate.
We also conduct a new round of experiments in 2011 to test further predictions of the
model. To distinguish our explanation from failure to migrate due to a liquidity constraint, we show
that migration is more responsive to incentives (e.g. credit conditional on migration) than to
unconditional credit. We also implement another new treatment providing insurance for migration,
and this offer induces just as many households to migrate. Further, they respond to the insurance
program as if the environment is risky, and they are risk averse.
Results of these tests notwithstanding, it is still somewhat puzzling that the households we
induced were not experimenting with migration in years in which their income realization was high,
or that they did not save up to experiment. To explore, the fourth part of this paper calibrates the
model allowing for buffer stock savings and shows that, quantitatively, our model does not offer a
fully satisfying explanation for the migration phenomena.5 Once agents in our model are allowed to
save up to migrate, they do so rapidly. The model implies that, for reasonable levels of risk aversion,
there should be very few households that have not tried migrating, and therefore very few
households that would be induced to migrate by our interventions. We conclude that the level of
risk aversion required to quantitatively account for our data appears to be implausibly high.
In the light of these results, we believe that our work leads to three main conclusions. First,
our experimental results show that migration in this setting is very profitable, and in some sense
under-utilized. Second, our qualitative exploration of the model shows that the three components
of risk, incomes close to subsistence and learning about the returns to migration are important
elements in explaining the low utilization. Our positive results are likely to be replicable in settings
with these three characteristics. Third, our quantitative results show that we do not fully understand
the migration choices of these households: there is some important aspect of their choices that we
are not capturing. This final challenge leads us to briefly consider some departures from full
information and rationality and other market imperfections (such as savings constraints). Ultimately,
however, we lack the data to determine what ingredient would provide a fully satisfying

5 We adapt the highly influential buffer stock saving model that is the backbone of much modern macroeconomic
modeling. For example, see Kaboski & Townsend (2011).

4

characterization of the behavior we observe, and leave this to future research. Because we cannot
fully rationalize the behavior, we advocate care in interpreting our model: any additional element
that is needed to match the data may change the conclusions from our baseline model.
The next two sections describe the context and the design of our interventions. We present
program evaluation results in Section 4. These findings motivate the risky experimentation model in
Section 5. We use the model to frame further discussion of the data in Section 6, calibrate the
model and discuss its ability to rationalize the experimental results in Section 7, discuss some
extensions to the baseline model in Section 8 and offer conclusions and some tentative policy
implications in Section 9.

2

The Context: Rangpur and the Monga Famine
Our experiments were conducted in 100 villages in two districts (Kurigram and Lalmonirhat)

in the seasonal-famine prone Rangpur region of north-western Bangladesh. The Rangpur region is
home to roughly 7% of the country’s population, or 9.6 million people. 57% of the region’s
population (or 5.3 million people) live below the poverty line.6 In addition to the higher level of
poverty compared to the rest of Bangladesh, the Rangpur region experiences more pronounced
seasonality in income and consumption, with incomes decreasing by 50-60% and total household
expenditures dropping by 10-25% during the post-planting and pre-harvest season (SeptemberNovember) for the Aman harvest, which is the main rice crop in Bangladesh (Khandker and
Mahmud 2012). As Figure 1 indicates, the price of rice also spikes during this season, particularly in
Rangpur, and thus actual rice consumption drops 22% even as households shift monetary
expenditures towards food while waiting for the harvest.
The lack of job opportunities and low wages during the pre-harvest season and the
coincident increase in grain prices combines to create a situation of seasonal deprivation and famine
(Sen 1981; Khandker and Mahmud 2012).7 The famine occurs with disturbing regularity and thus
has a name: monga. It has been described as a routine crisis (Rahman 1995), and its effects on
hunger and starvation are widely chronicled in the local media. The drastic drop in purchasing power

Extreme poverty rates (defined as individuals who cannot meet the 2100 calorie per day food intake) were 25 percent
nationwide, but 43 percent in the Rangpur districts. Poverty figures are based on Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics (BBS)
Household Income and expenditure survey 2005 (HIES 2005), and population figures are based on projections from the
2001 Census data.
7 Amartya Sen (1981) notes these price spikes and wage plunges as important causes of the 1974 famine in
Bangladesh, and that the greater Rangpur districts were among the most severely affected by this famine.
6

5

between planting and harvest threatens to take consumption below subsistence for Rangpur
households, where agricultural wages are already the lowest in the country (Bangladesh Bureau of
Statistics 2011).
Several puzzling stylized facts about institutional characteristics and coping strategies
motivate the design of our migration experiments. First, seasonal out-migration from the mongaprone districts appears to be low despite the absence of local non-farm employment opportunities.
According to the nationally representative HIES 2005 data, it is more common for agricultural
laborers from other regions of Bangladesh to migrate in search of higher wages and employment
opportunities. Seasonal migration is known to be one primary mechanism by which households
diversify income sources in India (Banerjee and Duflo 2007).
Second, inter-regional variation in income and poverty between Rangpur and the rest of the
Bangladesh have been shown to be much larger than the inter-seasonal variation within Rangpur
(Khandker 2012). This suggests smoothing strategies that take advantage of inter-regional arbitrage
opportunities (i.e. migration) rather than inter-seasonal variation (e.g. savings, credit) may hold
greater promise. Moreover, an in-depth case-study of monga (Zug 2006) notes that there are offfarm employment opportunities in rickshaw-pulling and construction in nearby urban areas during
the monga season. To be sure, Zug (2006) points out that this is a risky proposition for many, as
labor demand and wages drop all over rice-growing Bangladesh during that season. However, this
seasonality is less pronounced than that observed in Rangpur (Khandker 2012).
Finally, both government and large NGO monga-mitigation efforts have concentrated on
direct subsidy programs like free or highly-subsidized grain distribution (e.g. “Vulnerable Group
Feeding,”), or food-for-work and targeted microcredit programs. These programs are expensive, and
the stringent micro-credit repayment schedule may itself keep households from engaging in
profitable migration (Shonchoy 2010). There are structural reasons associated with rice production
seasonality for the seasonal unemployment in Rangpur, and thus encouraging seasonal migration
towards where there are jobs appears to be a sensible complementary policy to experiment with.

3

The Experiment and the Data Collected
The two districts where the project was conducted (Lalmonirhat and Kurigram) represent

the agro-ecological zones that regularly witness the monga famine. We randomly selected 100
villages in these two districts and first conducted a village census in each location in June 2008. Next
we randomly selected 19 households in each village from the set of households that reported (a) that
6

they owned less than 50 decimals of land, and (b) that a household member was forced to miss
meals during the prior (2007) monga season.8 In August 2008 we randomly allocated the 100
villages into four groups: Cash, Credit, Information and Control. These treatments were
subsequently implemented on the 19 households in each village in collaboration with PKSF through
their partner NGOs with substantial field presence in the two districts.9 The partner NGOs were
already implementing micro-credit programs in each of the 100 sample villages.
The NGOs implemented the interventions in late August 2008 for the monga season
starting in September. 16 of the 100 study villages (consisting of 304 sample households) were
randomly assigned to form a control group. A further 16 villages (consisting of another 304 sample
households) were placed in a job information only treatment. These households were given
information on types of jobs available in four pre-selected destinations, the likelihood of getting
such a job and approximate wages associated with each type of job and destination (see Appendix 1
for details). 703 households in 37 randomly selected villages were offered cash of 600 Taka
(~US$8.50) at the origin conditional on migration, and an additional bonus of 200 Taka (~US$3) if
the migrant reported to us at the destination during a specified time period. We also provided
exactly the same information about jobs and wages to this group as in the information-only
treatment. 600 Taka covers a little more than the average round-trip cost of safe travel from the two
origin districts to the four nearby towns for which we provided job information. We monitored
migration behavior carefully and strictly imposed the migration conditionality, so that the 600 Taka
intervention was practically equivalent to providing a bus ticket.10
The 589 households in the final set of 31 villages were offered the same information and the
same Tk 600 + Tk 200 incentive to migrate, but in the form of a zero-interest loan to be paid back
at the end of the monga season. The loan was offered by our partner micro-credit NGOs that have
a history of lending money in these villages. There is an implicit understanding of limited liability on

71% of the census households owned less than 50 decimals of land, and 63% responded affirmatively to the
question about missing meals. Overall, 56% satisfied both criteria, and our sample is therefore representative of the
poorer 56% of the rural population in the two districts.
9 PKSF (Palli Karma Sahayak Foundation) is an apex micro-credit funding and capacity building organizations in
Bangladesh. It is a not-for-profit set up by the Government of Bangladesh in 1990.
10 The strict imposition of the migration conditionality implied that some households had to return the 600 Taka if
they did not migrate after accepting the cash. We could not provide an actual bus ticket (rather than cash) for practical
reasons: if that specific bus crashed, then that would have reflected poorly on the NGOs. Our data show that
households found cheaper ways to travel to the destination: the average roundtrip travel cost was reported to be 450
Taka, or 529 Taka including the cost of food and other incidentals during the trip.
8

7

these loans since we are lending to the extremely poor during a period of financial hardship. As
discussed below, ultimately 80% of households were able to repay the loan.
In the 68 villages where we provided monetary incentives for people to seasonally outmigrate (37 cash + 31 credit villages), we sometimes randomly assigned additional conditionalities to
subsets of households within the village.

A trial profile in Figure 2 provides details.

Some

households were required to migrate in groups, and some were required to migrate to a specific
destination. These conditionalities created random within-village variation, which we will use as
instrumental variables to study spillover effects from one person to another.
3.1

Data
We conducted a baseline survey of the 1900 sample households in July 2008, just before the

onset of the 2008 Monga. We collected follow-up data in December 2008, at the end of the 2008
Monga season. These two rounds involved detailed consumption modules in addition to data on
income, assets, credit and savings. The follow-up also asked detailed questions about migration
experiences over the previous four months. We learnt that many migrants had not returned by
December 2008, and therefore conducted a short follow-up survey in May 2009 to get more
complete information about households’ migration experiences. To study the longer-run effects of
migration, and re-migration behavior during the next Monga season, we conducted another followup survey in December 2009. This survey only included the consumption module and a migration
module.

We conducted a new round of experiments to test our theories in 2011, and therefore

collected an additional round of follow-up data on the re-migration behavior of this sample in July
2011. In summary, detailed consumption data was collected over 3 rounds: in July 2008 (baseline),
December 2008 and December 2009. Migration behavior was collected in December 2008, May
2009, December 2009 and July 2011, which jointly cover three seasons in 2008, 2009 and 2011.
Table 1 shows that there was pre-treatment balance across the randomly assigned groups in
terms of the variables that we will use as outcomes in the analysis to follow. A Bonferroni multiple
comparison correction for 27 independent tests requires a significance threshold of α=0.0019 for
each test to recover an overall significance level of α=0.05. Using this criterion, no differences at
baseline are statistically meaningful.

8

4

Program Take-up and the Effects of Seasonal Migration
In this section we describe the main results of our initial (2008) experiment. Section 4.1

provides results on migration behavior. We first document the impact of the incentive on migration
during the 2008 monga season (the season for which the incentive was in place). We then document
the ongoing impact of the incentive on migration in 2009 and 2011 (one and 3 years, respectively,
after the incentive was removed). In Section 4.2 we look at the effect of the treatment on
consumption at the origin (both in the short-run: 2008 and the long-run: 2009). We first provide
both intent-to-treat (ITT) and local average treatment effect (LATE) estimates for consumption in
December 2008 and then also look at the ongoing impact of the incentives on consumption in 2009.
In Section 4.3 we look at migration income and savings at the destination.
4.1

Migration and Re-migration
Table 2 reports the take-up of the program across the four groups labeled cash, credit,

information and control. We have 2008 migration data from two follow-up surveys, one conducted
immediately after the monga ended (in December 2008), and another in May 2009. The second
follow-up was helpful for cross-checking the first migration report,11 and for capturing the migration
experiences of those who left and/or returned later. The two sets of reports were quite consistent
with each other, and the first row of Table 2 shows the more complete 2008 migration rates
obtained in May 2009.
In Table 2 we define a household as having a seasonal migrant if at least one household
member migrated away in search of work between September 2008 and April 2009. This extended
definition of the migration window accounts for the possibility that our incentive merely moved
forward migration that would have taken place anyway. This window captures all migration during
the Aman cropping season and, as a consequence, all the migration associated with Monga.
About a third (36.0%) of households in control villages sent a seasonal migrant.12 Providing
information about wages and job opportunities at the destination had no effect on the migration rate

11 Since an incentive was involved, we verified migration reports closely using the substantial field presence of our
partner NGOs, by cross-checking migration dates in the two surveys conducted six months apart, by cross-checking
responses across households who reported migrating together in a group, and finally, by independently asking neighbors.
The analysis (available on request) shows a high degree of accuracy in the cross reports and, importantly, that the
accuracy of the cross reporting was not different in incentivized villages.
12 In a large survey of 482,000 households in the Rangpur region, 36.0% of people report using “out-migration” as a
coping mechanism for the Monga (Khandker et al. 2011). Our result appears very consistent with the large-sample

9

(the point estimate of the difference is 0.0% and is tightly estimated). Either households already had
this information, or the information we made available was not useful or credible. With the $8.50
(+$3) cash or credit treatments, the seasonal migration rate jumps to 59.0% and 56.8% respectively.
In other words, incentives induced about 22% of the sample households to send a migrant. The
migration response to the cash and credit incentives are statistically significant relative to control or
information, but there is no statistical difference between providing cash and providing credit – a
fact that our model will later account for. Since households appear to react very similarly to either
incentive, we combine the impact of these two treatments for expositional simplicity (and call it
“incentive”) for much of our analysis, and compare it against the combined information and control
groups (labeled “non-incentive”).
The second and third rows of Table 2 compare re-migration rates in subsequent years across
the incentive and non-incentive groups. We conducted follow-up surveys in December 2009 and in
July 2011 and asked about migration behavior in the preceding lean seasons, but we did not repeat
any of the treatments in the villages used for the comparisons in 2008. Strikingly, the migration rate
in 2009 was 9 percentage points higher in treatment villages, and this is after the incentives were
removed. Section 6.3.1 will show that this is almost entirely due to re-migration amongst a subset
who were induced to migrate in 2008. In other words, migration appears to be an “experience
good”. The July 2011 survey measured migration during the other (lesser) lean season that coincides
with the pre-harvest period for the second (lesser) rice harvest. Even two and a half years later,
without any further incentive, the migration rate remains 7 percentage points higher in the villages
randomly assigned to the cash or credit treatment in 2008.13
We learn two important things from this re-migration behavior. First, the propensity to remigrate absent further inducements serves as a revealed preference indication that the net benefits
from migration were positive for many, and/or that migrants developed some asset during the initial
experience that makes future migration a positive expected return activity.14 Second, the persistence
of re-migration from 2009 to 2011 (with four potential migration seasons in between) suggests that
finding. Interestingly, survey respondents who qualified for government safety-net benefits were no more likely to
migrate than households that did not.
13 Overall in our sample, 953 out of 1871 sample households sent a migrant in 2008 (and 723 of them traveled before
our December 2008 follow-up survey), and 800 households sent a seasonal migrant during the 2009 monga season.
14 All socio-economic outcomes we measure using our surveys will necessarily be incomplete, since it is not possible to
combine the social, psychological and economic effects of migration in one comprehensive welfare measure. The
revealed re-migration preference is therefore a useful complement to other economic outcomes that we use in the
analysis below.

10

households learnt something valuable or grew some real asset from the initial migration experience.
This persistence makes it unlikely that some households simply got lucky one year, and then it took
them several tries to determine (again) that they are actually better off not migrating. It also reduces
the likelihood that our results are driven by a particularly good migration year in 2008.
This strong repeat migration also suggests that migration is an absorbing state, at least for
some portion of the population. As we discuss further in Sections 6 and 8, this makes it hard to
understand how our initial incentive was successful in inducing so much migration.
4.2

Effects of Migration on Consumption at the Origin
We now study the effects of migration on consumption expenditures amongst remaining

household members during the monga season. Consumption is a broad and useful measure of the
benefits of migration, aggregating as it does the impact of migrating on the whole family (Deaton
1997), and takes into account the monetary costs of investing (although it neglects non-pecuniary
costs). Consumption can be comparably measured for migrant and non-migrant families alike, and
it overcomes the problems associated with measuring the full costs and benefits of technology
adoption highlighted in Foster and Rosenzweig (2010). Our consumption data are detailed and
comprehensive: we collect expenditures on 318 different food (255) and non-food (63) items
(mostly over a week recall, and some less-frequently-purchased items over bi-weekly or monthly
recall), and aggregate up to create measures of food and non-food consumption and caloric intake.
We first present pure experimental (intent-to-treat) estimates in Table 3 with consumption
measures regressed on the randomly assigned treatments: cash, credit and information for migration.
Our regressions take the form:

whereYivj is per capita consumption (money spent on food, non-food, total calories, protein,
meat, education, etc. in turn) for household i in village v in sub-district j in 2008, and φj are fixed
effects for sub-districts.

Standard errors are clustered by village, which was the unit of

randomization (and this will be true for all our analysis). The first three columns in Table 3 show
,

and

– the coefficients on cash, credit and information – and each row represents a

different regression on a different dependent variable. Panel A studies the effects on 2008
consumption, while Panel B examines consumption measured in December 2009, after the next
Monga season. The dependent variables are household averages using the set of people reported to
11

be living in the household for at least 7 days at the time of the survey as the denominator. We
discuss the appropriate choice of denominator in more detail below.
Panel A shows that both the cash and credit treatments – which induced 21-24% more
migration – result in statistically significant increases in food and non-food consumption in 2008.
Total consumption increased by about 97 Taka per household member per month in the ‘cash’
villages, which represents about a 10% increase over consumption in the control group. The
increase in credit villages was 8%. The information treatment, which did not induce any additional
migration, does not result in any significant increases in consumption. Calories per person per day
increase by 106 under the ‘cash’ treatment.
Since both cash and credit treatments led to greater migration (Table 2), column 4 reports
the intent-to-treat estimates for these two incentive treatments jointly. Average monthly household
consumption increases by 68 Taka in these incentive villages (7% over control group), and this
results in 142 extra calories per person per day. Column 5 indicates that these effects are generally
robust to adding some controls for baseline characteristics.
Next we show the local average treatment effect (LATE), the consumption effect of
migration for those households that were induced to migrate by our intervention. This is a welldefined and policy relevant parameter in our setting: programs providing credit for migration and
even incentivizing migration seem to be of direct policy interest, and we think it unlikely that any
households were dissuaded from migrating by our incentive.15 We calculate this effect by estimating:

where Migrantivj is a binary variable equal to 1 if at least one member of household migrated
during Monga in 2008 and 0 otherwise, and Xivj is a vector of household characteristics at baseline
that we sometime control for. The endogenous choice to migrate is instrumented with whether or
not a household was randomly placed in the incentive group:
where the set of instruments Zv includes indicators for the random assignment at the village
level into one of the treatment (cash or credit) or control groups. First stage results in Appendix
Since the incentive arm included the information script, it may in theory have altered the behavior of households
that did not migrate, which would threaten the exclusion restriction. We have verified that the information-only
treatment had no effect (relative to control) on savings in 2008 or migration in 2009, or a broader range of outcomes. It
is therefore unlikely that the information component of the incentive treatment had independent effects that violate the
exclusion restriction. Furthermore, all incentive treatment effects we report in this section are robust to omitting the
information-only group entirely, and comparing only to the pure control arm.
15

12

Table 1 verify that the random assignments to cash or credit treatments are powerful predictors of
the decision to migrate.
The intervention may have changed not only households’ propensity to migrate on the
extensive margin, but also who within the household migrates, how long they travel, the number of
migration episodes on the intensive margin. Such changes may affect the interpretation of the IV
estimates. Appendix Table 2 shows that the treatment does not significantly alter whether the
household sends a male or female migrant, or the number of trips per migrant, or the number of
migrants or trips per household (on the intensive margin, conditional on someone in the household
migrating once). The effects are concentrated on the extensive margin, inducing migration among
households who were previously not migrating at all.16 However, the treatment does make it more
likely that older, heads of households become more likely to migrate.
IV estimates using treatment assignment are always larger than OLS estimates. This likely
reflects the fact that rich households at the upper end of our sample income distribution are not
very likely to migrate (baseline income has a negative coefficient in the first stage regression in
Appendix Table 1). In the IV specification, per capita food, non-food expenditures, and caloric
intake among induced migrant households increase by 30% to 35% relative to non-migrant
households. This is very similar to the 36% consumption gains from migration estimated by Beegle
et al (2011) for Tanzania. Finally, none of the results discussed above are sensitive to changes in
baseline control variables.
In terms of magnitude of effects, monthly consumption among migrant families increase by
about $5 per person, or $20 per household due to induced migration. Our survey only asked about
expenditures during the second month of monga, and the modal migrant in our sample had not yet
returned home (which includes cases where they may have returned once, but left again). We
therefore expect the effects to persist for at least another month, and the total expenditure increase
therefore easily exceeds the amount of the treatment ($8.50). Furthermore, if households engage in
consumption smoothing, then some benefits may persist even further in the future. In any case, the
$8.50 is spent on transportation costs two months prior to the consumption survey.
16 The migrant is almost always male (97%), and often the household head (84% in treatment villages and 76% in
control), who is often the only migrant from that household (93%). Migrants make 1.73 trips on average during the
season, which implies that migrants often travel multiple times within the season. The first trip lasts 42 (56) days for
treatment (control) group migrants. They return home with remittance and to rest, and travel again for 40 (40) days or
less on any subsequent trips.

13

It is not straightforward to evaluate the returns to migration based on these estimates, and
the precise value will depend on assumptions about the period over which the consumption gains
are realized, and how to treat the cost that some migrants choose to incur to return home and take a
second trip. Under a reasonable assumption that the consumption gains are realized over the 2
months of the monga period, households consume an extra Tk. 2840 (Tk. 355 per capita per month
estimated in Table 3 * 4 household members * 2 months) during the monga by incurring a migration
costs of Tk. 1038 (Tk.600/trip*1.73 trips). This implies a gross return of 273%, ignoring any
disutility from separation.
Since the act of migration increases both the independent variable of interest and possibly
reduces the denominator of the dependent variable (household size at the time of interview), any
measurement error in the date that migrants report returning can bias the coefficient on migration
upwards. We address this problem directly by studying the effects of migration in 2008 on
consumption in 2009 (where household size is computed using a totally different survey conducted
over a year later). Panel B of Table 3 shows that 2009 effects are about 60-75% as large as the
consumption effects in 2008 across both ITT and LATE specifications, but still statistically
significant. Migration is associated with a 28% increase in total household consumption. The
LATE specification for 2009 is more difficult to interpret: many of those induced to migrate in 2008
were induced to re-migrate a year later, but they could have also re-invested their 2008 earnings in
other ways that leads to long-run consumption gains.17 Appendix Table 4 examines effects on a few
detailed categories of consumption. We focus on protein consumption, because this is a marker of
welfare in very poor populations. We see that migration leads to some statistically and quantitatively
significant increase in the consumption of protein, especially from meat and fish (but not milk and
eggs). For the Bangladesh context, this reflects a shift towards a higher quality diet, as meat and fish
are considered more attractive, “tasty” sources of protein. Educational expenditures on children
also increase significantly, but there is no significant change in medical expenditures for males or
females. There are no changes in female labor force participation, school attendance or agricultural
investment.

Since the migration decision is serially correlated, measurement error in 2009 migration dates can also bias our
estimates. Appendix Table 3 shows the results of a number of other sensitivity checks on the consumption results by
varying the definition of household size (the denominator). The results are robust.

17

14

4.3

Income and Savings at the Destination
Next we examine the data on migrants’ earnings and savings at the destination to see

whether the magnitude of consumption gains we observe at the origin are in line with the amount
migrants earn, save and remit. Information on earnings and savings at the destination were only
collected from migrants, and these are not experimental estimates; they merely help to calibrate the
consumption results. Table 4 shows that migrants in the treatment group earn about $105 (7451
Taka) on average and save about half of that. The average savings plus remittance is about a dollar a
day. Remitting money is difficult and migrants carry money back in person, which is partly why we
observe multiple migration episodes during the same lean season. Therefore, joint savings plus
remittances is the best available indicator of money that becomes available for consumption at the
origin. The destination data suggest that this amount is about $66 (4600 Taka) for the season. The
“regular” migrants in the control group earn more per episode, save and remit more per day relative
to migrants in the treatment group. This is understandable, since the migrants we induce are new
and relatively inexperienced in this activity.
We can compute experimental (ITT) estimates on total income (and savings), by aggregating
across all income sources at the origin and the destination. Income is notoriously difficult to
measure in these settings, with income realized from various sources – agricultural wages, crop
income, livestock income, enterprise profits – parts of which are derived from self-employment or
family employment where a financial transaction may not have occurred. Appendix Table 5 shows
ITT and IV estimates. Households in the treatment group have 585 extra Taka in earnings, and hold
592 extra Taka in savings. In the IV specification, migration is associated with 3300 extra Taka in
earnings and savings. We also examine effects on an anthropometric measure we collected – each
child’s middle-upper-arm-circumference (MUAC). The IV specifications suggest that migrants’
children’s MUAC grew an extra 5-11 mm, but the result is not statistically significant. MUAC was
measured in December 2008, soon after the initial inducement to migrate.
Appendix Table 6 provides further descriptive statistics on the number of migration
episodes and average earnings by sector and by destination. Dhaka (the largest urban area) is the
most popular migration destination, and a large fraction of migrants to Dhaka work in the transport
sector (i.e. rickshaw pulling). Many others work for a daily wage, often as unskilled labor at
construction sites. At or around other smaller towns that are nearer to Rangpur, many migrants
work in agriculture, especially in potato-growing areas that follow a different seasonal crop cycle
than in rice-growing Rangpur. Migrants earn the most in Dhaka and at other “non-agricultural
15

destinations”: about 5100 Taka or $71 per migration episode, which translates to $121 per
household on average given multiple trips. Those working for daily wages in the non-agricultural
sector (e.g. construction sites, brick kilns) earn the most.
It is difficult to infer the income these migrants would have received had they not migrated.
Observed average migrant earnings at the destination (100 Taka per day) do compare favorably to
the earnings of the sub-sample of non-migrants with salaried employment at the origin (65 Taka per
day) and to the profits of entrepreneurs at the origin (61 Taka per day). There is heterogeneity
around that average, which introduces some risk, and we will discuss this in Section 6.

5

Theory
We have documented three facts: (1) A large number of households were motivated to

migrate in response to the 600 Taka incentive, (2) There were positive returns to the induced
migration on average, indicating that households were not migrating despite a positive expected
profit, and (3) A large portion of the households that were incentivized to migrate continued to send
a seasonal migrant in subsequent years.
These three facts taken together suggest that the people of Rangpur, and perhaps others in
the developing world, are failing to capitalize on an extremely profitable opportunity, and suggest a
potential role for policy in facilitating migration. Two issues, however, need to be addressed: first,
because these results are unlikely to generalize to all settings, it is important to understand the
circumstances in which we expect to see migration outcomes similar to the ones documented above;
and second, it is important to understand the optimal policy response to our findings. To address
these issues, this section provides a simple model that can help to rationalize the findings. The
model can be used to characterize settings in which our experimental results are likely to replicate
and can be used to think about optimal policy.
The model we provide emphasizes three key elements: risk, subsistence, and learning about
the profitability of migration. These elements help to explain why a household would not migrate
despite positive returns, and also the strong remigration rates. Further, our model also incorporates
the empirically realistic assumptions that households face credit constraints and can save, both for
migration and to buffer against income shocks.
To assess the empirical fit of the model we undertake two exercises. First we use the model
to frame a deeper discussion of the data in Section 6 and argue that several patterns in the data are
qualitatively consistent with our simple framework. Second, in Section 7 we ask whether the model
16

can make sense of the data, quantitatively. To do this, we calibrate the model and then ask how risk
averse a potential migrant would have to be for our model to generate our experimental results.
Here we find that the model is not able to quantitatively replicate our experimental findings for
reasonable parameter values. We argue that there are two main reasons for this failure: first, forward
looking migrants should foresee the strong positive re-migration rate and hence the long term risk
reduction advantages of migration; second, given the profitability of migration, households should
be saving up in order to experiment.
We interpret the results of this section as follows. First, our qualitative analysis strongly
suggests that risk, subsistence and the need to experience migration are important elements in
explaining our experimental results. We predict these three elements will be present in other settings
where migration is profitable but under-utilized. Second, our quantitative results suggest that the
behavior we document (low migration rates but high returns) remains somewhat of a puzzle: there is
some element that we do not understand. In section 8 we provide some discussion of what this
element may be but, because we lack the data to come to a definitive conclusion, we leave the
resolution of the puzzle to future work. Such work could help us to get a stronger understanding of
the two questions that motivate this section: where do we expect to see positive unrealized returns,
and what exactly should policymakers do in response to these returns?
5.1

Baseline Model
We consider the migration and consumption choices of an infinitely lived household in

discrete time. In each time period, a state of the world
and the household receives income

∈

is drawn according to the distribution μ

.18 We refer to this as background income and assume the

process is iid.19 A household that enters the period with assets A and receives background income y
has cash on hand x = A+y. We assume that the household can save at a gross interest rate R, but

We assume that all households face the same distribution of background income. This is a strong simplifying
assumption. In practice there are likely to be poorer and wealthier households. Our model suggests that those that are
very poor will not migrate because it is too risky. In practice, those that are very rich will likely not migrate because they
do not need to supplement income and those that are in the middle migrate because they can afford to and benefit from
doing so. This is consistent with a slightly altered version of the model presented here in which migration truncates the
distribution of earning from below. We have explored this alternative model, but find that it leads to similar quantitative
results. We do not pursue this approach in the main text as the model is more complicated – because cash on hand is
not a sufficient state variable it is also more computationally expensive to use for simulations.
19 See Deaton (1991) for a discussion of the impact of relaxing this assumption. We think it is a reasonable assumption
in our setting and maintain it throughout.
18

17

cannot borrow for consumption purposes.20 Therefore, consumption is less than cash on hand
in any period.
The household faces uncertainty. With probability

the household is type G – good at

migrating – and receives a positive (net) return to migrating of m. With probability 1

the

household is type B – bad at migrating – and receives no return to migrating, but faces a cost F if it
does choose to migrate. There are two possible interpretations of

. The first is that each

migrator has a set characteristic, which determines whether he or she good at migrating, and is
revealed at the destination. The second is that

is the probability of finding a connection at the

destination within a reasonable search time.21 In either case, we think of type (once it is revealed) as
being a household specific parameter, and not something that can be easily learned or transferred
over from other households in the village. We further assume that this uncertainty resolves after one
period of experimentation with migration. Migration is, therefore, to be thought of as an experience
good. This assumption is motivated by reports that migrants need to find a potential employer at the
destination and convince that employer to trust them. Once this link is established it is permanent,
but some migrants will not be able to form such a link. A leading example from our data is
convincing the owner of a rickshaw that you can be trusted with his valuable asset.22
A household that knows it is bad at migrating will never migrate and is essentially a Deaton
(1991) buffer stock saver. With cash on hand x, such a household solves
max

,

20 Households have access to microfinance from a range of sources, but the conditions associated with such loans
(only for female borrowers, to be used for entrepreneurial ventures, requiring bi-weekly repayment) imply that
households are still credit constrained for consumption smoothing or migration.
21 The two alternatives differ in one key aspect: what are the choices open to a household that has migrated in the past
and found itself to be a bad migrator? The first alternative implies they will never migrate again, because they know they
are bad at migrating, but the second that they may migrate again and take another draw to see if they can find a
connection. We write the model in this section with the first possibility in mind because it is simpler. However, when
we do our calibration we assume that a household that is found to be bad can continue to migrate and have another
draw, in line with the second interpretation. This errs on the side of letting the model fit the data, because more
households will be affected by the incentive. We also favor the second interpretation when we consider the
interpretation of our insurance experiments in Section 6.2.1.
22 We thank an anonymous referee for clarification on this point and also the term experience good.
Direct
experience with migration may also be required if it difficult to receive credible reports on employment conditions at the
destination. McKenzie et al. (2007) provide some evidence that migrators report incorrect information.

18

where u is a standard strictly increasing, strictly concave utility function and δ is the household's
discount factor. A household that knows it is good at migrating will always migrate and solves a
similar problem, but with a higher income. With cash on hand x a household that is a good migrator
has value
max

.

With this formulation we are assuming that the household can migrate before it makes its
consumption decision, this means that a household that knows it is a good migrator can always
migrate regardless of credit constraints.
We are interested in the behavior of a household that has never migrated before. In each
period, such a household chooses both whether to migrate and consumption/savings. If it migrates
it discovers that it is a good migrator with probability

and has value G(x). If, however, the

household migrates and discovers that it is a bad migrator, then it has paid a cost F and receives
value B(x-F). We think of the cost F as being the cost of transport and lost income while the
migrator searches for work. The household will choose to migrate if the expected utility of migration
is greater than that of not migrating. Therefore, a household that has never migrated before, and has
cash on hand x, solves
,

1

.

Migration is risky in this model. A household that turns out to be a bad migrator pays a cost F but
receives no benefit. This has two implications. First, the household is credit constrained and will
have to forego consumption in the current period. Second, the household may face a bad shock in
the next period, but will have no buffer stock saving to smooth consumption. Hence, the model has
a role for background risk which, given the assumptions we make about the utility function, implies
that the riskier the background income process, the less likely is migration for any particular level of
cash on hand.23

23 See Eeckhoudt et al. (1996) and the literature cited there for a discussion of when background risk leads to a
reduction in risk taking.

19

Throughout our discussion we assume that the household faces a subsistence constraint. We
model this by assuming that
lim

with lim

→

∞, lim

→

∞, and

∞. That is, there is a level of consumption s at which the household is unwilling to

→

consider decreasing consumption for any reason, and the household becomes infinitely risk averse.
We think of s as a point at which survival requires the household to spend all its current resources
on food, with the implication that household members face a threat of serious illness or death if they
do not consume at least s. The possibility that consumption is close to this point in our data is
highlighted by the fact that the monga famine regularly claims lives. We also show below that many
households’ expenditure seems to fall below what would be required for a minimal subsistence diet.
We believe it reasonable to assume that a household that has such a low consumption level would
not be willing to take on any risk. For our simulations we use a fairly standard utility function that
incorporates a subsistence point:

.

The model is related to Deaton's buffer stock model, several models from the poverty trap
literature (e.g. Banerjee 2004), and the entrepreneurship literature (e.g. Buera 2009; Vereshchagina
and Hopenhayn 2009).

Because the model is a simple combination of well-known models we

provide only a brief description of its main implications, a longer discussion can be found in
Appendix 2.

First, the model implies a cutoff level of cash on hand : for cash on hand below

the household does not migrate, for cash on hand greater than

the household does migrate. Our

cash incentive treatment is easy to incorporate into the model: the payment increases cash on hand
by 600 Taka in either the good or bad state of the world. This has the effect of increasing the value
of the program conditional on migration and lowers
hand in the interval

′,

to ′. Those households that had cash on

are induced to migrate. Other interventions and policy prescriptions can

be analyzed in a similar fashion.
Second, the model implies a poverty trap of sorts. We show in the appendix that for some
parameter values and for low enough cash on hand, households that have the opportunity to migrate
engage in exactly the same savings behavior as households that cannot. This implies that these
households do not engage in any saving up for migration. If the income process

is such that cash

on hand is always low, then such a household will not save up for the profitable investment, while
wealthier households will. This implies that a poverty trap is possible in this model. In Section 7 we
ask whether such a trap can be sustained for empirically plausible parameter assumptions. In the
20

Appendix we also simulate the model for 50 periods and show that, for specific parameter values, it
is possible for a household with low starting cash on hand to not migrate, while a household that
starts out wealthier saves up and migrates.

In general our simulations show the intuitive

comparative static that households with a lower mean income

or with a lower starting cash

on hand are less likely to cross the migration threshold for any finite time period. Again, this shows
that the model can generate a poverty trap over a finite time period.

6

Qualitative Evaluation of the Model’s Assumptions and Central
Implications
In this section we provide some descriptive and some experimental evidence in favor of the

main assumptions and implications of the model. Our aim is to show that risk, subsistence, and
learning/experience are important explanations of our experimental findings.
6.1

Descriptive Evidence on Income Variability and Buffering
Here we provide evidence that background income is indeed variable, as assumed in the

model. We incorporate this variability into the model because it seems to be empirically important,
and makes it hard for our model (or any model) to match the empirical results. In particular, our
incentive presumably works, at least in part, by increasing cash on hand past the threshold required
to migrate. But, the data suggests that income (and, therefore, cash on hand) will be higher by the
size of the incentive regularly, just by pure chance. This is primarily why we don’t think that a pure
liquidity constraint – the inability to raise bus fare – provides a good description of the setting.
We provide two pieces of evidence in favor of income variability. First, our consumption
data shows a great deal of variability. Mean absolute deviation in weekly consumption in our sample
is 307 Taka between rounds one and two and 368 Taka between rounds two and three. The standard
deviation of the absolute deviation in income is 635 and 508 Taka respectively. By way of
comparison, average per-capita consumption levels in the control group were 1067, 954 and 1227
Taka in the three surveys. In Appendix Figure 1 we plot histograms of second round consumption
separately for each of the 10 deciles of first round household consumption. Visual inspection
suggests that there is no real permanence in the income distribution - those that were in the lowest
decile in the first round do not appear to have a significantly different draw in the second period
from those that were in the middle decile. We verify this by regressing consumption in later rounds
on earlier rounds consumption in Appendix Table 7. Every extra dollar of consumption measured
21

in July 2008 is associated with only 10.2 cents extra consumption in December 2008, and 6.7 cents
in December 2009.

One dollar extra in December 2008 is associated with 45 cents more

consumption in December 2009. The R-squared in these regressions are between 0.02-0.13: current
consumption does not predict future consumption well. Although measurement error is probably
very important in explaining these results, we think it is reasonable to conclude that background
income is also very variable.24
Second, we show that behavior is in line with the theoretical implications of background
risk. If households are prudent (i.e.

0) and impatient (

), both of which seem likely in

our setting,25 then high income-variability should lead to buffer stock savings. Appendix Table 8
describes savings behavior in our sample. Conditional on being a saver, the mean holding in cash is
1400 Taka, which is about 35% of monthly expenditure for the household. This is a relatively high
savings/expenditure ratio, even compared to the United States.

For the full sample (not

conditioning on people with positive savings), average cash savings is 745 Taka, and average value of
cash plus other liquid assets (e.g. jewelry and financial assets) held by all households is 1085 Taka.
Our model also suggests, given the assumption of a subsistence constraint, that households
close to subsistence should hold very little savings. About 50% of households close to subsistence
(consuming less than 1000 calories) do not hold any savings, and average savings in this group is
about half of the value for the rest of the sample. Appendix Table 9 displays results of a Tobit
regression of savings on calories consumed and shows a strong positive correlation in both the
baseline and the follow-up surveys: every extra 100 calories of consumption per day is associated
with 18-34 extra Taka in savings.
6.2

Descriptive and Experimental Evidence on Migration Risk
Our model assumes both that migration is risky, and that risk takes a particular form: risk is

assumed to be idiosyncratic. We begin by discussing evidence on migration risk, and will turn to the
specific form of the risk in Sections 6.3 and 6.4.
24 We conservatively use consumption data rather than income data because income is measured with more error in
these settings (Deaton 1997) and this would artificially inflate variability, and because income is more variable due to
seasonality and consumption smoothing.
25 The existence of savings constraints in developing countries (Dupas and Robinson 2013) makes
reasonable.
There are by now many theoretical and empirical arguments suggesting that prudence is a reasonable assumption for the
utility function. See Gollier (2004) for a discussion of the theory, Deaton (1991) for an early argument in favor of the
empirical reasonableness of assuming prudence in low income countries, Paxson (1992) for evidence in favor of the
buffering behavior implied by prudence and Carroll (2001) for a discussion of the empirical relevance of prudence and
buffering in developed countries.

22

Figure 3 provides a clear depiction of the migration risk. We take the monthly consumption
per household member in December 2008, and subtract the value of the incentive from households
that chose to take it. There are two ways to think about this. First, if we assume that the incentive
was consumed within the one month of December (a reasonable assumption given the date of
disbursement and the fact that some households would have had very low consumption without the
incentive) this provides an estimate of the outcome of migration in the absence of our treatment.
Second, our incentive covered the cost of migration, but in the absence of the incentive, this money
would have to be found by a migrating household. Subtracting the cost of migration (roughly 600
Taka as argued below) from monthly consumption gives household consumption levels if migration
costs have to be borne within one month.
In panel A of Figure 3, we subtract the histogram for distribution of consumption in the
control (non-incentive) villages from this histogram for the distribution of consumption in the
treatment (incentive) villages, less the value of the migration incentive paid out. The results show
significant amounts of risk: while the treatment moved many poor households from extreme
poverty (consuming 500-900 Taka per month) to a less poor (1300 Taka per month) category, many
other households would shift to 100-300 Taka per month (which, as discussed below, corresponds
to caloric intake at or below subsistence).
We quantify this excess risk of falling below subsistence (where the migrant cannot afford
1000 calories) in Appendix Table 10 under different assumptions for the amount of money that has
to be paid out-of-pocket (just the bus fare of 450, or the cost of travel including incidentals of 529,
or the migration incentive of 600-800), and the length of time over which the incentive was
consumed, or the migration cost can be spread. There appears to be significant excess risk of falling
below subsistence even if the migration cost can be spread over 2-2.5 months.

As we note above,

those that are close to subsistence in the data are less likely to have savings, suggesting that they
would not be able to spread the cost of migration over time and further suggesting that the choice to
migrate is associated with a risk of a very bad outcome. Finally, Panel B of Figure 3 shows that the
risk all but disappears when we account for the incentive and suggests that households at greatest
risk were the ones induced to migrate by our incentive, a result we will explore more precisely below.
6.2.1 Experiments on Migration Insurance
Motivated by our first two years of findings and the model, we conducted new experiments
in 2011 to directly test whether households perceive migration to be risky. Appendix 3 describes the
23

sampling frame and intervention design. To study risk, the specific treatment was to offer a 800
Taka loan up-front conditional on migration, but the loan repayment requirement was explicitly
conditional on rainfall conditions measured at one of the popular migration destinations: Bogra.
Excessive rainfall is an important external event that adversely affects labor demand and non-farm
work opportunities at the destination. Rain makes it more difficult to engage in daily wage labor at
outdoor construction sites (e.g. breaking bricks), it both increases the cost of pulling rickshaws and
lowers the demand for rickshaw transport. In terms of the model, high rainfall reduces the
likelihood of finding a connection at the destination (because job opportunities that allow you to
display your skills to a potential employer are scarce), and reduces the return to migration, m.
Appendix 4 develops a simple model of index insurance with basis risk to clarify how this
treatment is linked to household perceptions of migration risk.

Following Clarke (2011), we

formalize basis risk as the probability that income is low but that measured rainfall is within normal
range so that the insurance does not pay out. In terms of the model, this would be the event of not
finding a job connection during your search (i.e. finding out you are a bad migrator) but still being
forced to repay the loan.26 Appendix 4 shows that our formalization implies that the portion of
people induced to migrate by the index insurance is decreasing in basis risk, if and only if migration
is risky and households are risk averse. The insurance contract is based on rainfall measured at one
specific destination (Bogra), which allows us to clearly define the basis risk: households that had a
pre-existing affinity to Bogra face lower basis risk than others. 27
There are two sources of exogenous variation in pre-existing household preferences for
Bogra: (a) some people were randomly assigned to migrate to Bogra during our August 2008
incentive interventions, and (b) some people had reported sending a migrant to Bogra in our July
2008 baseline survey, conducted before any migration intervention was introduced. Table 5 shows
the migration responsiveness to our 2011 insurance treatment, paying particular attention to
heterogeneous treatment effects among those with the affinity to Bogra (who faced lower basis risk).

26 Related to footnote 20 and the discussion in the text, we are assuming here that
is the probability of finding a
connection at the destination within a reasonable search time.
27 We use the basis risk variation to test for riskiness because our insurance contract is valuable even without risk, as it
also includes a credit element. During our baseline survey in July 2008 (before any interventions were introduced in
these villages), we asked all households the destinations to which they had migrated in the past. This produces a clean
indicator for households that entered our sample with a pre-existing affinity for Bogra, and therefore provides
exogenous variation in the basis risk created by our insurance contract design.

24

The first column shows that the rainfall insurance contract induced the same amount of
migration overall as a simpler (conditional) credit contract very similar to the credit contract offered
in 2008. The second column shows that households randomly assigned to travel to Bogra in 2008
are 31.5 percentage points more likely to migrate under the rainfall insurance treatment in 2011 (pvalue 0.03), whereas others are only 9.7 percentage points more likely to migrate.

The 21.8

percentage point difference between the two groups is significant, which is a strong indication that
basis risk plays a role in decision-making. The third column replaces the random assignment to
Bogra with an indicator for households with the historical propensity to travel to Bogra, and finds
that such households are 28.6 percentage points more likely to migrate in response to the rainfall
insurance treatment (p-value 0.02), compared to a 16.9 percentage point effect among others. The
11.7 percentage point difference is not statistically significant.
All these results suggest that basis risk affected people’s propensity to migrate in response to
the insurance intervention. This is reasonably strong evidence that households perceive migration to
be risky, and behave as though they are risk averse.
6.3

Learning and Idiosyncratic Risk
Our model makes the assumption that migration risk takes a specific form: that it is

individual-specific (idiosyncratic), and resolved after one period of migration (i.e., there is something
to learn, or a connection to make.). Our motivation for making this assumption is the strong and
consistent repeat migration seen in the data – half of all induced migrants migrate again, and this
number is relatively stable over 3 years. This result is very hard to drive without learning or
accumulation of a connection. Even if households earn a very large return on the investment F, the
impact will dissipate quickly because of the variability in base income.
6.3.1 Is Risk Idiosyncratic in this Setting?
We first examine whether migration risk is idiosyncratic, and try to identify the nature of the
risk from our data, before turning to evidence on learning. Our information intervention – which
provided general information on wages and the likelihood of finding a job – has a precisely
estimated zero impact on migration rates. This is consistent with the assumption that risk is
idiosyncratic, but may also reflect the fact that this kind of information is not credible.
We next examine the determinants of 2009 re-migration to study directly whether
households are able to learn from others. As discussed above, our 2008 experiments contained
25

several sub-treatments where additional conditions were imposed: some households were required
to migrate to specific destinations, some were required to form groups, etc. This variation is within
village and implies that we have exogenous variation in the number of a household’s friends that
migrated.

We also collected data at baseline on social relationships between all our sample

households to identify friends and relatives within the village. To test for learning from others we
run regressions of the form
where

is an indicator for second round migration,

is an indicator for first round migration and

is a measure of how many of a household’s friends migrated. We instrument

and

with all

our treatments (incentives and conditions on the migrant, and incentives and conditions on his
friends), and report OLS and IV results in Table 6. If there is learning from others we expect to
see

0, because of the strong positive returns to migration. Table 6 shows strong persistence in

own migration: that inducing migration in 2008 with the randomized treatments leads those same
induced migrants to re-migrate in 2009. However, friends’ migration choices the previous year have
no impact on 2009 migration decisions, and this is a reasonably precisely estimated zero effect. This
suggests that people learn from their own experience, but do not learn from the experiences of
others. This provides strong support for the assumption that risk is idiosyncratic as implied by the
model.
Why is learning so individual-specific? The 2011 follow-up survey provides a strong hint: of
the 2011 migrants provided incentives in 2008, 60% report going back to work for the same
employer at the same destination. Appendix Table 11 shows that being treated in 2008 leads to a 5
percentage point greater likelihood of re-migrating and working for the same employer.

A likely

source of uncertainty in the returns to migration thus appears to be the (potential) employer’s
incomplete information about the characteristics of specific migrants – are they reliable, honest,
hard-working? The typical employer in Dhaka is a rickshaw garage owner who has to trust a migrant
with his valuable asset. Research in India has documented that migrants sometimes abandon the
rented rickshaws at the train or bus station (Jain and Sood 2012). This would make it difficult for
migrants to “learn” from other villagers to resolve the uncertainty.28

28 Friends and relatives could potentially vouch for each other with employers, but this need not be believed. Further,
making such a referral could be quite costly, it may put the referrers own job in danger, or require the referrer to look
after a new migrant, perhaps providing some risk sharing and sharing housing.

26

Furthermore, migrants who were provided incentives in 2008 and who continue working
for the same employer in 2011 are significantly more likely to have formed a connection to that
specific employer in 2008, when they were originally induced to go. Specifically, treatment group
migrants are 16.5% more likely to report forming the job connection to their current (2011)
employer in 2008 instead of 2007, relative to “regular” migrants in the control group.29 This is again
strongly suggestive that the migrants who were induced to migrate by our treatments formed an
asset (a connection to an employer) at the destination, which continued to provide value three years
later.
Finally, among households that migrated in 2008 (in both incentive and control groups), we
asked whether these households knew someone at the destination, or whether they had a job lead at
the destination. These measures can be thought of as proxies for whether the household’s type has
been revealed – households that have a connection have already determined their status while those
that do not have not, or know that they are bad at migrating.30 Our model implies that the incentive
will only have an impact on those that do not know their status and so we expect to see more
migrators without a connection in the incentive group. Table 7 shows that migrants in the control
group are much more likely to know someone at the destination, and to have a job lead, than are
those in the incentive treatment. This suggests that our treatment induced migrants among those
that had not already determined their status, as implied by the model.
6.3.2 Evidence on Learning
The fact that learning should be destination specific – a connection in Dhaka, for example, is not
useful when migrating to Bogra – allows us to test more directly for learning effects using
experimental variation induced by our treatments. One of our treatments assigned a specific
destination city (Bogra, Dhaka, Munshigonj or Tangail) as a condition of receiving the migration
incentive, and creates exogenous variation in the destination choices in 2008. Learning or creating a
job connection implies that migrants assigned to a specific location should be more likely to return
to that particular location in 2009 than to any other. The IV estimates in Appendix Table 13a (where
destination choices are instrumented by the random assignment of destinations) imply quantitatively
Appendix Table 12 shows the results of the t-tests. Results are statistically significant at conventional levels for the
difference tests (e.g. 2007 vs 2008), but not for the difference-in-difference (e.g. 2007 vs 2008, treatment vs control)
tests.
30 According to our model, those that have migrated and know they are bad should not be in this sample that is
entirely made up of migrators.
29

27

important stickiness. Households randomly assigned to migrate to Munshigonj in 2008 are 30%
more likely to re-migrate to Munshigonj in 2009 than to any other location. Effects are positive for
all four destinations, which is evidence in favor of location specific learning, or the accumulation of
connections at the destination being an important driver of migration behavior.
Our model also suggests that some induced migrants should discover that they are bad
migrators, while some discover that they are good. Among regular migrants, however, our model
predicts no such effects – only households that know they are good at migrating should migrate in
the control group. Figure 4 shows evidence consistent with this. In the treatment groups (credit or
cash) those that chose to re-migrate in 2009 had a significantly better migration experience in 2008
than those who chose not to re-migrate. In the control group, however, we see no such effect.
6.4

Subsistence
Our model postulates that households may not migrate because they are close to

subsistence, and risk falling below subsistence if they have a bad migration outcome. We can study
the distribution of expenditures and caloric intake to examine whether this setup is warranted.
The Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics classifies a person as ultra-poor if they consume less
than 1605 calories, and it is usually thought that something between 600 and 1000 calories are
required just to survive. Based on the prices collected in our baseline survey, and assuming very
basic calorie composition, we estimate that it would cost about 660 Taka per person per month to
meet the ultra-poor level, 450 taka to consume 1000 calories and 250 Taka to consume 600 calories.
Comparing these figures to the distribution of per-capita expenditures in our sample presented in
Appendix Figure 1, we see that a substantial portion of households are close to subsistence.
Appendix Figure 2 shows directly the histogram of calories per person per day in the control group
in our December 2008 follow-up. Many households in the control group can be characterized as
“close to subsistence” in terms of caloric intake. Comparing the treatment and control histograms,
we again see that our treatment moved many people from a subsistence level of consumption (of
800-1300 calories per person per day) to a comfortable level exceeding 2000 calories per person per
day.
Our model suggests that if aversion to the risk of falling below subsistence is an important
deterrent to migration, then: (a) people close to subsistence should not be migrating in the control
group, and (b) our treatment should have the largest effect on households that are close to
subsistence: they should be the ones induced to migrate by our incentive. The three panels in Figure
28

5 show strong evidence in favor of these two claims graphically and in a regression. We measure
subsistence as the proportion of total household expenditures devoted to food.31 The regression and
the graphs show that those closer to subsistence are significantly less likely to migrate in the control
group, and their migration decisions respond most strongly to the treatment.
6.5

Does the Model Rationalize Responses to all Treatments?
The model allows us to understand the impact of specific treatments designed to help

households accumulate sufficient cash on hand to engage in profitable migration. In this section we
compare the impacts of several potential policies on which we have collected data.
First, as noted above our initial treatments included both cash and credit incentives. In
practice these two incentives have approximately the same impact on the migration rate. Here we
argue that this finding is consistent with the model, if credit is seen as incorporating a limited liability
aspect. An assumption of limited liability is consistent with the fact that only 80% of households
repaid the loan.
We can capture the limited liability effect of credit by noting that households have to have a
reason to repay their loans. Let

if the household is a bad migrator, and

if the houshold is a good migrator, and consider a household that has a loan of value L and is
required to repay Z. The household will repay the loan if and only if
,
where P is a utility cost of punishment by the lender. P is assumed to be state independent as the
punishment should reflect the long run value of credit to the household. This setup is easily able to
generate the experimental finding that cash and credit have the same impact. The cash treatment
differs from credit treatment in making a payout when the migrator is good, but this has a low value
as it occurs when consumption would be high anyway. The credit contract also differs from cash
because it costs P to use the limited liability, which provides insurance in the bad state. This cost P
is, however, very small relative to the benefit because the household that uses it is close to
31 The ratio of food to total expenditures has less measurement error than caloric intake or total expenditure as a
measure of proximity to subsistence because (a) caloric requirements vary greatly across families with different age,
gender compositions and activity levels, and (b) prices used to calculate expenditures varies across families, introducing
noise (which is eliminated when computing the ratio). We therefore prefer the ratio measure for our regression, even
though we describe subsistence in our sample in Appendix Figure 2 using more intuitive measures like calories
consumed. The concept behind this measure is motivated by the literature on food consumption which shows that the
elasticity of calories to income is modest even among the very poor (e.g. Subramanian and Deaton, 1996). Jensen and
Miller (2008) use a similar measure of subsistence.

29

subsistence. Both these arguments imply that, for concave enough utility functions, the cash and
credit have almost identical effects, a fact which we can also demonstrate in our calibrations below.
Second, as noted above, we returned in 2011 and implemented new treatments. One of these
treatments was an unconditional credit contract of the same size at the conditional credit transfer.
Our motivation for this experiment was to rule out the possibility that households were merely cash
constrained. Our model implies that the credit incentive should have a larger impact as it only
increase households utility when it migrates, while the unconditional credit also increase the payoff
to staying at home.32 This is an implication of any model in which a household weighs the returns to
migration relative to other possible uses of the money, but is not an implication of a model where
the household knows that migration is profitable, but simply cannot afford it. The results of this
experiment are shown in the first column of Table 5, and indicate that, consistent with our model
but inconsistent with a cash constraint model, the unconditional transfer has a smaller impact than
the conditional transfer.33
6.6

Summary of Qualitative Tests
In summary, both descriptive and experimental analyses of the data indicate that our model

accurately captures many key aspects of the environment: background income is volatile, migration
is risky, savings is high and migration is an experience good. The model also (qualitatively)
rationalizes most of the data coming from our experiment: the fact that credit and cash have similar
sized impacts, the fact that the incentive was most effective for those that are close to subsistence,
the relative impacts of unconditional and conditional transfers, and the response to the insurance
treatment. What remains to be seen, however, is whether the model brings all of these ingredients
of the migration decision together in a way that can quantitatively account for the magnitude of the
experimental effects.

7

Quantitative Calibration of the Model
Our quantitative exercise will use the data to calibrate all the free parameters of the model

except risk aversion. We then ask what level of risk aversion would be required to match key
aspects of the data. Table 8 shows the parameters we use for the quantitative exercise. In all cases
32 In terms of the discussion in Appendix 2 the conditional credit payment moves only the
curve, while the
curve as well.
unconditional credit raises the
33 Although we presented the products in a similar way, if household perceptions of repayment requirements varied
between the conditional and unconditional loans, that may also lead to differential take-up.

30

we have erred on the side of allowing the model to generate the experimental estimates. This choice
reflects the fact that we will ultimately argue that the model in its basic form is not able to rationalize
the experimental estimates. Our interpretation of this result is that the qualitative evidence above
suggests that the model captures several key aspects of the setting, and gives guidance to where we
would expect to be able to replicate our experimental findings. However, because the model fails to
quantitatively explain the experimental results, there remains some element of household behavior
or the environment that our model does not capture, which would result in the observed undermigration. We therefore view the model as providing a starting point for future work on what
prevents investments in profitable technologies like seasonal migration.
Three calibration choices deserve special mention. First, we assume that there are two
opportunities to migrate each year (or two time periods per year): one after each planting season.
This means that a time period for the purpose of the model should be thought of as half a year.
Second, we assume that the cost of migration, F, must be borne over 1 month, so that consumption
when migration is bad is very low. This reflects the fact that most households earn money during
the monga season and use it to pay for consumption. Credit constrained households will have to
pay for migration out of this income, reflecting the possibility that the subsistence constraint binds,
and the household has no choice but to finance migration out of contemporaneous consumption.
Third, we assume that income at home is distributed

700,70 .34 This is an attempt to estimate

the income distribution of the lowest 50% of households in the sample. We argue that the results of
this section are not sensitive to this choice.
We undertake two different exercises. First, we use the model to determine four cutoff
points – ,

,

and

– the amount of cash on hand required to migrate with no intervention,

with our cash incentive, with a credit incentive and with an unconditional cash transfer, respectively.
We then match these levels of cash on hand to the histogram of consumption levels in the control
group and ask what portion of the distribution lies between the relevant bounds to estimate the set
of migrants that our treatments are predicted to induce. For example, we consider the density of
households consuming between

and

to estimate the portion of households that would be

The use of the normal distribution implies that the model does not in fact contain a poverty trap: as time goes to
infinity all households will eventually receive a shock so large that they decide to migrate. In practice this is not a
problem for our calibrations for two reasons. First, we truncate the distribution in the upper tail because we have to
make a discrete approximation to make the calibration feasible. Second, we work with short time periods – always less
than 20 years – implying that this theoretical possibility does not seem important in practice.
34

31

induced to migrate by our incentive. This exercise essentially ignores the repeat migration effect and
learning, or the possibility of saving up to migrate (although households do consider the benefit of
repeat migration when making their choices).
Our second exercise is to ask what portion of households can still be induced to migrate
after t periods. A household is “induceable” in period t if it does not yet know its type. In the
model, only induceable households will be affected by our migration incentive, as other households
will have already determined their status as good or bad migrators. For this exercise, we make use
of the assumed background income distribution to determine the probability of a household
crossing the migrating threshold

in each period. If the number of induceable households is very

low after only a small number of time periods, then the model cannot rationalize the experimental
results.35
Here we present results from calibrating the full model, Appendix 5 presents further
discussion.

The left panel of Figure 6 shows the portion of migrants that would be induced

assuming no repeat migration and the right panel shows the number of induceable migrants as a
function of the time period. The left panel shows that, ignoring the dynamic effects of migration,
the model predicts that with a risk aversion of

1.5 our incentive would induce about 20% of

households to migrate – consistent with our experimental findings. Further, consistent with our
experimental results, the cash and credit incentives have the same effect. However, while the
unconditional cash transfer has a smaller effect, as predicted, at low levels of risk aversion the UCT
continues to induce about 17% of the population to migrate, higher than observed in the data.
Despite this quantitative inconsistency, this form of the model is broadly consistent with our
experimental results.
The right hand panel, however, shows that once we allow for savings up and repeat
migration the model is no longer able to rationalize the data. With a risk aversion level of about 11,
40% of the population is induceable after 8 seasons (or 4 years), which corresponds to a 20%
treatment effect if the model applies to the poorest half of the sample. If we allow 10 prior years of
migration activity, the model suggests that even

20 is insufficient to rationalize the results.36 We

In all the results presented below we depart slightly from the baseline model and assume that households that
migrate and are determined to be bad migrators are also induceable. This errs on the side of allowing the model to fit
the data. See also the discussion in footnote 20.
36 These results assume that households begin time with no assets and the lowest possible income shock. We use the
model to generate policy functions as well as cutoff values. We then simulate the model for 10,000 households and ask
35

32

discuss plausible values for risk aversion in the next section, but believe that most scholars would
think 20 to be implausible, especially in our model where the subsistence constraint means that
behavior will exhibit even more risk aversion.

Because it seems reasonable to assume that

households in our treatment areas have faced a similar migration choice for some time, and quite
reasonably for 10 prior years, we conclude that the model cannot quantitatively account for our
experimental findings: there should not be large numbers people living in the villages who can be
induced to migrate.
These results are robust to our assumption regarding the distribution of income. We have
simulated the right panel of Figure 6 for standard deviations from 40 to 140 and the results are
almost identical. As discussed in Appendix 2, there are several impacts of increasing the degree of
background risk, and the simulations suggest that, for our parameter values, these effects cancel each
other out.
We can also use the model to ask whether the observed level of savings is consistent with
the model. For a risk aversion level of 0.5 the model predicts a household will hold on average 1500
Taka in savings, which is roughly in line with what we see in the data. For higher levels of risk
aversion, however, the model predicts far more savings than we observe: at a risk aversion level of 5,
predicted average savings is close to 3000 Taka and at

10 we predict savings of nearly 5000

Taka. It is not possible to match both the level of savings and the responses to the migration
treatments at any given level of assumed risk aversion.
In Appendix 5 we discuss two alternative forms of the model: first, a completely static
model, where households do not save for migration and do not consider the benefits of ongoing
migration when they make their initial migration choice – i.e. they are myopic past the current
migration period; and second, a model in which we assume that there is no savings, but allow
households to be forward looking. The results allow us to better understand why the model cannot
match the data and reveal two main results. First, forward looking behavior is very important in
driving the results: if the households are not forward looking and do not save, then the model is able
to match the data, but if the households are forward looking and cannot save, then we cannot match
the experimental results without risk aversion levels of greater than 5, which may be implausibly
high. Second, allowing savings has two partially offsetting effects. On one hand, savings reduces
what portion of those 10,000 households has not migrated after t periods. Another way to summarize the results is to
say that the distribution of cash on hand implied by the model is insufficiently close to subsistence to support the
experimental results.

33

the value of migration because it allows the household to self-insure through buffering, reducing the
need to experiment with migration. This effect means that in a myopic model allowing savings
allows us to more easily rationalize the data. On the other hand, savings allows households to save
up to migrate. As we see above, once this effect is incorporated it becomes extremely hard to
rationalize the data – households should be saving for an opportunity that is this profitable.

8

Extensions
While the qualitative evaluation of the model shows that households do save, that they

respond to migration incentives in ways predicted by the model, and that they perceive migration to
be risky, the calibration exercise suggests that to match the magnitudes of responses to our
treatments, we have to extend the model in some way. It could be that households under-estimate
the benefits of migration, or they are unable to save up for migration, or they are insufficiently
forward-looking. In this section we briefly summarize extensions that we have considered, and
provide further details in Appendix 6. We do not have the data to determine conclusively which
extensions are the most important. We therefore see this section as an extended call for more work
and we provide some suggestions based on our model and data, regarding approaches that are
unlikely to work. We consider a large number of possibilities partly to highlight the uncertainty and
the need for additional experimentation before moving to policy prescriptions.
The thrust of our calibration argument is that households would have to be very risk averse
to generate our data. However, if we allow σ to be very high, then the model can rationalize most of
the data.37 The literature has not arrived at a consensus on “reasonable” values for σ: Holt and
Laury (2002) state that someone with σ >1.37 should “stay in bed”, while papers in the equity
premium literature (e.g. Kandel and Stambaugh 1991) argue that values as high as 30 may be
reasonable. In our model, households are much more risk averse than implied by their

because

they become infinitely risk averse as consumption approaches the subsistence point.

In

circumstances analogous to ours, Chetty and Szeidl (2007) show that agents even in developed
countries become more risk averse with commitments for consumption. In future research, it
would be worth exploring at what point risk aversion should be considered to be a “mistake” that a

37 As we note above, however, high risk aversion is not a complete panacea as it would imply very high savings rates,
which we do not observe in the data.

34

policy maker should seek to address. If extreme risk aversion is akin to a behavioral bias, then
adding conditions to transfers may improve a migrator’s utility over unconditional cash transfers.
Changing model parameters presents a second obvious way to improve the fit of the model.
We have experimented with several different specifications of the returns to migration, including
allowing for risk in m. This does not substantially improve the ability of the model to fit the data.
We also considered the effect of lowering the discount factor ( ) or allowing for depreciation of the
status of being a good migrator. We considered only reasonable levels of

and depreciation

consistent with the high remigration rates, and while these possibilities allow for a better fit, high
risk aversion levels are still required to match the experimental findings.
A third explanation is that migration is unpleasant and there is high non-pecuniary disutility
from migration. We estimate the value of this disutility from our data (see Appendix 6 for details),
but this is unlikely to account for our experimental results. The central issue is that while high
disutility may prevent migration, it would also reduce responsiveness to our interventions.
We also examined whether incorrect beliefs about the returns to migration could drive the
38

results.

To assess this possibility we asked all migrants in both treatment and control groups about

how their migration experience, in terms of time it took to find work and their earnings at
destination, compared to their expectations prior to migration. If households have biased beliefs we
would expect that those in the control group, who were already migrating and had had a chance to
learn, would have roughly correct beliefs, while those in the treatment group would have beliefs
biased toward the overly pessimistic.39 Results presented in Appendix Table 14 are not consistent
with biased beliefs: treatment group migrants do not have significantly different beliefs from control
group migrants.
The slightly different character of our results for the model with and without savings points
to the possible conclusion that it is savings behavior that is the real anomaly (why are people not
saving up to migrate?). Our sample households may be savings-constrained due to sharing norms
(Jakiela and Ozier 2012), or they may simply be no safe place to store things. This conclusion is
consistent with recent research that demonstrates very large impacts of simple interventions that
One possible cause of bias is that non-migrators have access to incorrect information. McKenzie et al. (2007) argue
that migrant households provide incorrect information because they do not want to have to share resources, or job
connections and accommodation at the destination.
39 To be clear, it is not evidence of incorrect beliefs that some people found the experience worse than anticipated,
this is perfectly consistent with an ex-post statement about an ex-ante risky event. The prediction of biased beliefs is
that those in the treatment should be more likely to have done better than expected.
38

35

relax savings constraints (e.g. Dupas and Robinson 2013). Two caveats should be mentioned,
however. First, before citing savings constraints as the key issue, it is necessary to understand why
households are able to buffer, but not to save up a lump-sum amount for migration. Second, as we
argue above, even without savings, forward-looking households should not be induceable in great
numbers.40 There is, therefore, a need to understand more than just savings constraints, we must
also understand why households act as though they are not aware of the full benefits of migration.
Another related avenue to consider may be the need to share risk and solve public goods
problems in general. Risk sharing networks not only constrain savings; they may also deter profitable
investments (e.g. Lewis 1955). Migrating away may undermine network ties, and this may be a
hidden cost of migration (Munshi and Rosenzweig 2009).
Finally, many models that fall under the rubric of behavioral economics could be used to
explain the results. In this area we are particularly wary of making pronouncements without data, as
there are many different possible explanations. Here we mention just two models that have been
applied to developing country contexts. First, the quasi-hyperbolic discounting model of Laibson
(1997) can likely be applied to rationalize the data for some values of . The version of this model
discussed in Duflo, Kremer and Robinson (2011) provides an explanation for low savings. The
version of this model discussed in Banerjee and Mullainathan (2010) can explain why households do
not undertake profitable investments. Second, Koszegi and Rabin (2006)’s model of reference
dependence can likely rationalize the data. That model provides a non-self-control based explanation
for the fact that household find themselves to be perpetually without the money they need to invest:
households adjust their expected consumption in response to shocks and then assess the costs of
investments relative to this expected consumption level.
In summary, there are numerous avenues that could be pursued to get a better quantitative
accounting of the data generated by our experiment. We have noted just a few. We are currently
working on isolating which factors are most relevant in other settings where seasonal migration is
relevant.

9

Concluding Remarks
We conducted a randomized experiment in which we incentivized households in a famine-

prone region of Bangladesh to send a seasonal migrant to an urban area. The main results show that
40

This is shown in Appendix Figure 7.

36

a small incentive led to a large increase in the number of seasonal migrants, that the migration was
successful on average, and that households given the incentive in one year continued to be more
likely to migrate in future years. These results bolster the case made by Clemens et al (2008),
Rosenzweig (2006), Gibson and McKenzie (2010), Clemens (2011), Rodrik (2007) and Hanson
(2009) that offering migration opportunities has large effects on welfare, even relative to other
promising development interventions in health, education, trade or agriculture. The literature largely
focuses on international migration, and we show that the returns to internal migration – a much
more common, but under-studied phenomenon41 – are also large.
We argue that the results are qualitatively consistent with a simple (rational) model of a
poverty trap where households that are close to subsistence face a small possibility that migrating
will turn out badly, leaving household consumption below subsistence. The model helps us to
understand the types of situation in which we would expect incentive and insurance policies to lead
to long-term benefits as observed in our experiment. We should look for situations in which the
investment is risky, that risk is individual-specific, and where the utility cost of the downside risk is
large (e.g. the household is close to subsistence). These predictions also provide an answer to the
puzzle that motivated the entire project: why does Rangpur – the poorest region of the country that
regularly faces a seasonal famine - have a lower out-migration rate compared to the rest of
Bangladesh? This can also explain other peculiar migration patterns noticed in the literature – the
lower out-migration rate among poorer Europeans (Hatton and Williamson 1998) and poorer
South-Africans (Ardington et al. 2009).
Our quantitative work implies that we cannot provide a fully satisfying explanation for why
people in Rangpur had not saved up to migrate.42 We are therefore hesitant to draw policy
implications from our research. However, it is clear that the migration support programs we
implement help some Rangpur households cope with the Monga famine, and appear more costeffective than subsidizing food purchases on an ongoing basis, which is the major anti-famine policy
tool currently employed by the Bangladesh government (Government of Bangladesh 2005;
Khandker et al. 2011). Two important caveats are that our research does not capture long-term
There were 240 times as many internal migrants in China in 2001 as there were international migrants (Ping 2003),
and 4.3 million people migrated internally in the 5 years leading up to the 1999 Vietnam census compared to only
300,000 international migrants (Anh 2003).
42 Several other papers document very high rates of return to small capital investments in developing countries (Udry
and Anagol 2006; de Mel et al. 2008; Bandiera et al. 2011; Duflo et al. 2011; Fafchamps et al. 2011), and this literature
must also confront the same question of why households do not save to invest in these high-return activities.
41

37

psychological and social effects of migration, and the scale of our experiment does not permit us to
analyze potential adverse general equilibrium effects in destination labor markets if the government
were to contemplate scaling up such a program.43
If there are net efficiency gains, this is likely because our intervention mitigates the spatial
mismatch between where people live, and where jobs are during the pre-harvest months. This
approach may be of relevance to other countries that face geographic concentrations of poverty,
such as northern Nigeria, eastern islands of Indonesia, northeast India, southeast Mexico, and inland
southwest China (Jalan and Ravallion 2001). More generally, providing credit to enable households
to search for jobs, and aid spatial and seasonal matching between employers and employees may be
a useful way to augment the microcredit concept currently more narrowly focused on creating new
entrepreneurs and new businesses.44 The potential efficiency gains raise an interesting question of
why private sector entities do not profit by developing mechanisms that link migrants to employers
in the city. To understand this, we interviewed several employers in Dhaka. The employers reported
that there are in fact “labor sardars” who bring migrant workers to Dhaka, but the process is fraught
with uncertainty and risk. Migrants have to be paid the one-way bus ticket and some salary in
advance, but it is difficult to enforce any long-term contract if they disappear and choose to go work
elsewhere after the transit cost is paid.

There is mixed evidence in the literature on whether these effects are substantial (Ottaviano and Peri (forthcoming);
Borjas 2003; Borjas and Katz 2007; Card 2009). Moreover, general equilibrium effects may be positive in net, if spillover
benefits at the origin exceed external costs at the destination. Migrants form a much larger part of the village economy
at the origin compared to the destination urban economy.
44 With credit contracts, it may be difficult to collect regular repayment from migrants who move away, but one of the
world’s largest micro-credit NGOs, BRAC, has recently introduced credit programs to finance even international
migration.
43

38

Bibliography
Adams, R. H. 1998. "Remittances, Investment, and Rural Asset Accumulation in Pakistan." Economic
Development and Cultural Change 47 (1): 155-173.
Akee, R. 2010. "Who Leaves? Deciphering Immigrant Self-Selection from a Developing Country."
Economic Development and Cultural Change 58 (2): 323-344.
Anh, D. N. 2003. "Migration and Poverty in Asia: With Reference to Bangladesh, China, the
Philippines and Viet Nam." Bangkok, 27–29 August, .
Ardington, C., A. Case, and V. Hosegood. 2009. "Labor Supply Responses to Large Social Transfers:
Longitudinal Evidence from South Africa." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 1 (1):
22-48.
Ashraf, N., D. Aycinena, C. A. Martinez, and D. Yang. forthcoming. "Remittances and the Problem
of Control: A Field Experiment among Migrants from El Salvador." Review of Economics and
Statistics.
Aycinena, D., C. A. Martinez, and D. Yang. 2010. "The Impact of Remittance Fees on Remittance
Flows: Evidence from a Field Experiment among Salvadoran Migrants.".
Bandiera, O., I. Barankay, and I. Rasul. 2011. "Field Experiments with Firms." Journal of Economic
Perspectives 25 (3): 63-82.
Banerjee, A. 2004. "The Two Poverties." In Insurance Against Poverty, edited by Stefan Dercon, 59-76.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Banerjee, A., and E. Duflo. 2007. "The Economic Lives of the Poor." Journal of Economic Perspectives
21 (1): 141-168.
Banerjee, A. and S. Mullainathan. 2010. "The Shape of Temptation: Implications for the Economic
Lives of the Poor." Working Paper.
Banerjee, A., and A. F. Newman. 1991. "Risk-Bearing and the Theory of Income Distribution." The
Review of Economic Studies 58 (2): pp. 211-235.
Bangladesh
Bureau
of
Statistics.
http://www.bbs.gov.bd/home.aspx.

2011.

"Monthly

Statistical

Bulletins."

.

Barham, B., and S. Boucher. 1998. "Migration, Remittances, and Inequality: Estimating the Net
Effects of Migration on Income Distribution." Journal of Development Economics 55 (2): 307-331.
Basu, K. and M. Wong. 2012. "Evaluating Seasonal Food Security Programs in East Indonesia.".
39

Beegle, K., J. De Weerdt, and S. Dercon. 2011. "Migration and Economic Mobility in Tanzania:
Evidence from a Tracking Survey." The Review of Economics and Statistics 93 (3): 1010-33.
BenYishay, A., and A. M. Mobarak. 2013. "Social Learning and Communication." Unpublished
Manuscript, Yale University.
Borjas, G. 2003. "The Labor Demand Curve is Downward Sloping: Reexamining the Impact of
Immigration on the Labor Market." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 118 (4): 1335-1374.
Borjas, G. and L. Katz. 2007. "The Evolution of the Mexican-Born Workforce in the United States."
In Mexican Immigration to the United States, edited by George Borjas, 13-55. Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press.
Brown, R. and G. Leeves. 2007. "Impacts of International Migration and Remittances on Source Country
Household Incomes in Small Island States: Fiji and Tonga." Discussion Paper 347.
Brune, L., X. Gine, J. Goldberg, and D. Yang. 2011. "Commitments to Save: A Field Experiment in Rural
Malawi." Policy Research Working Paper 5748.
Buera, F. J. 2009. "A Dynamic Model of Entrepreneurship with Borrowing Constraints: Theory and
Evidence." Annals of Finance 5: 443-464. doi:10.1007/s10436-009-0121-2.
Card, D. 2009. "Immigration and Inequality." The American Economic Review 99 (2): 1-21.
doi:10.1257/aer.99.2.1.
Carroll, C. D. 2001. "A Theory of the Consumption Function, with and without Liquidity
Constraints."
The
Journal
of
Economic
Perspectives
15
(3):
23-45.
http://www.jstor.org/stable/2696555.
Caselli, F. 2005. "Accounting for Cross-Country Income Differences." In Handbook of Economic
Growth, edited by Philippe Aghion and Steven Durlauf. Vol. 1A, 679-741. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Chaudhuri, S. and C. Paxson. 2002. "Smoothing Consumption Under Income Seasonality: Buffer Stocks Vs.
Credit Markets " Department of Economics Discussion Papers 0102-54.
http://hdl.handle.net/10022/AC:P:363.
Chetty, R., and A. Szeidl. 2007. "Consumption Commitments and Risk Preferences." The Quarterly
Journal of Economics 122 (2): 831-877. doi:10.1162/qjec.122.2.831.
Chin, A., L. Karkoviata, and N. Wicox. 2010. "Impact of Bank Accounts on Migrant Savings and
Remittances: Evidence from a Field Experiment." mimeo.
Clarke, D. J. 2011. "A Theory of Rational Demand for Index Insurance." Department of Economics
Discussion Paper Series 572. http://www.economics.ox.ac.uk/index.php/department-ofeconomics-discussion-paper-series/a-theory-of-rational-demand-for-index-insurance.

40

Clemens, M. 2011. "Economics and Emigration: Trillion-Dollar Bills on the Sidewalk?" The Journal of
Economic Perspectives 25 (3): 83-106. doi:10.1257/jep.25.3.83.
———. . 2010. "The Roots of Global Wage Gaps: Evidence from Randomized Processing of U.S. Visas."
Working Paper 212.
Clemens, M., C. E. Montenegro, and L. Pritchett. 2008. "The Place Premium: Wage Differences for
Identical Workers Across the U.S. Border." Working Paper No. 148.
de Mel, S., D. McKenzie, and C. Woodruff. 2008. "Returns to Capital in Microenterprises: Results
from a Randomized Experiment." Quarterly Journal of Economics 123 (4): 1329-1372.
Deaton, A. 1997. The Analysis of Household Surveys: A Microeconometric Approach to Development Policy.
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press for the World Bank.
———. 1991. "Savings and Liquidity Constraints." Econometrica 59 (5): 1221-1248.
Dercon, S., and L. Christiaensen. 2011. "Consumption Risk, Technology Adoption and Poverty
Traps: Evidence from Ethiopia." Journal of Development Economics 96 (2): 159-173.
Dercon, S., and P. Krishnan. 2000. "Vulnerability, Seasonality and Poverty in Ethiopia." Journal of
Development Studies 36 (6): 25-53.
Dostie, B., S. Haggblade, and J. Randriamamonjy. 2002. "Seasonal Poverty in Madagascar:
Magnitude and Solutions." Food Policy 27 (5/6): 493.
Duflo, E., M. Kremer, and J. Robinson. 2011. "Nudging Farmers to use Fertilizer: Theory and
Experimental Evidence from Kenya." The American Economic Review 101 (6): 2350-2390.
Dupas, P. 2014. "Short-Run Subsidies and Long-Run Adoption of New Health Products: Evidence
from a Field Experiment." Econometrica 82 (1): 197-228.
Dupas, P., and J. Robinson. 2013. "Why Don't the Poor Save More? Evidence from Health Savings
Experiments." American Economic Review 103 (4): 1138-1171.
Eeckhoudt, L., C. Gollier, and H. Schlesinger. 1996. "Changes in Background Risk and Risk Taking
Behavior." Econometrica 64 (3): 683-689. http://www.jstor.org/stable/2171866.
Evenson, R. E., and D. Gollin. 2003. "Assessing the Impact of the Green Revolution, 1960 to
2000." Science 300: 758-762.
Fafchamps, M., D. McKenzie, S. R. Quinn, and C. Woodruff. 2011. "When is Capital enough to Get
Female Microenterprises Growing? Evidence from a Randomized Experiment in Ghana." Working Paper
17207.
Fischer, G. 2013. "Contract Structure, Risk Sharing and Investment Choice." Econometrica 81 (3):
883-939.
41

Foster, A. and M. R. Rosenzweig. 2011. "Are Indian Farms Too Small? Mechanization, Agency
Costs and Farm Efficiency." Working Paper.
———. 2010. "Microeconomics of Technology Adoption." Annual Review of Economics 2 (1): 395424.
Gibson, J. and D. McKenzie. 2010. "The Development Impact of a Best Practice Seasonal Worker Policy."
BREAD Working Paper 286. http://ipl.econ.duke.edu/bread/abstract.php?paper=286.
Gibson, J., D. McKenzie, and S. Stillman. 2013. "Accounting for Selectivity and DurationDependent Heterogeneity when Estimating the Impact of Emigration on Incomes and Poverty
in Sending Areas." Economic Development and Cultural Change 61 (2): 247-280.
Gollier, C. 2004. "The Economics of Risk and Time." MIT Press Books 1.
Gollin, D., D. Lagakos, and M. E. Waugh. 2011. "The Agricultural Productivity Gap in Developing
Countries."
Working
Paper
Series
11-14.
https://files.nyu.edu/mw134/public/uploads/56836/apg.pdf.
Gollin, D., S. Parente, and R. Rogerson. 2002. "The Role of Agriculture in Development." American
Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 92 (2): 160-164.
Government of People’s Republic of Bangladesh. 2005. Bangladesh: Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper:
Unlocking the Potential, National Strategy for Accelerated Poverty Reduction. Washington, D.C.:
International Monetary Fund.
Grogger, J., and G. H. Hanson. 2011. "Income Maximization and the Selection and Sorting of
International Migrants." Journal of Development Economics 95 (1): 42-57.
Hanson, G. H. 2009. "The Economic Consequences of the International Migration of Labor."
Annual Review of Economics 1: 179-207.
Hatton, T. and J. Williamson. 1998. the Age of Mass Migration: An Economic Analysis New York:
Oxford University Press.
Hausmann, R., and D. Rodrik. 2003. "Economic Development as Self-Discovery." Journal of
Development Economics 72 (2): 603-633.
Holt, C. A., and S. K. Laury. 2002. "Risk Aversion and Incentive Effects." The American Economic
Review 92 (5): 1644-1655. http://www.jstor.org/stable/3083270.
Jain, T. and A. Sood. 2012. "How does Relationship Based Governance Accomodate New Entrants?
Evidence from the Cycle Rickshaw Rental Market.".
Jakiela, P. and O. Ozier. 2012. "Does Africa Need a Rotten Kin Theorem? Experimental Evidence
from Village Economies." Working Paper.
42

Jalan, J., and M. Ravallion. 2001. "Behavioral Responses to Risk in Rural China." Journal of
Development Economics 66 (1): 23-49. doi:10.1016/S0304-3878(01)00154-7.
Jensen, R. T., and N. H. Miller. 2008. "Giffen Behavior and Subsistence Consumption." The
American Economic Review 98 (4): 1553.
Kaboski, J. P., and R. M. Townsend. 2011. "A Structural Evaluation of a Large‐Scale Quasi‐
Experimental Microfinance Initiative." Econometrica 79 (5): 1357-1406.
Kanbur, R. 1979. "Of Risk Taking and the Personal Distribution of Income." Journal of Political
Economy: 769-797.
Kandel, S., and R. F. Stambaugh. 1991. "Asset Returns and Intertemporal Preferences." Journal of
Monetary Economics 27 (1): 39-71. doi:10.1016/0304-3932(91)90004-8.
Khandker, S. R. 2012. "Seasonality of Income and Poverty in Bangladesh." Journal of Development
Economics 97 (2): 244-256.
Khandker, S. R., M. A. Khaleque, and H. Samad. 2011. "Can Social Safety Nets Alleviate Seasonal
Deprivation? Evidence from Northwest Bangladesh." Policy Research Working Paper 5865.
Khandker, S. R. and W. Mahmud. 2012. Seasonal Hunger and Public Policies: Evidence from Northwest
Bangladesh. Washington, D.C.: The World Bank.
Kihlstrom, R., and J. Laffont. 1979. "A General Equilibrium Entrepreneurial Theory of Firm
Formation Based on Risk Aversion." Journal of Political Economy 87 (4): 719-748.
Koszegi, B., and M. Rabin. 2006. "A Model of Reference-Dependent Preferences." The Quarterly
Journal of Economics 121 (4): 1133-1165.
Laibson, D. 1997. "Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic Discounting." Quarterly Journal of Economics 113 (2):
443-477.
Lewis, W. A. 1955. The Theory of Economic Growth. London: Allen & Unwin.
Macours, K., and R. Vakis. 2010. "Seasonal Migration and Early Childhood Development." World
Development 38 (6): 857-869.
Martinez, C. A. and D. Yang. 2005. "Remittances and Poverty in Migrants' Home Areas: Evidence
from the Philippines." In International Migration, Remittances, and the Brain Drain, edited by Caglar
Ozden and Maurice Schiff. Washington, D.C.: World Bank.
McKenzie, D. 2012. "Learning about Migration through Experiments." CReAM Discussion Paper 07/12.
http://www.cream-migration.org/publ_uploads/CDP_07_12.pdf;.

43

McKenzie, D., J. Gibson, and S. Stillman. 2007. "A Land of Milk and Honey with Streets Paved with Gold:
Do Emigrants have Over-Optimistic Expectations about Incomes Abroad." Policy Research Working
Paper 4141. doi:10.1596/1813-9450-4141.
McKenzie, D., and H. Rapoport. 2007. "Network Effects and the Dynamics of Migration and
Inequality: Theory and Evidence from Mexico." Journal of Development Economics 84 (1): 1-24.
McKenzie, D. and D. Yang. 2010. "Experimental Approaches in Migration Studies." Discussion Paper
5125.
McMillan, M. and D. Rodrik. 2011. "Globalization, Structural Change and Productivity Growth." 17143.
Meredith, J., J. Robinson, S. Walker, and B. Wydick. 2013. "Keeping the Doctor Away:
Experimental Evidence on Investment in Preventative Health Products." Journal of Development
Economics 105: 196-210. http://people.ucsc.edu/~jmrtwo/HealthProducts.pdf.
Mobarak, A. M., P. Dwivedi, R. Bailis, L. Hildemann, and G. Miller. 2012. "Low Demand for
Nontraditional Cookstove Technologies." Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 109 (27):
10815-10820. doi:10.1073/pnas.1115571109.
Mobarak, A. M., and M. R. Rosenzweig. 2013. "Informal Risk Sharing, Index Insurance, and Risk
Taking in Developing Countries." The American Economic Review 103 (3, PAPERS AND
PROCEEDINGS OF THE One Hundred Twenty-Fifth Annual Meeting OF THE
AMERICAN
ECONOMIC
ASSOCIATION):
375-380.
http://www.jstor.org/stable/23469760.
Munshi, K. 2004. "Social Learning in a Heterogeneous Population: Technology Diffusion in the
Indian Green Revolution." Journal of Development Economics 73 (1): 185-213.
Munshi, K. and M. R. Rosenzweig. 2009. "Why is Mobility in India so Low? Social Insurance, Inequality,
and Growth." Working Paper 14850.
Ottaviano, G. I. P. and G. Peri. (forthcoming). "Rethinking the Effects of Immigration on Wages.".
Paxson, C. 1993. "Consumption and Income Seasonality in Thailand." Journal of Political Economy 101
(1): 39-72.
Paxson, C. H. 1992. "Using Weather Variability to Estimate the Response of Savings to Transitory
Income
in
Thailand."
The
American
Economic
Review
82
(1):
15-33.
http://www.jstor.org/stable/2117600.
Ping, H. 2003. "China Migration Country Study." Dhaka, Bangladesh, 22-24 June, 2003.
Rahman, H. Z. 1995. "Mora Kartik: Seasonal Deficits and the Vulnerability of the Rural Poor." In
Rethinking Rural Poverty: Bangladesh as a Case Study, edited by Hossain Zillur Rahman and
Mahabub Hossain. New Dehli, India: Sage Publications.
44

Restuccia, D., D. T. Yang, and X. Zhu. 2008. "Agriculture and Aggregate Productivity: A
Quantitative Cross-Country Analysis." Journal of Monetary Economics 55: 234-250.
Rodrik, D. 2007. "Be our Guest." New York Times, June 1.
Rosenzweig, M. R. 2006. "Global Wage Differences and International Student Flows." In Brookings
Trade Forum: Global Labor Markets?, edited by Susan M. Collins and Carol Graham, 211-228.
Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press.
Rosenzweig, M. R., and K. I. Wolpin. 1993. "Credit Market Constraints, Consumption Smoothing,
and the Accumulation of Durable Production Assets in Low-Income Countries: Investments in
Bullocks in India." Journal of Political Economy 101 (2): 223-244.
Sen, A. 1981. Poverty and Famines: An Essay on Entitlement and Deprivation. Oxford, USA: Clarendon
Press.
Shonchoy, A. 2010. "Seasonal Migration and the Effectiveness of Micro-Credit in the Lean Period: Evidence from
Bangladesh." Institute of Developing Economies Discussion paper No. 294.
Subramanian, S., and A. Deaton. 1996. "The Demand for Food and Calories." Journal of Political
Economy: 133-162.
Swift, J. 1989. "Why are Rural People Vulnerable to Famine?" IDS Bulletin 20 (2): 8-15.
Udry, C., and S. Anagol. 2006. "The Return to Capital in Ghana." The American Economic Review 96
(2): 388-393.
Vereshchagina, G., and H. A. Hopenhayn. 2009. "Risk Taking by Entrepreneurs." American Economic
Review 99 (5): 1808-1830. doi:10.1257/aer.99.5.1808.
Vollrath, D. 2009. "How Important are Dual Economy Effects for Aggregate Productivity?" Journal
of Development Economics 88 (2): 325-334.
Yang, D. 2008. "International Migration, Remittances and Household Investment: Evidence from
Philippine Migrants' Exchange Rate Shocks." The Economic Journal 118 (528): 591-630.
Zug, S. 2006. "Monga—Seasonal Food Insecurity in Bangladesh—Bringing the Information
Together." Journal of Social Studies 111.

45

Table 1. Randomization Balance on Observables at Baseline

Consumption of Food
Consumption of Non-Food
Total Consumption
Total Calories (per person per day)
Calories from Protein (per person per
day)
Consumption of Meat Products
Consumption of Milk & Eggs
Consumption of Fish
Consumption of Children's Education
Consumption of Clothing and Shoes
Consumption of Health for Male
Consumption of Health for Female
Total Saving in Cash (conditional on
positive savings)
HH size
HH Head Education 1=Educated
Number of Males Age>14
Number of Children Age<9
Household has pucca walls
Literacy score average
Subjective expectation: Monga
occurrence this year
Subjective expectation: Will get social
network help in Dhaka
Subjective expectation: Can send
remittance from Dhaka
Ratio of food expenditure over Total
Consumption in round 1
Average skill score received by network
Appled and refused for credit or didn't
apply because of insufficient collateral
Received credit from NGO, family and
friends, or money lender
Migration to Bogra in round 1

Incentivized
Cash
Credit
805.86
813.65
(19.16)
(40.91)
248.98
262.38
(5.84)
(6.74)
1054.83
1076.03
(21.11)
(42.08)
2081.19
2079.51
(20.34)
(22.76)
45.66
45.3
(0.54)
(0.57)
25.04
18.24
(2.58)
(2.0)
11.74
9.77
(0.79)
(0.80)
42.17
39.86
(1.83)
(1.79)
24.14
27.14
(1.75)
(2.31)
37.31
38.8
(0.79)
(0.90)
52.39
52.9
(5.14)
(5.23)
37.34
52.5
(3.52)
(5.75)
1345.55
1366.37
(97.54)
(121.26)
3.93
3.98
(0.05)
(0.05)
0.25
0.24
(0.02)
(0.02)
1.19
1.22
(0.02)
(0.02)
1.01
1.05
(0.03)
(0.04)
0.29
0.32
(0.02)
(0.02)
3.37
3.40
(0.04)
(0.04)
78.79
78.62
(0.88)
(0.77)
58.53
60.82
(1.07)
(1.21)
52.53
52.90
(1.13)
(1.25)
0.77
0.75
(0.003)
(0.09)
6.53
6.49
(0.05)
(0.27)
0.03
0.04
(0.01)
(0.004)
0.68
0.65
(0.02)
(0.02)
0.11
0.10
(0.01)
(0.01)

Non-Incentivized
Control
Info
818.68
768.64
(31.76)
(18.00)
248.4
237.35
(9.28)
(7.99)
1067.08
1005.99
(34.55)
(22.77)
2099.3
2021.31
(30.44)
(32.56)
46.26
44.75
(0.77)
(0.85)
27.13
20.71
(3.24)
(2.90)
9.96
10.77
(1.12)
(1.19)
41.36
45.98
(2.76)
(2.89)
22.31
16.95
(2.34)
(2.1)
39.24
38.35
(1.41)
(1.30)
63.72
47.45
(8.15)
(6.48)
39.36
49.75
(5.68)
(7.51)
1418.29
1611.05
(135.04)
(185.56)
3.99
4.05
(0.08)
(0.08)
0.25
0.22
(0.02)
(0.02)
1.18
1.18
(0.03)
(0.03)
1.08
1.15
(0.05)
(0.05)
0.27
0.30
(0.03)
(0.03)
3.48
3.30
(0.05)
(0.06)
78.38
75.72
(1.15)
(1.35)
58.38
57.40
(1.64)
(1.61)
52.42
51.15
(1.78)
(1.72)
0.77
0.77
(0.01)
(0.004)
6.24
6.20
(0.07)
(0.07)
0.04
0.04
(0.01)
(0.01)
0.70
0.60
(0.03)
(0.03)
0.16
0.12
(0.02)
(0.02)

Diff I v NI

P-value

15.84
(33.57)
12.23
(11.20)
28.06
(38.29)
20.25
(36.99)
-0.01
(0.92)
-1.97
(3.69)
0.48
(1.13)
-2.56
(3.74)
6.01
(2.44)
-0.80
(2.02)
-2.86
(7.28)
-0.31
(6.26)
-160.56
(140.09)
-0.07
(0.10)
0.01
(0.03)
0.03
(0.04)
-0.09
(0.05)
0.02
(0.04)
-0.01
(0.06)
1.66
(2.32)
1.68
(2.04)
0.91
(2.40)
-0.01
(0.01)
0.27
(0.23)
-0.00
(0.01)
0.02
(0.04)
0.03
(0.03)

0.638
0.278
0.465
0.585
0.992
0.594
0.675
0.496
0.016**
0.693
0.696
0.961
0.255
0.473
0.628
0.515
0.093
0.55
0.84
0.47
0.41
0.70
0.21
0.24
0.75
0.55
0.30

Notes. First four columns show the mean of the corresponding variables; fifth column shows the difference between the means of incentivized and non-incentivized
groups. Standard errors are reported in parentheses. P-values are derived from testing the difference between the means of incentivized cash and credit and control
control and info groups; linear regression is used where the dependent variables are the variables of interest and the only control is incentivized, a binary variable equal to
1 if treatment group and 0 otherwise ; robust standard errors clustered at the village level are reported. All expenditure categories are monthly totals, reported on per capita
basis based on the size of the household .

Table 2: Program Take-up Rates

Migration Rate in 2008
Migration Rate in 2009

Migration Rate in 2011*

Incentivized

Cash

Credit

Not
Incentivized

Info

Control

Diff (I-NI)

58.0%
(1.4)
46.7%
(1.4)

59.0%
(1.9)
44.6%
(1.9)

56.8%
(2.1)
49.1%
(2.1)

36.0%
(2.0)
37.5%
(2.0)

35.9%
(2.8)
34.4%
(2.8)

36.0%
(2.8)
40.5%
(2.9)

22.0***
(2.4)
9.2***
(2.5)

39%

32%

7.0**

(2.1)

(2.5)

(3.3)

Standard errors in parentheses. P-value is obtained from the testing difference between migration rates of incentivized and non-incentivized households, regardless of whether they accepted our cash or
credit. No incentives were offered in 2009.
*For re-migration rate in 2011, we compare migration rates in control villages that never received any incentives to the subset of 2008 treatment villages that did not receive any further incentives in 2011.
Note that migration was measured over a longer period (covering the main Monga season) in 2008 and 2009, and a different time period (the mini-Monga season) in 2011.

Table 3: Effects of Migration before December 2008 on Consumption Amongst Remaining Household Members
Panel A: 2008 Consumption
ITT
Consumption of Food
Consumption of Non-Food
Total Consumption
Total Calories (per person per day)
Panel B: 2009 Consumption
Consumption of Food
Consumption of Non-Food
Total Consumption
Total Calories (per person per day)
Controls?

ITT

ITT

IV

IV

OLS

15.644
(40.177)
22.843
(17.551)
38.521
(50.975)
-85.977
(76.337)

48.642**
(24.139)
20.367**
(9.662)
68.359**
(30.593)
142.629***
(47.196)

44.183*
(23.926)
16.726*
(9.098)
60.139**
(29.683)
129.901***
(48.057)

280.792**
(131.954)
115.003**
(56.692)
391.193**
(169.431)
842.673***
(248.510)

260.139**
(128.053)
99.924*
(51.688)
355.115**
(158.835)
757.602***
(250.317)

102.714***
(17.147)
59.085***
(8.960)
160.696***
(22.061)
317.495***
(41.110)

-30.736
(29.087)
-8.644
(20.024)
-39.380
(39.781)
-81.487
(60.141)
No

43.983**
(17.589)
21.009*
(11.954)
64.992***
(23.958)
95.621**
(39.187)
No

34.042*
(18.110)
14.877
(12.031)
48.919*
(24.713)
78.564*
(40.600)
Yes

230.811**
(100.536)
110.324*
(65.333)
341.135**
(137.029)
510.327**
(221.010)
No

186.279*
(96.993)
74.216
(63.792)
260.495**
(131.851)
434.602**
(216.670)
Yes

1.687
(14.687)
6.133
(10.312)
7.820
(21.044)
20.361
(28.392)
No

Cash

Credit

Info

61.876**
(29.048)
34.885***
(13.111)
96.566***
(34.610)
106.819*
(62.974)

50.044*
(28.099)
27.817**
(12.425)
76.743**
(33.646)
93.429
(59.597)

34.273
(23.076)
3.792
(16.186)
38.065
(30.728)
83.242
(52.766)
No

22.645
(23.013)
31.328*
(18.135)
53.973
(34.057)
23.995
(62.207)
No

Mean
726.80
274.46
1000.87
2090.26

872.69
323.31
1196.01
2001.27

Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered by village. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Each row is a different dependent variable (in column 1). In the IV columns, these dependent variables are regressed on "Migration", which is
a binary variable equal to 1 if at least one member of the household migrated and 0 otherwise. The last column reports sample mean of the dependent variable in the control group. All consumption (expenditure) variables are measured
in units of Takas per person per month, except Caloric Intake which is measured in terms of calories per person per day. Some expenditure items in the survey were asked over a weekly recall and other less frequently purchased items
were asked over a bi-weekly or monthly recall. The denominator of the dependent variable (household size) is the number of individuals who have been present in the house for at least seven days. Additional controls included in
columns 5 and 7 were: household education, proxy for income (wall material), percentage of total expenditure on food, number of adult males, number of children, lacked access to credit, borrowing, total household expenditures per
capita measured at baseline, and subjective expectations about Monga and social network support measured at baseline.

Table 4. Migrant Earnings and Savings at Destination (Data for Migrants Only; Non-Experimental)

Total Savings by household
Total Earnings by household
Savings per day
Earnings per day
Remittances per day
One-way Travel Cost per Episode

All Migrants

Incentivized

Not Incentivized

Diff

Obs

3,490.47
(97.22)
7,777.19
(244.77)
56.76
(1.15)
99.39
(1.75)
18.34
(1.06)

3,506.59
(110.83)
7,451.27
(264.99)
56.46
(1.29)
96.09
(1.92)
16.94
(1.19)

3,434.94
(202.80)
8,894.40
(586.14)
57.79
(2.56)
111.15
(4.0)
23.33
(2.28)

71.65
(232.91)
-1443.129**
(583.83)
-1.33
(2.77)
-15.06**
(4.2)
-6.39**
(2.55)

951

264.55

264.12

266.00

-1.88

(3.41)

(3.80)

(7.62)

(8.16)

952
905
926
927
953

*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. The "Diff" columns tests statistical differences between incentivized and non incentivized groups. Standard errors are
reported in parentheses. The measures for total savings and earnings, and savings and earnings per day do not include outliers (Less than 20,000 for total
savings and 120000 for earnings, individuals savings per day less than 500 and individuals ernings per day less than 700). Travel cost refers to the cost of food
and travel to get to the destination. Average migration duration 76 days.

Table 5. Treatment Effects in 2011 Accounting for Basis Risk in the Insurance
Program

Bogra variable:
Dep. Var.: Migrated in 2011
Impure Control

Assigned to travel to
Bogra

Went to Bogra
before 2008

Full Sample Full Sample

Full Sample

0.065

0.046

0.052

(0.048)

(0.044)

(0.045)

0.157**

0.185**

0.171**

(0.077)

(0.088)

(0.071)

0.141**

0.097

0.169***

(0.056)

(0.062)

(0.053)

0.100

0.089

0.139**

(0.065)

(0.069)

(0.063)

-0.062

0.104

(0.082)

(0.065)

0.218*

0.117

(0.130)

(0.127)

0.213***

0.131**

0.133**

(0.064)

(0.061)

(0.061)

Observations

2,058

1,563

2,050

R-squared

0.042

0.077

0.072

Yes

Yes

Yes

0.0311

0.0244

Conditional Credit
Rainfall Insurance
Unconditional Credit
Bogra
Bogra x Rain Insurance

Constant

District Fixed Effects?
p-value for F-test: Conditional credit = Rainfall
Insurance
p-value of 0 = Rainfal Ins + Bogra*rain

0.847

Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Regressions control for Farmer indicator, and
interactions between Bogra and other randomized treatments.

Table 6. Learning from Own Experience and Others' Experiences in 2009 Re-migration Decision
Dep. Var.: Migration in 2009
Did any member of the household migrate in
2008?

OLS

IV

OLS

IV

OLS

IV

OLS

IV

0.392***

0.410***

0.392***

0.464***

0.393***

0.436***

0.392***

0.476***

(0.02)

(0.145)

(0.02)

(0.133)

(0.021)

(0.132)

(0.02)

(0.13)

0.007

-0.006

(0.01)

(0.022)

0.01

0.007

(0.011)

(0.027)

Number of friends and relatives who migrated
Number of friends who migrated

-0.012

-0.048

(0.025)

(0.049)

Number of relatives who migrated
0.097***

0.088

0.095**

0.062

0.098***

0.078

0.095**

0.052

(0.037)

(0.083)

(0.038)

(0.078)

(0.037)

(0.076)

(0.038)

(0.077)

Observations

1818

1818

1818

1818

1797

1797

1797

1797

R-squared

0.207

0.206

0.207

0.201

0.208

0.206

0.209

0.202

Constant

*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 Robust standard errors in parentheses.

Table 7. Differences in Characteristics Between Migrants in
Treatment and in Control Group
Panel A: Percentage of Migrants that Know Someone at Destination
First Episode
Any Episode

Incentive
47%
(1.85)
55%
(1.80)

Non incentive
64%
(3.30)
62%
(3.23)

Diff
17***
(3.8)
6.3*
(3.70)

Panel B: Percentage of Migrants that had a Job Lead at Destination
First Episode
Any Episode

Incentive
27%
(1.64)
31%
(1.67)

Non incentive
44%
(3.41)
44%
(3.30)

Diff
17***
(3.55)
12.8***
(3.56)

Panel C: Percentage of Migrants Traveling Alone
First Episode
Any Episode

Incentive
30%
(1.70)
37%
(1.75)

Non incentive
32%
(3.20)
37%
(3.20)

*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Standard errors are in parentheses.

Diff
1.6
(3.6)
0.44
(3.65)

Table 8. Parameters Used for Calibration

Parameter
u(c)
s
𝜋𝐺
F

Calibration
(𝑐 − 𝑠)1−𝜎
1−𝜎

Notes
HARA utility function.

250 Taka per hh member per

Enough for about 600 Calories per

month

hh member per month

0.5
250 Taka per hh member per
month

The portion of induced migrants that
remigrate
600 Taka for bus fare, plus 6 days of
foregone labor at 60 Taka per day.
Spread over 4 hh members
Solution to:

m

550 per household member per
month

𝜋𝐺 (𝑚 + 𝐼) = 350

where 350 is our LATE estimate and
I is the size of our incentive.

𝜇(𝑦)
Time Period

𝑁(700,70) per household
member, per month

Designed to look like the distribution
of the bottom half of the population
We assume the choice to migrate can

6 months

be made after planting for either of
the agricultural seasons.

𝛿

0.99

I (incentive

200 Taka per household

size)

member

Assumes a households size of 4

Figure 1. Seasonality in Consumption and Price in Rangpur and in Other Regions of Bangladesh

Source: Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics 2005 Household Income and Expenditure Survey

Figure 2. Trial Profile and Timeline
Agricultural Season
2008 Planting of Aman Rice

Jul., 2008
Aug., 2008
Sep., 2008

Monga

Oct., 2008
Nov., 2008

2008 Aman Rice Harvest

Dec., 2008
May, 2009
Jun., 2009

2009 Planting of Aman Rice
Monga

2009 Aman Rice Harvest

2011 Planting of Boro Rice

Pre-harvest
mini Monga season
2011 Boro Rice Harvest

Aug., 2009
Sep., 2009
Oct., 2009
Nov., 2009
Dec., 2009
Jan., 2010

Jan., 2011
Feb., 2011
Mar., 2011
Apr., 2011
May, 2011
Jun., 2011
Jul., 2011

Survey
Baseline Survey – July, 2008
• 1900 households, 100 villages
• Household roster, assets , economic activities, agricultural production,
consumption and expenditures, credit and savings use
• Previous migration experience, expectations about migration
Follow-up Survey, Consumption Data – Oct.-Nov., 2008
• 1900 households, 100 villages
• Assets, economic activities, agricultural production, consumption and
expenditures, credit and savings use
Follow-up Survey, Migration Data – May, 2009
• 1900 households, 100 villages
• Detailed migration and remittance data from Sept. 2008-Apr. 2009

Experimental Design
First Experiment – August, 2008
Households (Villages)
Cash
Credit
Information
Control
Total

703 (37)
589 (31)
304 (16)
304 (16)
1900 (100)

Group Formation Requirement
Individual

476

Assigned Group

408

Self‐Formed Group

408

Destination is assigned for half the
sample in each group, randomized at
the household level

Follow-up Survey, Round 3 – Nov., 2009
• 1900 households, 100 villages
• Employment, consumption
• Migration episodes since April, 2009

Baseline Survey – Jan., 2011
• 627 households, 33 villages
• (Same as 2008 baseline, but for newly added households)

Second Experiment – February, 2011
Households (Villages)

Follow-up Survey, Round 4 – July, 2011
• 2527 households, 133 villages
• Household composition, assets, economic activities, agricultural production,
consumption and expenditures, financial assistance received, savings
• Migration between Feb. 2011 and June 2011
• Psychological cost of migration

Rainfall Insurance
Rice Price Insurance
Unconditional Credit
Conditional Credit
Control
Total

456 (24)
456 (24)
285 (15)
285 (15)
665 (35)
2147 (113)

Figure 3. Distribution of Consumption in Control Villages subtracted
from Distribution of Consumption in Treatment Villages

Figure 4. Migration Experience in 2008 by re-Migration Status in 2009.

Distribution of Total Earnings
Not Incentivized

0

0

.00002

.00005

Density

Density
.00004

.0001

.00006

.00008

.00015

Incentivized

0

10000

20000

30000

In Taka

0

10000

20000

30000

In Taka

People who chose to remigrate

People who chose to remigrate

People who chose not to remigrate

People who chose not to remigrate

Total Earnings less than 30000

Total Earnings less than 30000

Figure 5. Heterogeneity in Migration Responsiveness to Treatment by Subsistence Level
Panel B: Migration Decision as a Function of
Baseline Subsistence
Incentivized
Ratio of Food Expenditure over
Total Expenditure Round 1

Panel C: Migration Rates across the Distribution of Food
Expenditures/Total Expenditures
80
70
60
50
40

Incentivized
Non‐incentivized

30

Poly. (Incentivized)

20

Linear (Non‐incentivized)

10
0

Food Expenditures / Total Expenditures (Subsistence Level at Baseline)

-0.252
(0.185)
-0.870***
(0.204)

Interaction: Ratio of food to total *
Incentivized

0.567**
(0.240)

Constant

0.412*
(0.227)

Observations
R-squared

1860
0.189

Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered by village. ***
p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. The dependent variable is "Migration"
, a binary variable equal to 1 if at least one member of the
household migrated and 0 otherwise. Additional treatment
variables included but not shown were: random assignment into
individual or group migration and random assignment by
migration destination. Additional controls were number of adult
males at the baseline, number of children at the baseline, past
migration dummy, lacked access to credit, borrowing, total
household expenditures per capita measured at baseline, and
social network support measured at baseline.

Figure 6. Full Model with Buffer Stock Savings and Possibility of Saving up for Migration
Panel A

Panel B
Portion of Households Induced To Migrate

Portion of Population Induceable

55
Cash Incentive
Credit Incentive
UCT

50
45

0.8

40

0.7

35
30
25
20

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3

15

0.2

10

0.1

5

0

2

4

6

8
Risk Aversion

10

12

14

RA:0.5
RA:2
RA:4
RA:6
RA:8
RA:10
RA: 12
RA:14
RA:16
RA:18
RA:20

0.9

Portion of Population Induceable

Portion of Households

1

16

0

2

4

6

8

10
12
Time Periods

14

16

18

20

