NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE VALUE OF TRANSMISSION IN ELECTRICITY MARKETS:
EVIDENCE FROM A NUCLEAR POWER PLANT CLOSURE
Lucas Davis
Catherine Hausman
Working Paper 20186
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20186
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2014

We thank Matt Barmack, Severin Borenstein, Catherine Elder, Jeremiah Johnson, Ryan Kellogg, Shaun
McRae, Nolan Miller, and seminar participants at the MIT CEEPR Workshop, the University of California
Energy Institute, the University of Illinois, and the University of Michigan for valuable comments.
We thank Mackenzie Humble for assistance assembling the price data from CAISO. We have not
received any financial compensation for this project nor do we have any financial relationships that
relate to this research. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Lucas Davis and Catherine Hausman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

The Value of Transmission in Electricity Markets: Evidence from a Nuclear Power Plant Closure
Lucas Davis and Catherine Hausman
NBER Working Paper No. 20186
May 2014
JEL No. L51,L94,Q41,Q54
ABSTRACT
Reliable estimates of the value of electricity transmission are critical if these heavily-regulated investments
are to be made cost-effectively. In this paper, we exploit the abrupt closure of the San Onofre Nuclear
Generating Station (SONGS) in February 2012. During the previous decade, SONGS had produced
about 8% of the electricity generated in California, so its closure had a pronounced impact on the
wholesale market, requiring large and immediate increases in generation from other sources. We find
that in the months following the closure, almost all of the lost generation from SONGS was met by
natural gas plants inside California at an average cost of almost $68,000 per hour. During high demand
hours, we find that as much as 75% of the lost generation was met by plants located in the southern
part of the state. Although lower-cost production was available elsewhere, transmission constraints
and other physical limitations of the grid severely limited the ability of other producers to sell into
the southern California market. These constraints also made it potentially more profitable for certain
plants to exercise market power, and we find evidence consistent with one company acting noncompetitively. Overall, the constraints increased generation costs by an average of $4,500 per hour,
implying that the value of additional transmission capacity is about $380 million.
Lucas Davis
Haas School of Business
University of California
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
and NBER
ldavis@haas.berkeley.edu
Catherine Hausman
Weill Hall
735 S. State St. #4215
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-3091
chausman@umich.edu

An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w20186

1

Introduction

Geographic integration of markets improves the allocation of production across firms, reduces
price dispersion, and increases consumer and producer surplus. These benefits are particularly important in electricity markets because unlike most other goods, electricity cannot
be cost-effectively stored. Supply must meet demand at all times, or the frequency in the
grid will fall outside of a narrow tolerance band, causing blackouts. In addition, electricity
demand is highly variable and highly inelastic. As a result, the market clears mostly on the
supply side, with production ramping up and down to meet demand. Geographic integration
helps smooth this volatility, reducing the frequency and severity of price spikes and better
allocating production across plants.
Connecting electricity markets requires substantial investments in transmission lines and
other infrastructure. In the United States, total investments in electricity transmission reach
almost $15 billion annually (Edison Electric Institute, 2014). This spending is expected to
increase over the next several years as additional transmission capacity is needed to help
integrate wind, solar, and other intermittent generation technologies. These are large, longlived projects, so making the right level of investment in the right locations is extremely
important. Reliable estimates of the value of transmission are critical if these investments
are to made cost-effectively.
Quantifying the value of transmission is challenging. Investments in transmission capacity
are endogenous responses to changes in market conditions, making it hard to construct
a credible counterfactual for what would have happened without these investments. In
addition, investments are anticipated years in advance, so before-and-after comparisons can
be difficult to interpret. Moreover, the engineering models that are used in the industry rely
on strong simplifying assumptions that are difficult to verify empirically.
In this paper, we use evidence from a nuclear power plant closure to quantify the value of
transmission in the California electricity market. Between 2005 and 2011, the San Onofre
Nuclear Generating Station (SONGS) generated an average of 16 million megawatt hours of
electricity annually, making it one of the largest electric generating facilities in California.
During this period, SONGS generated enough electricity to meet the needs of 2.3 million
California households1 – about 8% of all electricity generated in the state. Moreover, SONGS
was even more valuable than these numbers suggest because of its location between Los
Angeles and San Diego, two enormous demand centers. Although there is transmission that
1

U.S. DOE/EIA “Electric Sales, Revenue, and Average Price,” November 2013, Tables T1 and T2.
California households used an average of 6.9 megawatt hours in 2012.

1

connects Southern California to the rest of the state, the capacity is limited, implying that a
large part of demand must be met locally. SONGS was closed abruptly and permanently in
February 2012, when workers discovered problems with the plant’s steam generators. Because
of the plant’s size and prominence, the closure provides a valuable natural experiment for
learning about the value of electricity transmission capacity.
Even in a world without transmission constraints or market power, closing a large generation
source will impact the price of wholesale electricity. Like other nuclear power plants, SONGS
produced electricity at very low marginal cost. Consequently, the plant was always near the
top of the “merit-order,” operating around the clock and providing a consistent source of
electricity. When SONGS was closed, this generation had to be made up for by operating
other, more expensive generating resources. We use rich micro-data from a variety of sources
and an econometric model to identify those marginal resources that would be expected to
increase production. Overall, we find that bringing these additional power plants online cost
around $63,000 each hour.
In addition to these merit-order effects, the closure caused transmission constraints to bind,
essentially segmenting the California market. Prior to the closure, transmission capacity
between Northern and Southern California was usually sufficient, so that wholesale prices
equalized in the two regions during the vast majority of hours. Although SONGS was
occasionally shut down temporarily for refueling or maintenance, plant managers were careful
to schedule these outages during the winter, when demand is low. Beginning with the
permanent closure in 2012, we document a substantial divergence in prices between Northern
and Southern California.
This binding transmission constraint and other physical constraints of the grid meant that it
was not possible to meet all of the lost output from SONGS using the lowest cost available
generating resources. We find that during low demand hours, the change in generation follows
closely the merit order, with about half of the increased generation coming from Southern
California and the other half coming from Northern California. During high demand hours,
however, we find significant “out-of-merit” effects: higher cost generating units coming online
more than we would have expected. In high demand hours in 2012, we find that as much as
75% of the lost generation was met by plants located in Southern California. On average,
these constraints increased generation costs by an average of $4,500 per hour, implying that
the total cost of additional natural gas generation was almost $68,000 per hour.
Distinguishing between merit-order and out-of-merit effects is challenging because one must
construct a credible counterfactual for what the pattern of generation would have been with-

2

out transmission constraints. The empirical strategy that we adopt in the paper is to exploit
the fact that prior to the closure, transmission constraints were rarely binding in the California market. We use data from this pre-period to describe flexibly the relationship between
unit-level generation and system-wide demand. These estimates are used to predict what
operating behavior would have been after the SONGS closure were there no transmission
constraints. We then compare generating units’ actual behavior with this counterfactual to
measure out-of-merit effects. This approach affords several advantages over a simple before
and after comparison. Most importantly, we are able to account for concurrent changes
to hydroelectric resources, renewables, demand, and other market conditions – all of which
would confound a before and after comparison.
Our results provide a detailed account of economic and environmental outcomes. We find
that the SONGS closure increased the cost of electricity generation in California by about
$350 million during the first twelve months. This is a large change, equivalent to a 13 percent
increase in total in-state generation costs, yet it went almost completely unnoticed because of
a large offsetting decrease in natural gas prices that occurred in 2012. In fact, a simple beforeand-after calculation would have erroneously concluded that the SONGS closure actually
decreased electricity prices. The SONGS closure also had important implications for the
environment, increasing carbon dioxide emissions by 9 million tons in the twelve months
following the closure. To put this in some perspective, this is the equivalent of putting 2
million additional cars on the road, and implies a social cost of emissions of almost $320
million per year.2
Of this $350 million in increased private generation costs during the first twelve months,
we attribute $40 million to transmission constraints and other physical limitations of the
grid. Over a ten-year time horizon with a 1% discount rate, this implies that the value
of additional transmission capacity is $380 million. As we discuss, this is substantially
higher than the cost of infrastructure projects that would relieve some of the constraints.
The California Independent System Operator evidently agrees, and since 2013 has been
increasing transmission capacity and making other investments aimed at better integrating
northern San Diego county with the rest of the California market.
We are also able to determine which individual plants changed their behavior the most
after the SONGS closure. Because of the transmission constraints, the largest out-of-merit
increases are at Southern plants, and the largest out-of-merit decreases are at Northern
2

According to U.S. DOE/EIA Annual Energy Review, September 2012, Table 2.8 “Motor Vehicle Mileage,
Fuel Consumption, and Fuel Economy”, light-duty vehicles with a short wheelbase use an average of 453
gallons of gasoline annually. For each gallon of gasoline, 19.6 pounds of carbon dioxide are emitted.

3

plants. Surprisingly, we also find large out-of-merit decreases during high demand hours
at two Southern plants: Alamitos and Redondo, both owned by the same company. This
was unexpected but, as it turns out, not coincidental. The Federal Energy Regulatory
Commission recently alleged market manipulation at these plants over the period 2010 to
2012, for which JP Morgan paid fines of over $400 million. The fact that the results clearly
identified these two plants suggests that our approach may serve as a useful diagnostic tool.
Although a large out-of-merit effect does not prove that a plant is exercising market power,
it is a good indicator of unusual behavior.
Our paper contributes to a small but growing literature on the value of geographic integration
in electricity markets (Mansur and White, 2012; Wolak, 2012; Ryan, 2013; Birge et al., 2013).
Previous studies of transmission constraints in electricity markets have either used stylized
theoretical models (Cardell, Hitt and Hogan, 1997; Joskow and Tirole, 2000), or Cournot
simulations (Borenstein, Bushnell and Stoft, 2000; Ryan, 2013). Our methodology is novel, as
it decomposes changes in quantity into merit-order and out-of-merit effects without requiring
strong assumptions about the firms’ objective function or an explicit representation of the
physical constraints of the electric grid. We see broad potential for applying this approach
elswhere. Whereas most economic studies of wholesale electricity markets have relied on
confidential data from the system operator and other sources, our analysis relies entirely
on publicly-available data. Consequently, it would be relatively straightforward to perform
similar analyses in other electricity markets, both for quantifying the impacts of large changes
in generation and transmission infrastructure, and for diagnosing unusual changes in firm
behavior.

2

Background

2.1

Electricity Markets

In the United States, electricity generation in 2012 came from coal (37%); natural gas (30%);
nuclear (19%); hydro (7%); and wind, solar and other renewables (5%).3 This mix of technologies reflects cost, flexibility, and environmental objectives. Wind, solar, and other renewables have near zero marginal cost, so they occupy the top of the merit order. Next in
the order is nuclear, which has a low marginal cost relative to fossil fuel plants. Fossil fuel
plants follow, with coal tending to be cheaper than natural gas. Depending on fuel prices,
3

Table 7.2a “Electricity Net Generation: Total (All Sectors)” in EIA (2013a).

4

however, there may be some highly-efficient natural gas plants with lower marginal cost than
particularly inefficient coal plants.
Regulation of electricity markets varies across states and has changed over time. Under the
classic regulatory model still used in many states today, electric utilities receive exclusive
rights to provide electricity within given geographic areas and charge rates set by cost-ofservice regulation. These vertically-integrated utilities typically perform all the activities
required to supply electricity: generating electricity, operating the transmission and distribution networks, and providing retail services.
In part as a response to the limitations of cost-of-service regulation, several states began to
deregulate their electricity markets beginning in the late 1990s. In most states, the deregulation process separated generation from transmission and distribution. Whereas most
economists believe generation is potentially competitive, transmission and distribution are
natural monopolies. Wholesale electricity markets were established in several different regions, and regulators required utilities to sell all or part of their existing electric generating
portfolios to independent power producers.
Deregulation has resulted in gains in operating efficiency (Fabrizio, Rose and Wolfram, 2007;
Davis and Wolfram, 2012), but it has also introduced opportunities for generation companies
to exercise market power (Borenstein and Bushnell, 1999; Borenstein, Bushnell and Wolak,
2002; Bushnell, Mansur and Saravia, 2008; Hortacsu and Puller, 2008). As with any market,
the scope for individual firms to affect prices depends on the size of the market and the
number of firms. With electricity, however, the lack of cost-effective storage and inelastic
short-run demand makes the market particularly susceptible to market power, even when
market concentration is relatively low.
Economists have also long recognized the key role of transmission capacity in deregulated
electricity markets (Cardell, Hitt and Hogan, 1997; Bushnell, 1999; Borenstein, Bushnell and
Stoft, 2000; Joskow and Tirole, 2000; Wolak, 2012; Ryan, 2013). When transmission lines
are unconstrained, electricity moves between markets at virtually no cost, prices are equated
across markets, and the effective size of the market is large. However, when transmission
capacity is limited, the effective size of the local market shrinks, potentially making it more
profitable for producers to withold generation. There is also related work on how centralized
markets can increase the effective size of the market. Mansur and White (2012) document
how the expansion of a wholesale electricity market from the Eastern United States to
the Midwest led to a substantial increase in efficiency, equating prices across regions and
improving allocative efficiency.

5

2.2

The California Landscape

California was part of this initial wave of electricity deregulation. California’s wholesale
electricity market was launched in April 1998, with all three major investor owned utilities
required to buy and sell electricity through this new market. Around the same time, the
utilities were required to sell nearly all of their natural gas power plants to independent
power producers. By the end of the 1990s, independent power producers controlled more
than 30 percent of the electricity generating capacity in the state.
For the first two years wholesale prices varied widely across hours, but average monthly prices
stayed below $50 per megawatt hour. Then in 2000 the nascent market was put to the test.
The year was unusually dry, leading to below average hydro generation, and the summer
was unusually hot, increasing demand. Starting in June 2000, wholesale prices spiked and
for the next several months average monthly prices exceeded $100 per megawatt hour. The
prices were devastating to the utilities, who were required to buy electricity in the wholesale
market and then sell it to customers at lower, regulated rates. California’s largest utility,
Pacific Gas and Electric, declared bankruptcy in 2001, and the state eventually intervened
and suspended the market.
Most economic analyses of this period have concluded that generation companies exercised
market power that pushed prices considerably higher than they would have gone due to market fundamentals (Borenstein, Bushnell and Wolak, 2002; Joskow and Kahn, 2002; Puller,
2007). Borenstein, Bushnell and Wolak (2002), for example, finds that about half of the
increase in electricity expenditures during summer 2000 was due to market power. These
studies are innovative in the broader industrial organization literature because they illustrate how under tight market conditions firms can exercise unilateral market power even
with a small market share. This was noted in the many studies of the crisis, and also presaged by Borenstein and Bushnell (1999) using a Cournot model to simulate the California
market.
The California market today looks considerably different. First, a much higher fraction of
electricity is sold using long-term contracts. This reduces the incentive for producers to withhold generation in the spot market because they cannot influence the price of the output
already committed through contracts (Allaz and Vila, 1993). Second, short-run demand for
electricity in California is more elastic than it was in 2000. Although the vast majority of
residential and commercial customers continue to face time-invariant retail prices, a growing number of California industrial customers face more dynamic rates. Third, the state’s
renewable portfolio standard and other state and federal policies have led to substantial in6

vestments in wind, solar, and other renewables. This has increased total generation capacity
during a period in which demand has been relatively flat.
Table 1 describes electricity generation in California by source in 2011. By far the largest
source of generation is natural gas, with 44% of total generation. The second largest source
is hydro, accounting for 21% of generation. The two nuclear plants, San Onofre and Diablo
Canyon, each contributed approximately 9% of total generation in 2011. Finally, geothermal,
wind, solar, and other renewables account for about 13% of total generation. Thus, overall
the the California generation portfolio is substantially less carbon intensive than the rest of
the United States, with more emphasis on natural gas, hydro, and renewables.

2.3

The San Onofre Nuclear Generating Station

San Onofre Nuclear Generation Station (SONGS) is a retired two-reactor, 2,150 megawatt
nuclear power plant, operated by Southern California Edison (SCE).4 SONGS was valuable
to the California market not just because it generated a large amount of generation, but
also because of its prime location. Located in the Northwest corner of San Diego County,
SONGS provided electricity in the highly-populated corridor between Los Angeles and San
Diego, where there are few other large power plants.
Trouble for SONGS started on January 31, 2012 when operators detected a small leak inside one of the steam generators. The reactor with the leak was shut down immediately;
the other reactor that had already been shut down three weeks prior for a routine refueling
outage. Although it was not known at the time, neither reactor would ever operate again.
On investigation, it was discovered that thousands of tubes in the steam generators in both
units were showing premature wear. This was followed by months of testing and, eventually, a proposal to the Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) to restart one of the units at
reduced power level. An additional eight months passed without a decision from the NRC.
Meanwhile, policymakers grew concerned that without SONGS, the grid would face “additional operational challenges in the Los Angeles Basin and San Diego areas” (CEC 2012),
relating to the possibility of insufficient summer capacity and the possibility of transmission
constraints (NERC 2012; CAISO 2012).
Facing uncertainty about the NRC ruling, and continued costs of maintaining SONGS in a
state of readiness, SCE made the decision in June 2013 to permanently retire the facility.
“SONGS has served this region for over 40 years,” explained Ted Craver, Chairman and
4

SCE is also the majority owner (78%). The other owners are San Diego Gas & Electric (20%) and the
city of Riverside (2%).

7

CEO, “but we have concluded that the continuing uncertainty about when or if SONGS
might return to service was not good for our customers, our investors, or the need to plan
for our region’s long-term electricity needs.” (Southern California Edison, 2013).5
The SONGS closure was abrupt, permanent, and unexpected, making it a valuable natural
experiment for learning about behavior in electricity markets. It is worth noting that there
is some precedent for studying changes in market behavior during changes in nuclear plant
operations. In particular, Wolfram (1999) instruments for wholesale electricity prices using
available nuclear capacity, exploiting the large quasi-random changes in electricity supply
due to unplanned outages. Our study is different in that we focus on a permanent shock
rather than temporary outages, but the identifying variation is similar.
The SONGS closure is particularly interesting for an empirical analysis because whereas most
large plant closures are anticipated months or even years in advance, the SONGS closure
was abrupt and unexpected. This sharpens the impact and interpretation considerably as it
provided little opportunity for the anticipatory investments in generation and transmission
that typically accompany infrastructure openings and closings. In addition, SONGS is of
particular interest because it operated in a deregulated electricity market. In states where
generation companies are regulated using cost-of-service regulation there is less scope (and
less incentive) for generating units to exercise market power in response to changes in market
conditions.
Finally, the SONGS closure is worth understanding because it evokes parallels with the
California electricity crisis. The year 2012 was similar to 2000 in that both years were
unusually dry, resulting in low levels of hydro generation. Removing an enormous generation
source like SONGS, particularly during a bad year for hydroelectric generation, might have
been expected to create tight supply conditions like in 2000. As it turns out, however, market
prices and other outcomes in 2012 were very different from the experince in 2000. We think
that comparing the behavior of the market in 2012 to 2000 can yield insights, both about
firm behavior and market design.
5

SONGS is one of three U.S. nuclear power plants to close over the last decade. Crystal River and
Kewaunee were both officially closed in 2013. Additionally, Vermont Yankee is expected to close in 2014.
For a recent survey of some of the broader challenges faced by nuclear power see Davis (2012).

8

3

Data

For this analysis we compiled data from a variety of difference sources including the U.S.
Department of Energy’s Energy Information Administration (EIA), the California Independent System Operator (CAISO), and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).
As we mention in the introduction, a strength of our analysis is that it relies entirely on
publicly-available data.

3.1

Generation Data from EIA

We first assembled a dataset of annual plant-level electricity generation from the EIA’s Power
Plant Operation Report (EIA-923). This is a required survey for all U.S. electric generating
facilities with more than one megawatt of capacity. The advantage of these data is that they
are comprehensive, including not only large fossil-fuel generating units, but also smaller and
less frequently operated units, as well as hydroelectric facilities, solar and wind plants, and
nuclear plants. Most California plants complete the survey only once per year, so we perform
all analyses of the EIA-923 data at the annual level, relying on the other datasets listed below
for within-year comparisons. These data also contain information on plant characteristics,
including operator name, fuel type, and some details about the generation technology. We
supplement these characteristics with additional information (county, capacity, and vintage)
from another Department of Energy dataset, the Annual Electric Generator Report (EIA860).
Table 2 describes California electricity generation in 2011 and 2012. SONGS was closed in
early February 2012, so the columns can be approximately interpreted as before and after
the SONGS closure. Panel A reports average monthly generation by fuel type. Nuclear
generation decreased by 1.5 million megawatt hours monthly. Interestingly, 2012 was also an
unusually bad year for hydroelectric power, with a decrease of 1.3 million megawatt hours
monthly. Offsetting these decreases, natural gas generation in California increased by 2.6
million megawatt hours monthly. There is also a modest increase in wind generation, and
close to zero changes for all other categories.
Panel B examines natural gas generation more closely. These categories primarily distinguish
between whether plants are owned by electric utilities or independent power producers, and
whether or not the plants are cogeneration facilities. The two largest categories are “Independent Power Producer Non-Cogen” and “Electric Utility.” Both increase substantially in
2012. Generation is essentially flat in all other categories between 2011 and 2012. In some
9

cases (e.g. industrial non-cogen) there are large percentage changes but from a small base
level. It is difficult to make definitive statements based on these aggregate data, but this
is consistent with plants in these other categories being much less able to respond to market conditions. With industrial, commercial, and cogeneration facilities, electrical output
is a joint decision with other processes (e.g. oil extraction or refining, steam production,
etc.), which limits the ability of these plants to respond quickly to changes in market conditions.

3.2

Generation Data from CAISO

To complement the EIA data, we next assembled a database using publicly-available records
from CAISO. About 80 percent of the electricity used in California is traded through CAISO.
All of California’s investor-owned utilities and most municipally-owned electric utilities buy
power through CAISO. An important exception is the munipally-owned Los Angeles Department of Water and Power (LADWP), which maintains its own electricity generation and also
imports power from other states through long-term contracts.
The data from CAISO describe hourly data on electricity generation by broad categories
(thermal, imports, renewables, large hydroelectric, and nuclear). The renewables category
is disaggregated into six subcategories (geothermal, biomass, biogas, small hydroelectric,
wind, and solar). See CAISO (2013c) for details. Table 2, Panel C describes generation by
category in 2011 and 2012. These data corroborate the general pattern observed in the EIA
data. From 2011 to 2012, there is a large increase in thermal generation and large decreases
in nuclear and hydroelectric generation.
An important advantage of the CAISO data is that they also track imports. Between 2011
and 2012 imports increased from 5.45 to 5.77 million megawatt hours monthly. This is
a substantial increase, but offsets less than 1/5th of the shortfall experienced from the
SONGS closure, and only about 1/10th of the combined shortfall from SONGS and the
decrease in hydroelectric generation. Both the EIA data and CAISO data suggest that
California thermal generation played the primary role in making up for the lost generation
from SONGS. We examine the role of imports in greater depth in Section 5.1.

10

3.3

Generation Data from CEMS

We next built a database of hourly emissions, heat input, and electricity generation by
generating unit using the EPA’s Continuous Emissions Monitoring System (CEMS). The
CEMS data contain these hourly data as well as descriptive information for each generating
unit, including owner name, operator name, technology, primary and secondary fuel, and
vintage. Finally, we match each generating unit to one of the three price locations using the
“Control Area Generating Capability List” from CAISO (2013d).
CEMS data have been widely used in economic studies of generator behavior because they
provide a high-frequency measure of generation at the generating unit level. See, e.g., Joskow
and Kahn (2002); Puller (2007); Mansur (2007); Holland and Mansur (2008). CEMS data are
highly accurate because facilities must comply with specific requirements for maintenance,
calibration, and certification of monitoring equipment, and because the methodology used for
imputing missing data creates an incentive for generating units to keep monitoring equipment
online at all times.
During our sample period, 107 plants in California report to CEMS.6 In 2011, these plants
represent 30% of total generation in California and 62% of total natural gas generation. This
relatively low fraction of generation covered by CEMS reflects that a large share of California
generation comes from nuclear, hydro, and renewables – none of which are in CEMS. In
addition, as discussed above, one third of natural-gas fired generation in California is from
cogeneration, industrial, and commercial facilities, which are generally not in CEMS. Indeed,
generation reported in CEMS in 2011 is 96% of non-cogen natural gas-fired generation by
electric utilities and independent power producers reported in the EIA data.
Despite the imperfect coverage, the CEMS data are extremely valuable, because they are
the only publicly available information on hourly, generating unit-level outcomes. Moreover,
by combining the CEMS data with EIA and CAISO data, we are able to get a sense of how
much our results might be affected by focusing exclusively on CEMS generating units. Table
A1 in the Online Appendix lists the largest plants that do not appear in CEMS. Overall,
these plants tend to be quite small, or to be types of facilities (e.g. cogeneration plants,
industrial facilities) that are not able to respond quickly to market changes.
While CEMS data describe gross generation, for this analysis we would ideally observe net
generation. The difference between the two is equal to “in-house load,” which is the electricity
the plant uses to run, for instance, cooling equipment or environmental controls. As such,
6

CEMS reporting requirements do not change during our sample period.

11

net generation is what is sold on the grid. Reliable plant-level or unit-level estimates of the
ratio between net and gross generation are not available. In the analyses that follow we
use an implied measure of net generation, which we calculate as 95.7% of gross generation.
This 4.3-percent difference is the median difference in our sample between net generation
from EIA and gross generation from CEMS, after dropping some outliers.7 Kotchen and
Mansur (2013) make a similar comparison using national data, finding a 5-percent mean
difference.

3.4

Wholesale Price Data

We also obtained hourly wholesale electricity prices from CAISO. We use prices at three
locations: NP15 (Northern California), ZP26 (Central California), and SP26 (Southern California). Figure 1 shows the weekly maximum price for the North and South. We focus on
maximum prices because transmission constraints are only likely to bind during a few, high
demand hours. Maximum prices are generally very similar prior to the SONGS closure, but
they diverge substantially in 2012. Figure 2 shows the price difference between Northern
and Southern California at 3 p.m. each weekday, a time when transmission constraints are
more likely to bind. Again, there is clear evidence of an increase in the post-period price
differentials. After the SONGS closure, there are many more days with positive differentials,
including a small number of days with differentials that exceed $40.

4
4.1

Empirical Strategy and Generation Regressions
Creating a Credible Counterfactual

Our objective is to determine which power plants increased generation to make up for the
2,150 megawatts of capacity that became unavailable when SONGS closed in February 2012.
Although at first glance this might appear to be a relatively straightforward exercise, simple
before-and-after comparisons would not be credible. As we showed earlier, hydroelectric
generation was low in 2012. This alone necessitated substantial increases in generation from
7
Specifically, we examine generation data for 2005-2011 plants that appear in both CEMS and EIA. We
calculate the annual net to gross ratio for each plant, using net generation as reported to EIA and gross
generation as reported to CEMS. The median ratio is 0.966, but there are implausible outliers, such that
the average is greater than 1. In particular, if some but not all generating units report to CEMS, this ratio
can appear larger than 1. Dropping these outliers, the median is 0.957 and the average is 0.926.

12

thermal plants, making it difficult to interpret before-and-after comparisons like our Table
2.
One potential approach for estimating the causal impact of the SONGS closure would have
been to use a regression-discontinuity (RD) research design, comparing generation immediately before and after the SONGS closure. This approach has a great deal of intuitive
appeal, but is only useful for estimating a very short-run effect, i.e. changes in generation
during the days or weeks following the closure. Although this is somewhat interesting, we are
much more interested in longer-run changes in generation patterns. In particular, we want
to be able to examine June, July and August 2012, when air-conditioning and other factors
lead electricity consumption to reach its annual peak. The RD approach is not helpful for
examining this peak period because it occurs several months after the closure.
Instead, the approach we adopt in this paper is to construct an econometric model of the
relationship between system-wide demand and unit-level generation, and then to use this
model to quantify changes in generation post closure. The basic idea is simple. System-wide
demand varies substantially hour to hour, as a function of weather and economic activity.
Low-cost generating units operate most hours of the year, regardless of system-wide demand,
while higher-cost generating units turn on only during relatively high demand hours. The
first thing we do is describe this relationship non-parametrically by estimating a series of
what we call “generation regressions.”
We estimate these regressions using data from before the closure, when transmission constraints were rarely binding in the California market. These regressions are thus an empirical
representation of operating behavior in an unconstrained market, and they primarily reflect
differences in marginal cost across generating units. During the post-period, however, we
expect transmission constraints and other physical limitations of the grid to change the ordering of generating units. In particular, electricity generated by units in the immediate
vicinity of SONGS became more valuable, potentially leading these units to be used even at
lower levels of system-wide demand.
As we describe in the introduction, we distinguish between two different effects: (1) the
“merit-order” change in generation is when the next generating unit along the marginal cost
curve is brought online; and (2) the “out-of-merit” change in generation is when higher cost
generating units that would normally be offline are brought online because of transmission
constraints, voltage support, or other considerations. In this section we describe our approach
in detail, highlighting the key assumptions required for each stage in the analysis.
An alternative to our ex-post empirical approach would have been to simulate counterfactuals
13

using an engineering model of the electrical grid combined with a structural model of firm
optimization. However, our method is better suited to the application we consider for several
reasons. First, while Cournot simulations have been used to study two-node transmission
problems, the transmission constraints in our application are much more complex. And
while engineering models exist that attempt to capture these features (e.g. GE MAPS),
they rely on simplifying assumptions that only approximately describe Kirchhof’s laws and
the engineering properties that govern how electricity moves. In practice, electric grid system
operators use a combination of output from such models and real-time information about
system conditions.
Performing counterfactual simulations would also require strong assumptions about generator and system operator behavior. While the objective function for independent power
producers is relatively clear, describing behavior by investor-owned utilities is more difficult
because they are subject to rate-of-return regulation. System operator behavior is important
as well. During this period, CAISO was actively implementing new automated bid mitigation procedures and increasing the use of exceptional dispatches (CAISO 2013b). Modeling
these rapidly evolving market practices explicitly poses real challenges and would have required not only imposing these constraints in the model but also making strong assumptions
about generators’ expectations about these practices.

4.2

Generation Regressions by Category

The core of our econometric model is a system of what we call “generation regressions,” which
describe non-parametrically the relationship between system-wide demand and generation
at individual sources. We estimate these regressions first for broad categories of generation
and then later, in Section 4.3, for individual generating units. For the generation regressions
by category the estimating equation takes the following form:

generationit =

X

(γbi · 1{system-wide demandt = b}) + εit .

(1)

b

The dependent variable is electricity generation for category i in hour t, measured in megawatt
hours. We use the categories reported in CAISO data: thermal, large hydro, imports, nuclear, and renewables. In addition, we separate thermal into generation that appears in
CEMS and generation that does not, where the latter is calculated as the difference between
thermal generation reported by CAISO and thermal generation reported by CEMS.
The only independent variables in the regression are a set of indicator variables corresponding
14

to different levels of total system demand. We divide system-wide demand into bins of equal
width, indexed by b. For convenience, we define the bin width as 2,150/2 = 1,075 megawatt
hours, so that we can assume that system demand increased by two bins following the SONGS
closure. We have experimented with alternative bin widths, and the results are similar with
both more and fewer bins.
We do not include a constant in the regression, as the indicator variables sum to unity.
We could equivalently drop one and interpret the coefficients relative to the excluded bin,
but our approach makes it easier to interpret the estimated coefficients. Without including
a constant, the coefficients γbi are equal to the average generation for category i when
system demand is at level b. If there were no dynamic dispatch considerations and no plant
outages, this coefficient would be equal to zero up until the point when lower-cost generating
units had already been turned on to meet demand, and then would be equal to the unit’s
capacity. Because there are no additional regressors, this is formally equivalent to calculating
conditional means for different ranges of system-wide demand.
We estimate equation (1) using hourly data from 2010 and 2011, the two years leading up
to the SONGS closure. We begin the sample on April 20, 2010 because prior to that date,
we do not observe CAISO generation data. Additionally, we drop a small number of days
(fewer than ten) for which data from CAISO are incomplete. Because the coefficients γbi are
allowed to differ by generation category, we estimate six separate regressions, one for each
category. Figure 3 plots the estimated coefficients. In all plots, the x-axis is total generation
from all sources, divided into bins. The y-axis is average source-specific generation in MWh.
We plot all six categories using the same scale for the y-axis, so that one can immediately
compare both the level and responsiveness of generation.
The CEMS units (Panel A) are very responsive across all quantiles of demand. Large-scale
hydro (Panel B) is only somewhat responsive, which is a bit surprising given the potential for
using large hydroelectric facilities to follow demand fluctuations. We thought this might be
because 2011 had relatively high water supply, so we also examined the generation regression
for 2012. Though the overall level of hydro generation is lower in 2012, the slope is about the
same. Imports (Panel C) are also somewhat responsive, but only for relatively low demand
hours. Past the median level of demand, imports are essentially flat. Nuclear (Panel D) and
renewables (Panel E) are not responsive, as expected – the nuclear unit (Diablo Canyon) is
baseload, and renewable generation is exogenously determined by weather.
It is interesting to compare these results with the aggregate pattern of generation in Table 2.
Both show, in some sense, the ability of different generation sources to respond to changes in

15

demand, albeit on very different time scales. The year-to-year comparison suggests that the
majority of the response to the SONGS closure came from natural gas generation, and this
is consistent with the hour-to-hour responsiveness observed in Panel A. Similarly, most of
the other categories showed relatively little increase in 2012, and this accords with the lack
of hour-to-hour responsiveness in Panels B–F. Finally, it is important to note that, while
hydroelectric resources display some hour-to-hour variation in Figure 3, the year-to-year
variation is entirely exogenous – it depends on total precipitation.

4.3

Unit-Level Generation Regressions

The generation regressions by category give a valuable overview, but they provide no detail about which particular plants tend to be the most responsive to system-wide demand,
nor about the geographic location of production. Therefore, we next estimate generation
regressions for each unit that appears in the CEMS data. The estimating equation for these
regressions is very similar to equation (1) except the unit of observation is now the individual
generating unit j,
generationjt =

X

(αbj · 1{net system-wide demandt = b}) + ejt .

(2)

b

The right-hand side bins are now defined over total generation by all California CEMS
units. This is the net or residual demand, after generation from renewables, imports, and
non-CEMS units has been subtracted from the total system demand. We use this rather
than total system demand because we want to identify the ordering within the category of
natural gas units.
We estimate these unit-level generation regressions using two separate samples corresponding
to before and after the SONGS closure. Observing plant behavior before the closure allows
us to construct a counterfactual for what would have occurred if SONGS had not closed. As
we describe in the next section, the behavior of the natural gas units before the closure (the
“pre-period”) can then be compared to the behavior after the closure (the “post-period”).
Returning to equation (2), note that we use net demand because we want to attribute
changes from the pre-period to the post-period only to the SONGS outage, and the residual
demand will not be confounded by concurrent changes to renewables, hydro, or demand. We
elaborate on this below.
For the pre-period, we again use data from April 20, 2010 to January 31, 2012, the year
and a half leading up to the SONGS closure. We drop four generating units which are
16

owned by the Los Angeles Department of Water and Power (LADWP). As described earlier,
LADWP maintains its own electricity generation and also imports power from other states
through long-term contracts, and it is not part of the CAISO market. Finally, for the main
analysis we exclude generating units that enter or exit during our sample period, focusing
only on continuously-operating generating units plus Huntington Beach units 3 and 4 (which
operated through most of our sample period, but were converted to synchronous condensers
in 2013). We explore entry and exit further in the Online Appendix, arguing that exclude
the units that enter or exit during our sample period is unlikely to bias our results.
Sample graphs of the coefficients from these pre-period unit-level regressions are shown in
Figure 4. We show twelve units: the four largest units for each of three technologies. As can
be seen in Panel A, the combined cycle plants tend to turn on, and even reach capacity, at
fairly low levels of system demand. These units are generally new, large, and efficient. The
combustion turbines in Panel B are turned on at higher levels of demand and have much
smaller capacity. Finally, the boilers (Panel C), which are generally large and old, are turned
on only at high levels of system demand.
For the post-period, we use data from February 1, 2012 through January 31, 2013. These are
the first twelve months after the SONGS closure. While it would be interesting to examine
longer-run changes in the market (which will include adaptation responses, such as new
capital investment), our estimates would become less credible as we used data further into
the future.8

4.4

Merit-Order and Out-of-Merit Effects

We thus have a set of coefficients α for each of 21 bins at 184 generating units in 2 time
periods, for a total of over 7,000 coefficients. We summarize them as follows. We define
the “merit-order” change in generation at a given unit caused by the SONGS closure as:
maintaining the ordering of units along the marginal cost curve, while requiring an additional
2,150 megawatt hours of generation to fill the SONGS gap. Then the merit-order change
across all bins b and all generating units j in a geographic region (JN orth or JSouth ) is:
XX

 post
pre
pre
αbj
− αb−2,j
· θb

(3)

b>2 j∈J
8

In the Online Appendix, we include results estimated with a post-period which goes through June 30,
2013, and the main results are similar but somewhat attenuated, as expected.

17

where θbpost is the fraction of hours that system-wide demand was in bin b during the postperiod.9
The “out-of-merit” effect is the change in generation from the pre-period to the post-period,
conditional on a given level of system demand:
XX
b

 post
pre
post
· θb .
− αbj
αbj

(4)

j∈J

For ease of calculating standard errors, we estimate equation (2) at the regional, rather than
generating unit level. This is numerically equivalent, since in the tables which follow we
are reporting the linear sum of coefficients across units within a region. When estimating
the standard errors, we cluster by sample month to allow for arbitary spatial correlation
and serial correlation within sample month. To examine whether the monthly cluster was
sufficiently long, we regressed the residuals on their lags. Beyond fifteen days, we estimate
coefficients that are close to zero and not statistically significant.
Additionally, we evaluate the merit-order and out-of-merit changes for subsets of hours when
transmission constraints are most likely to bind. These calculations are exactly the same
as equations 3 and 4 except we use observations from only a subset of post-closure hours.
We consider two such subsets, each totalling approximately 5% of hours. First, we define
weekday summer afternoons as 2 p.m. to 5 p.m. in months June through September. Second,
we define high demand hours when total CEMS generation was in the 13th quantile (greater
than 13,837 MWh); this leaves approximately the same number of observations as in the
weekday summer afternoon results. We verify that both definitions are highly correlated
with congestion as defined by the price differential between North and South. They are also
correlated with one another, with a simple correlation of 0.30.
The primary assumption for these estimates is that the ordering of units along the marginal
cost curve in 2012 would have been the same as in 2010 and 2011, had SONGS not closed.
There are many reasons to think this is a reasonable assumption. These are all natural gas
plants, so there is no inter-fuel substitution, and the ordering among plants is essentially a
monotonic ordering by heat rate. Moreover, while there were large changes in hydroelectric
and renewables generation in 2012, these changes would not have affected the ordering of
the natural gas units. As such, we can attribute moves up the ordering to the need to fill in
for SONGS, and we can attribute re-ordering of units to the transmission constraints caused
9

Note that this cannot be calculated for b=1 and b=2, since b − 2 would be undefined. In our sample,
these levels of thermal generation do not appear in the post period, so in practice θ = 0. If they had
appeared, one solution would have been to use θ3 = θ1 + θ2 + θ3 .

18

by SONGS. In the Online Appendix, we explore each concern in greater depth, concluding
that our estimates are largely unaffected by them.

5
5.1

Regional Impacts
Impact on Generation

Table 3 describes the effect of the SONGS closure on the geographic pattern of generation
in California. The reported estimates are average hourly changes in MWh. Panel A reports
effects for all hours during the twelve months following the closure. The merit-order change
in generation is similar between the North and the South: the point estimate is 892 in the
South, and 944 in the North. The Central California column represents many fewer plants,
and accordingly a smaller in-order change (300 MWh). By design, the total merit-order effect
is approximately equal to 2,150 MWh, the lost generation from SONGS. This geographic
pattern reflects where in the state thermal resources are located. Without any transmission
constraints, our estimates imply that about 40% of the lost output from SONGS would have
been produced by plants located in Southern California.
The out-of-merit estimates show the displacement of generation from Northern generating
units to Southern units. Relative to what we would have expected in a world without
transmission constraints, the Southern units increased generation by 150 MWh, while the
Northern units decreased by 140 MWh. To put this in perspective, the average plant-level
capacity is around 380 MW in the South and around 270 MW in the North, so these effects
are approximately the size of half of a plant.
The results are starker when the sample is limited to the hours in which transmission constraints are most likely to bind. On weekday summer afternoons (Panel B), the out-of-merit
effect almost doubles, to a 237 MWh increase in the South and 260 MWh decrease in the
North. In the 5% of hours with the highest level of system demand (Panel C), the out-ofmerit effect is an increase in the South of 431 MWh, and a decrease in the North of 381
MWh. Thus as much as 75% of the lost generation from SONGS was met by plants in
Southern California. To get a sense of the magnitude, the out-of-merit effect is comparable
to an increase in capacity factor of three percentage points in the South and a decrease of
three percentage points in the North.
These results implicitly assume that the entire displaced SONGS generation (2,150 MWh)
was met by in-state CEMS units. This is a reasonable approximation given the lack of
19

responsiveness in all other categories of generation observed in Figure 3. The one potential
exception is imports, which are responsive over some ranges of demand. To account for
this, we calculated the merit-order impact on imports of a shock to total demand equal
to 2,150 MWh, using the generation regression for imports. This exercise implies that
around 25% of the lost generation from SONGS would have been replaced by imports.
One could imagine adjusting the merit-order estimates in Panel A of Table 3 accordingly.
For weekday summer afternoons and high demand hours, however, we find a very small
response in imports, consistent with the visual evidence in Figure 3. On weekday summer
afternoons, only 4 percent of the lost generation would have made up by imports, and in
high demand hours it would have been less than 1 percent. While the merit-order effects
depend on how responsive imports are, the out-of-merit effects do not, as imports did not
change transmission constraints. Further details, discussion, and figures plotting post-period
generation regressions by category are presented in the Online Appendix.
The table also reports standard errors. The merit-order changes are estimated with a high
degree of statistical precision and all nine estimates are strongly statistically significant.
The estimated out-of-merit changes are less precise, reflecting that whereas the merit-order
changes are estimated using the pre-period only, the out-of-merit effects reflect differences
in estimated coefficients between the pre-period and the post-period. It would have been
unusual to observe this magnitude and pattern of out-of-merit effects due to chance alone. In
the Online Appendix, we report results from a series of placebo tests aimed at providing some
reassurance that these results are not driven by omitted variables or model misspecification.
In particular, we repeat the analysis six times using the exact same specification, but with
a different set of years. In the first placebo test, for example, we estimate the model as if
SONGS had closed in January 2007 rather than January 2012. Overall, the estimated outof-merit effects in these other years do not follow the pattern observed in 2012. Some of the
estimates are similar in size to our main results. However, when one looks closely at non-zero
out-of-merit effects in other years, they tend to be driven by long outages. To demonstrate
this, we show several diagnostics on the unit-level out-of-merit effects. In the years with the
largest out-of-merit placebo effects, the standard deviation, skewness, and kurtosis are all
substantially larger (in absolute terms) than in 2012, indicating large year-to-year changes
in generation at a few individual plants rather than correlated changes in generation across
many plants.

20

5.2

Impact on Costs

We next quantify the change in the total cost of production associated with these generation
impacts. To do so, we must first calculate the marginal cost for each generating unit. As
is common in the literature, we calculate marginal cost using information on heat rates,
fuel prices, and variable operations and maintenance costs (VOM): M Cj = heat ratej ·
f uel pricej + V OMj . For the unit-level heat rate, we divide the total heat input over
our time frame (in MMBtus) by the total net generation (in MWhs). This abstracts from
ramping rates, as is common in the literature. We obtain daily natural gas prices from Platts
Gas Daily and calculate the average post-period price. We focus, in particular, on the PG&E
City Gate price for the North, and the SCG City Gate price for the South. For VOM, we
assume 3.02 $/MWh for combined cycle plants and 4.17 $/MWh for all other plants (in
2009$), following CEC (2010). The resulting marginal cost estimates range from $24 for
generating units with favorable heat rates to $81 for units with high heat rates.
In Figure 5, we plot the marginal cost curve for electricity in California. We use our estimates
of marginal cost for all thermal units. For the capacity of these units, we use the maximum
observed hourly generation in our sample. For hydroelectric, renewables, and nuclear, we
proxy for capacity using the average hourly generation in the post-period (February 2012
through January 2013), from CAISO. While these types of generation have higher rated
capacities, the average generation in the post-period is more relevant given constraints set
by weather conditions. We assume zero marginal cost for hydro and renewables production.
For the marginal cost of nuclear units, we use a nuclear fuel cost estimate of $7.08 per MWh
(in 2012$) from Table 8.4 of the EIA’s Electric Power Annual (EIA 2012), plus a nuclear
VOM estimate for California of $5.27 (in 2009$) from CEC (2010).
We overlay on the marginal cost curve a histogram of total hourly generation in the postperiod. In most hours, the marginal generating unit is a combined cycle natural gas unit,
with marginal cost (given the average post-period natural gas price) of around 27 $/MWh.
In high demand hours, however, the marginal unit is typically either a combustion turbine
or a boiler (again, fueled by natural gas), with marginal cost around 40 $/MWh.
To quantify the cost impact of the SONGS closure we run regressions similar to the unit-level
generation regressions, except the dependent variable is now the cost of generation rather
than the quantity:
(M Cj · generationjt ) =

X

(δbj · 1{net system-wide demandt = b}) + µjt .

b

21

(5)

The advantage of using this regression is that we can again decompose the total change in cost
into merit-order and out-of-merit changes. Results are given in Table 4. Taking a weighted
average across all hours, the merit-order increase in total cost of thermal generation was
$29,000 in the South, $8,000 in the ZP region, and $27,000 in the North – totalling $63,000
statewide each hour. The average cost implied is approximately 29 $/MWh.
It is worth noting that this estimate of $63,000 assumes that none of the lost generation
from SONGS was replaced by imports. As described above, imports made up approximately
25 percent of the lost generation on average, across all hours. Given that the California
marginal cost curve is quite elastic in most hours, the marginal cost of out-of-state generation
necessarily must have been close to the marginal cost of the in-state generation. As such, we
expect our estimate of $63,000 to be close to the true merit-order change in total cost.
The out-of-merit changes are also significant. While total cost increased by $7,100 in the
South and $500 in ZP, it decreased by $3,000 at Northern generating units because of the
decrease in quantity. Systemwide, this implies an increase of $4,500 each hour coming from
the out-of-merit changes in generation. While lower-cost units were available in the North,
they could not be used because of the transmission constraints and other physical limitations
of the grid. This out-of-merit effect reflects not only North-South transmission constraints,
but also local transmission constraints in and around San Diego and Los Angeles, as well
as other physical limitations of the grid. As we discuss briefly later in the paper, part of
the challenge with SONGS closing was that there was now very little generation in northern
San Diego county that could be used to boost the voltage of electricity transmitted from far
away. Maintaining some “reactive” power locally was another reason why units would have
been operated out-of-merit.
Thus the total cost increase at thermal power plants statewide, including both merit-order
and out-of-merit effects, is almost $68,000 per hour. This amounts to a 13 percent increase
in total in-state generation costs.10 As another point of comparison, the average post-period
price in the California wholesale electricity market (quantity-weighted) was 32 $/MWh.
Multiplying this by total quantity (i.e. 2,150 MWh) gives $68,000 per hour. The two
measures are quite close together because the supply curve is fairly elastic in most hours
throughout the year. Thus the cost of the marginal generating unit is not very different
from the cost of inframarginal units. Using our estimate of the marginal cost of California
nuclear plants (described above) of 12.8 $/MWh implies that the marginal cost of generation
at SONGS would have been around $28,000 each hour. This difference in costs implies that
10

To calculate this, we assume that the average hourly cost for residual thermal generation (i.e., not
observed in the CEMS data) is equal to the average cost we observe in our sample.

22

the SONGS closure increased the cost of generation by $350 million in the first twelve months.
Of this, the out-of-merit portion is $4,500 per hour, implying a total of $40 million in the
first twelve months following the closure. Table 5 summarizes these total impacts.11
Panels B and C of Table 4 report estimates of the cost changes for weekday summer afternoons and high demand hours, when transmission constraints are more likely to bind.
The merit-order effects are larger than in Panel A, because the marginal generating units
at these hours are higher up on the marginal cost curve. The change is particularly high
in the South, where the generation impacts were larger. The out-of-merit changes in total
cost are also higher than in Panel A, reflecting a combination of larger out-of-merit changes
in generation and higher marginal costs. The system-wide total change in thermal costs is
approximately $78,000 per hour on weekday summer afternoons, and around $84,000 per
hour in high demand hours. As we describe above, imports did not substantially increase
in the weekday summer afternoon and high demand hours, so we expect these estimates
to be close to the true total change in cost. For comparison, the average weekday summer
afternoon wholesale price (quantity-weighted) was 49 $/MWh. Multiplying this by SONGS
capacity gives $106,000 per hour. The same calculation for high demand hours (Panel C)
also gives $106,000 per hour. These measures are considerably higher than our estimate
because supply is relatively inelastic during these hours; the marginal generating unit has a
much higher cost than the inframarginal units.

5.3

Impacts on Emissions

In addition to the private cost of generation we calculate above, we quantify the impact of
the generation changes on carbon dioxide emissions. Using the CEMS data, we calculate
unit-specific carbon emissions rates. We then use the same type of regression as we used for
the generation and cost changes, but now with carbon dioxide emissions, in metric tons, as
the dependent variable:
(carbon ratej · generationjt ) =

X

(λbj · 1{net system-wide demandt = b}) + νjt .

(6)

b

While California power plants are currently covered by a carbon cap and trade program,
they were not yet covered in 2012. As a result, any increase in carbon dioxide emissions
11

These numbers reflect our assumptions regarding VOM costs. We are assuming that VOM at SONGS is
substantially higher than VOM at the natural gas plants that came online when SONGS closed. If we were
to assume equal VOM, the total cost of replacing the lost generation from SONGS would rise by about $40
million.

23

caused by the SONGS closure would not have been offset. We estimate an increase of 1,030
tons per hour.12 For comparison, the average hourly total emissions at CEMS plants was
around 3,800 tons in 2010 and 3,100 tons in 2011. The central value of the social cost of
carbon used by the federal government for regulatory impact analysis is 32 $/ton (in 2007$)
(IWG 2013). For this cost of carbon, our estimates imply a social cost of the additional
emissions of almost $320 million, in 2013 dollars.
We also examine the impact on sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxides emissions. Our estimates
imply that the SONGS closure increased emissions of both pollutants. However, natural
gas plants emit small enough amounts of these criteria pollutants that the implied economic
cost of the change in emissions is small compared to the carbon dioxide impacts. See Muller
and Mendelsohn (2012) for recent estimates of marginal damages. Moreover, a portion of
NOx emissions are capped in the RECLAIM market around the Los Angeles area, so some
of these increases may have been offset by other sectors.

6

Plant-Level Impacts

Our empirical approach generates estimates of merit-order and out-of-order effects not only
at a regional level, but also for individual plants. Table 6 shows the plants that were most
affected by the SONGS outage. In Panel A, we show the plants with the five largest meritorder increases in generation. All five are large combined-cycle plants with low marginal
cost. As Figure 5 shows, in most hours the equilibrium is at a fairly elastic portion of the
supply curve, with costs around 27 $/MWh. Panel B of Table 6 shows the largest positive
out-of-merit increases, and Panel C the largest out-of-merit decreases. The largest increases
tend to be in the South and the largest decreases tend to be in the North, matching the
aggregate results in Table 3.
The differences between the South and North are starker during hours when transmission
constraints were most likely to bind. Table 7 shows the most affected plants during high
demand hours. Results for weekday summer afternoons are similar and available in the Online Appendix. Not surprisingly, the merit-order increases are largest at plants with much
higher marginal cost: around 40 $/MWh. In Panel B, the largest out-of-merit increases are
exclusively at Southern plants, as expected. Moreover, these are plants that were approximately on the margin: their marginal cost is comparable to the marginal cost of the plants
12

We do not report the geographic breakdown nor the difference in high demand hours, although they
match what one would expect given the generation changes in Table 3. Since carbon dioxide is a long-lived,
global pollutant, these breakdowns are not relevant.

24

in Panel A.
In Panel C, several of the largest out-of-merit decreases are at plants in the North. There are
two important exceptions, however. The two largest out-of-merit decreases in high demand
hours were at plants in the South: Alamitos and Redondo, both owned by AES. These two
large plants were on the margin in high demand hours: they appear in Panel A as plants with
large merit-order changes. Moreover, given their location in the South, they would have been
expected to have out-of-merit increases. To illustrate the anomaly these plants represent, we
show in Figure 6 estimated out-of-merit effects by plant for high demand hours, separated
by region. The AES plants are shown with black lines, while all other plants are shown with
orange lines. While the other Southern California plants generally exhibit positive out-ofmerit effects, the estimated out-of-order effects for two of the three AES plants are clearly
large and negative.
We view the AES out-of-merit decreases as consistent with the exercise of market power.
As it turns out, the AES plants were operated through a tolling agreement with JP Morgan
Ventures Energy Corporation, a subsidiary of JPMorgan Chase. The Federal Energy Regulatory Commission has alleged market manipulation by JP Morgan at these and other plants.13
FERC asserted that JP Morgan engaged in twelve different manipulative bidding strategies
between September 2010 and November 2012 in both the California and Midcontinent markets. Some of the strategies, particularly in 2011, were designed to lead the independent
system operator to schedule the generating units even when it was uneconomical to do so,
then to pay prices above the wholesale price through so-called make-whole payments. Other
strategies, particularly in 2012, involved submitting extremely high bids but relying on the
ISO’s dynamic scheduling constraints to lead the bids to be accepted. For details on the
individual strategies, see FERC (2013). In 2013, JP Morgan agreed to pay a civil penalty
of $285 million and to disgorge $125 million in alleged unjust profits.
It would be interesting to use our results to calculate the profit earned by AES by their
alleged behavior, potentially then comparing this number to the settlement with FERC.
Several things prevent us from being able to do that. First, since FERC alleged market
manipulation in both the pre- and post-periods, we do not know whether the out-of-merit
decreases at Alamitos and Redondo are a result of unusually high generation in 2011 or
withholding in 2012. Second, the settlement with JP Morgan is still relatively recent, so
13

To understand FERC’s charges against JP Morgan it is helpful to have a bit of broader legal context.
Regulatory oversight of electricity is different than for many goods, in that it is illegal to exercise unilateral
market power. FERC is charged with a statutory mandate dating back to 1935 which requires wholesale
electricity prices to be “just and reasonable,” allowing for the recovery of production costs and a “fair” rate
of return. See Wolak (2005) for additional discussion.

25

it is hard to compare behavior before and after the settlement. As more data become
available from post-settlement, it might be possible to do more analysis. Finally, much
of the manipulation alleged by FERC was aimed at earning revenues through exceptional
dispatch and other out-of-market operations, and we do not observe these payments.
We do, however, re-examine our main results in light of the FERC investigation. In Table 8
we again present estimates of the regional impact (as in Table 3), but this time separating
three plants owned by AES from the other Southern plants. As column (2) shows, the outof-merit increases in the Southern units are even larger than in Table 3, once the plants
with alleged market manipulation are separated out. We believe this validates our overall
approach in two important ways. First, it shows that our out-of-merit estimates do indeed
show the effects of the transmission constraints between the Northern and Southern markets.
Second, it suggests that our out-of-merit estimates can serve as a valuable diagnostic tool,
pointing to generating units where one might suspect non-competitive behavior.

7

Discussion

In Section 7.1 we compare our estimates of the value of transmission with available estimates
in the literature for the cost of relieving transmission congestion. Then in Section 7.2 we
step back and think more broadly about Southern California Edison’s decision to close
SONGS.

7.1

Benefits vs. Costs

Of the estimated $350 million in increased generation costs, we attribute $40 million to transmission constraints and other physical limitations of the grid. This reflects Southern plants
operating too much, Northern plants operating too little, and intra-regional misallocation
of generation across units. When the decision was made to close SONGS, it still had ten
years left on its current operating license with the NRC.14 Over this ten-year horizon with a
1% discount rate (Office of Management and Budget, 2013), the annual cost of $40 million
implies a present discounted value of $380 million.
It is interesting to compare this $380 million, which reflects the potential benefit from additional transmission capacity, with cost estimates. There are several ways these transmission
14

Reactor number two was licensed through February 2022, and reactor number three was licensed through
November 2022. See Appendix A of NRC (2012).

26

constraints could be relaxed. One approach would be to build an additional high-voltage
(500-kV) transmission line along the existing ‘Path 15’ corridor, an 84-mile path connecting
Northern and Southern California. The advantage of increasing capacity of existing transmission lines is that it avoids much of the siting challenges inherent in opening new corridors.
A similar project in Path 15 was completed in 2004 and cost almost $370 million.15
Another alternative would have been to add new generation capacity in Southern California.
Construction costs for a conventional combined-cycle natural gas plant in California are
about $1100 per kilowatt (EIA 2013b), so to build a plant that could replace the entire
2,150 MWs from SONGS would cost about $2.4 billion. This is considerably larger than the
implied cost of the transmission constraints, but, of course, a new plant would both relax
the transmission constraints and generate electricity.
There may also be lower-cost alternatives available. Part of the challenge with the SONGS
closure was voltage regulation. Electricity gradually drops in voltage when it is transmitted
long distances, so some local generation is necessary to complement electricity produced far
away. Much of the attention since the SONGS closure has been on adding local generation,
and in particular, on adding generation that provides “reactive” power that maintains voltage, making it possible to bring in more power produced far away. For example, in 2013 two
generators at Huntington Beach Plant were converted to synchronous condensers to provide
local voltage support. According to CAISO (2013a) this project cost $15 million, making
it relatively inexpensive compared to capacity and generation additions.
Thus overall it appears there are some infrastructure investments that would pass a costbenefit test. Expanding ‘Path 15’ appears to just barely pass a cost-benefit test, but local
voltage support investments like the Huntington Beach Project are inexpensive enough to
pass a cost-benefit test even if they only partially relieve the constraints. CAISO seems to
agree with this assessment and since 2013 has been taking steps to expand local transmission
capacity in and around San Diego County (CAISO 2013e).

7.2

The Decision to Close SONGS

More broadly, an appealing feature of our analysis is that it provides some of the information
necessary to step back and evaluate whether it was socially efficient to retire SONGS. This
depends on the value of the electricity that SONGS would have generated during the ten
15

See the Western Area Power Administration’s 2004 “Path 15 Upgrade Project” Fact Sheet at
http://www.wapa.gov/sn/ops/transmission/path15/factSheet.pdf. We multiplied the construction cost by
1.20 to reflect year 2013 dollars.

27

years left on its license, the fixed costs of repairing the plant and keeping it open, and all
relevant externalities.
We find that the SONGS closure increased generation costs by $350 million during the first
twelve months, after accounting for avoided generation costs at SONGS. In addition, we find
that closing SONGS caused carbon dioxide emissions to increase by an amount worth almost
$320 million. Thus, the economic cost of closing SONGS was about $670 million in the first
twelve months.
These costs must be compared with the benefits of closing the plant. Although the marginal
cost of nuclear generation is low, its annual operations and maintenance costs are substantial,
about $340 million per year.16 In addition, there are important external costs associated with
operating a nuclear power plant. Some were concerned, for example, that SONGS’ troubles
signaled increased risk of a major accident. Quantifying these risks is very difficult, but even
a tiny probability of a catastrophic nuclear accident could outweigh the benefits of keeping
the plant open.
Another important practical complication is that it was not clear when the plant would have
been able to reopen. When Southern California Edison made the decision to permanently
retire the plant, they were waiting to hear from the Nuclear Regulatory Commission whether
they would ever be allowed to restart SONGS. The NRC had already warned SCE that it
might be a year or more before a final decision would be made, implying real uncertainty
about timing and about the cost of any required repairs. Given this uncertainty, Southern
California Edison’s decision appears to pass a private cost-benefit test.
It is also worth noting that the costs of closing the plant would have been much higher if
natural gas prices had not fallen so much in recent years. At the level of natural gas prices
seen in 2007, for instance, the increase in generation costs from the closure of SONGS would
have been two or three times larger. This is in line with the observation made by some
industry analysts that the shale gas boom has severely worsened the economics of existing
nuclear plants. Along a similar vein, the convexity of the supply curve implies that costs
could have been much higher had the system been further stressed by an extended period of
hotter-than-average weather or an outage at another major power plant.
16

The Cost of Generation Model from CEC (2010) reports an annual fixed O&M cost for California
nuclear plants of 147.7 $/kW-yr, in 2010 dollars. We multiplied this by SONGS’ capacity of 2,150 MW and
we translated into current dollars. This number closely matches regulatory documents, in which SCE had
forecast fixed O&M costs of $346 million per year prior to the closure (CPUC 2012).

28

8

Conclusion

Our paper uses evidence from the SONGS closure to quantify the value of electricity transmission in California. We find that the SONGS closure increased the private cost of electricity
generation in California by about $350 million during the first twelve months. Of this, $40
million reflects transmission constraints and other physical limitations of the grid that necessitated that a high fraction of lost generation be met by plants located in the Southern
part of the state. These constraints also increased the scope for market power, and we find
evidence consistent with one company acting non-competitively.
We also find that the closure had a surprisingly large environmental impact. Because virtually all of the lost production from SONGS was replaced by natural gas generation, the
closure increased carbon dioxide emissions by 9 million metric tons during the first twelve
months. At $35 per ton, the economic cost of these emissions is almost $320 million. A
large fraction of the world’s nuclear plants are beginning to reach retirement age, and it is
important to take these external costs into account as decisions are made about whether or
not to extend the operating lives of these plants.
The analysis corroborates long-held views about the importance of transmission constraints
in electricity markets (Bushnell, 1999; Borenstein, Bushnell and Stoft, 2000; Joskow and
Tirole, 2000) and contributes to a growing broader literature on the economic impacts of
infrastructure investments (Jensen, 2007; Banerjee, Duflo and Qian, 2012; Borenstein and
Kellogg, 2014; Donaldson, Forthcoming). Infrastructure facilitates trade and reduces price
dispersion, but it also affects market structure, and this is true not only for electricity but
also for a broad range of tradable goods (Ryan, 2013).
Our results also illustrate the challenges of designing deregulated electricity markets. Wolak
(2014) argues that while competition may improve efficiency relative to regulated monopoly,
it also introduces cost in the form of greater complexity and need for monitoring. Transmission constraints add an additional layer to this complexity, by implicitly shrinking the
size of the market. Constraints increase the scope for non-competitive behavior, but only for
certain plants during certain high-demand periods. Understanding and mitigating market
power in these contexts is difficult and requires an unusually sophisticated regulator.
Despite these challenges, the experience in California in 2012 also provides some cause for
optimism. An enormous generating facility closed suddenly and unexpectedly during a year
with low hydroelectric generation, yet there was essentially no disruption in supply and
wholesale prices remained steady. In part, these ‘steady’ prices were only an illusion, driven

29

by a lucky coincidence in the form of decreased natural gas prices. However the experience
also points to a more mature, more flexible market that, although imperfect, provides many
of the right incentives for generation and investment.

30

References
Allaz, Blaise, and Jean-Luc Vila. 1993. “Cournot Competition, Forward Markets and
Efficiency.” Journal of Economic Theory, 59(1): 1–16.
Banerjee, Abhijit, Esther Duflo, and Nancy Qian. 2012. “On the Road: Access to
Transportation Infrastructure and Economic Growth in China.” NBER Working Paper
17897.
Birge, John, Ali Hortaçsu, Ignacia Mercadal, and Michael Pavlin. 2013. “The Role
of Financial Players in Electricity Markets: An Empirical Analysis of MISO.” Working
paper.
Borenstein, Severin, and James Bushnell. 1999. “An Empirical Analysis of the Potential for Market Power in California’s Electricity Industry.” The Journal of Industrial
Economics, 47(3): 285–323.
Borenstein, Severin, and Ryan Kellogg. 2014. “The Incidence of an Oil Glut: Who
Benefits from Cheap Crude Oil in the Midwest?” Energy Journal, 35: 15–33.
Borenstein, Severin, James B Bushnell, and Frank A Wolak. 2002. “Measuring
Market Inefficiencies in California’s Restructured Wholesale Electricity Market.” American
Economic Review, 92(5): 1376–1405.
Borenstein, Severin, James Bushnell, and Steven Stoft. 2000. “The Competitive
Effects of Transmission Capacity in a Deregulated Electricity Industry.” RAND Journal
of Economics, 31(2): 294–325.
Bushnell, James. 1999. “Transmission Rights and Market Power.” The Electricity Journal,
12(8): 77–85.
Bushnell, James B, Erin T Mansur, and Celeste Saravia. 2008. “Vertical Arrangements, Market Structure, and Competition: An Analysis of Restructured U.S. Electricity
Markets.” The American Economic Review, 98(1): 237–266.
California Energy Commission (CEC). 2010. “Cost of Generation Model Version 2.”
Accessed from http://www.energy.ca.gov/2010publications/CEC-200-2010-002/.
California Energy Commission (CEC). 2012. “Summer 2012 Electricity Supply and
Demand Outlook.”
California
Independent
System
2012
Report
on
Market
Issues
31

Operator
(CAISO).
2012.
and
Performance.”
Accessed

“Q2
from

http://www.caiso.com/Documents/2012SecondQuarterReport-MarketIssues-PerformanceAugust2012.pdf.
California
Independent
System
Operator
(CAISO). 2013a. “Amendments to RMR Agreement with AES Huntington Beach, LLC.” Accessed from
http://www.caiso.com/Documents/Jun3 2013 Amendment AESHuntingtonBeachReliability
MustRunAgreement ER13-351 ER13-1630.pdf.
California
Independent
System
Operator
(CAISO).
2013b.
“Annual Report on Market Issues and Performance, 2012.” Accessed from
http://www.caiso.com/Documents/2012AnnualReport-MarketIssue-Performance.pdf.
California Independent System Operator (CAISO). 2013c. “Daily Renewables
Watch.” Accessed from http://content.caiso.com/green/renewableswatch.html.
California
Independent
System
Operator
(CAISO).
ter CAISO Control Area Generating Capability List.”
http://www.caiso.com/Documents/GeneratingCapabilityList.xls.

2013d.
“MasAccessed from

California
Independent
System
Operator
(CAISO).
2013e.
“Summer
Loads
and
Resources
Assessment,
2013.”
Accessed
from
https://www.caiso.com/Documents/2013SummerLoads ResourcesAssessment.pdf.
California Public Utilities Commission (CPUC). 2012. “Decision on Test Year
2012 General Rate Case for Southern California Edison Company.” Accessed from
http://www.edison.com/files/2012GeneralRateCaseProposedDecision101912.pdf.
Cardell, Judith B, Carrie Cullen Hitt, and William W Hogan. 1997. “Market
Power and Strategic Interaction in Electricity Networks.” Resource and Energy Economics,
19(1): 109–137.
Cullen, Joseph, and Erin T. Mansur. 2013. “Will Carbon Prices Reduce Emissions in
the U.S. Electricity Industry? Evidence from the Shale Gas Experience.” Working Paper.
Davis, Lucas W. 2012. “Prospects for Nuclear Power.” The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 26(1): 49–66.
Davis, Lucas W, and Catherine Wolfram. 2012. “Deregulation, Consolidation, and
Efficiency: Evidence from U.S. Nuclear Power.” American Economic Journal: Applied
Economics, 4(4): 194–225.
Donaldson, Dave. Forthcoming. “Railroads of the Raj: Estimating the Impact of Transportation Infrastructure.” American Economic Review.
32

Edison Electric Institute. 2014. “Transmission Projects: At a Glance.” Accessed from
http://www.eei.org/issuesandpolicy/transmission/Documents/Trans Project lowres bookmarked.pdf.
Energy Information Administration (EIA). 2012. “Electric Power Annual.” Accessed
from http://www.eia.gov/electricity/annual/.
Energy Information Administration (EIA). 2013a. “Monthly Energy Review.” Accessed from http://www.eia.gov/totalenergy/data/monthly/pdf/mer.pdf.
Energy Information Administration (EIA). 2013b. “Updated Capital Cost
Estimates for Utility Scale Electricity Generating Plants.” Accessed from
http://www.eia.gov/forecasts/capitalcost/pdf/updated capcost.pdf.
Fabrizio, Kira R, Nancy L Rose, and Catherine D Wolfram. 2007. “Do Markets
Reduce Costs? Assessing the Impact of Regulatory Restructuring on U.S. Electric Generation Efficiency.” The American Economic Review, 97(4): 1250–1277.
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC). 2013. “Order Approving Stipulation and Consent Agreement, Docket Nos IN11-8-000 and IN13-5-000.” Accessed from
http://www.ferc.gov/CalendarFiles/20130730080931-IN11-8-000.pdf.
Holland, Stephen P, and Erin T Mansur. 2008. “Is Real-Time Pricing Green? The
Environmental Impacts of Electricity Demand Variance.” The Review of Economics and
Statistics, 90(3): 550–561.
Hortacsu, Ali, and Steven L Puller. 2008. “Understanding Strategic Bidding in MultiUnit Auctions: A Case Study of the Texas Electricity Spot Market.” The RAND Journal
of Economics, 39(1): 86–114.
Interagency Working Group on Social Cost of Carbon, United States Government (IWG). 2013. “Technical Support Document: - Technical Update of the Social
Cost of Carbon for Regulatory Impact Analysis - Under Executive Order 12866.” Accessed from http://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/omb/assets/inforeg/technicalupdate-social-cost-of-carbon-for-regulator-impact-analysis.pdf.
Ito, Koichiro. 2014. “Do Consumers Respond to Marginal or Average Price? Evidence
from Nonlinear Electricity Pricing.” American Economic Review, 104(2): 537–663.
Jensen, Robert. 2007. “The Digital Provide: Information (Technology), Market Performance, and Welfare in the South Indian Fisheries Sector.” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
122(3): 879–924.
33

Joskow, Paul L, and Edward Kahn. 2002. “A Quantitative Analysis of Pricing Behavior in California’s Wholesale Electricity Market During Summer 2000.” Energy Journal,
23(4): 1–35.
Joskow, Paul L, and Jean Tirole. 2000. “Transmission Rights and Market Power on
Electric Power Networks.” The Rand Journal of Economics, 450–487.
Kotchen, Matthew J., and Erin T Mansur. 2013. “How Stringent is the EPA’s Proposed
Carbon Pollution Standard for New Power Plants?” Working Paper.
Mansur, Erin, and Matthew White. 2012. “Market Organization and Efficiency in
Electricity Markets.” Working Paper.
Mansur, Erin T. 2007. “Do Oligopolists Pollute Less? Evidence From A Restructured
Electricity Market.” The Journal of Industrial Economics, 55(4): 661–689.
Muller, Nicholas Z, and Robert Mendelsohn. 2012. “Efficient Pollution Regulation:
Getting the Prices Right: Corrigendum (Mortality Rate Update).” American Economic
Review, 102(1): 613–16.
North American Electric Reliability Corporation (NERC). 2012. “2012 Summer
Reliability Assessment.” Accessed from http://www.nerc.com/files/2012sra.pdf.
Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC). 2012. “2012-2013 Information Digest.” Accessed from http://pbadupws.nrc.gov/docs/ML1224/ML12241A166.pdf.
Office of Management and Budget. 2013. “Discount Rates for Cost-Effectiveness, Lease
Purchase, and Related Analyses, Circular A-94.”
Puller, Steven L. 2007. “Pricing and Firm Conduct in California’s Deregulated Electricity
Market.” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 89(1): 75–87.
Ryan, Nicholas. 2013. “The Competitive Effects of Transmission Infrastructure in the
Indian Electricity Market.” Working Paper.
Southern California Edison. 2013. “Press Release: Southern California Edison Announces Plans to Retire San Onofre Nuclear Generation Station.” Accessed from
http://www.songscommunity.com/news2013/news060713.asp.
Wolak, Frank. 2012. “Measuring the Competitiveness Benefits of a Transmission Investment Policy: The Case of the Alberta Electricity Market.” Working Paper.
Wolak, Frank. 2014. “Regulating Competition in Wholesale Electricity Supply.” In Economic Regulation and Its Reform. , ed. Nancy Rose. University of Chicago Press.
34

Wolak, Frank A. 2005. “Lessons from the California Electricity Crisis.” In Electricity
Deregulation: Choices and Challenges. , ed. James M Griffin and Steven L Puller. University of Chicago Press.
Wolfram, Catherine D. 1999. “Measuring Duopoly Power in the British Electricity Spot
Market.” American Economic Review, 805–826.

35

Figure 1: Weekly Maximum Prices, South versus North

Note: This figure plots maximum hourly wholesale electricity prices by week for Northern
and Southern California during the period 2009 to 2013. The vertical line indicates
January 31, 2012, the day the second SONGS unit was shut down. One outlier in 2009,
with both North and South prices greater than 400, has been dropped. North and South
are defined by the Path-15 transmission interconnection.

36

Figure 2: Price Differential, South versus North

Note: This figure plots daily wholesale electricity price differentials at 3 pm between May
2009 and September 2013. Weekends are excluded. For each day, we calculate the price
difference between Southern and Northern California. The vertical line indicates January
31, 2012, the day the second SONGS unit was shut down.

37

Figure 3: Generation Regressions by Category

Note: These figures plot the coefficients from six separate regressions. As described in
detail in the text, these regressions are estimated using hourly data from the two years
prior to the closure of SONGS. The x-axis is total generation from all sources (in quantiles)
and the y-axis is average generation, in MWh, for that category of generation. For the
non-CEMS thermal units in Panel F, we have subtracted total CEMS generation in our
balanced panel from total thermal generation as reported by CAISO.

38

Figure 4: Generation Regressions by Individual Unit

Note: These figures plot the coefficients from 12 separate unit-level generation regressions, for the four largest units within
three technology types as indicated in the panel headings. As described in detail in the text, these regressions are estimated
using hourly data from April 20, 2010 until December 31, 2011. The x-axis is total generation from all units in the CEMS panel
(in quantiles) and the y-axis is average generation, in MWh, for that individual unit.

39

Figure 5: The Marginal Cost of Electricity in California, 2012

Note: This figure was constructed by the authors using their measures of marginal cost and capacity for electricity generating
resources in the state of California in 2012. Imports are not included. All dollar amounts in year 2013 dollars. To construct
marginal cost for natural gas units, we use unit-specific heat rates, the average natural gas price (separated by region), and
California Energy Commission estimates for variable O&M costs. For details, see the text. For the capacity of natural gas
units (i.e. the width of each step), we use the maximum observed hourly generation in our sample. For hydro, renewables
(including wind, solar, geothermal, and small hydro), and nuclear capacity, we use average hourly generation in 2012. For the
marginal cost of nuclear generation, we use an EIA estimate of fuel costs of 7.08 $/MWh (in 2012$) and a CEC estimate of
nuclear variable O&M of 5.27 $/MWh (in 2009$). Biomass/biogas are not shown, as marginal cost numbers are not available.
This marginal cost of biomass generation is likely in the range of the combined cycle units with an average production over this
period of around 500 MWh.

40

Figure 6: Plant-Level Out-of-Merit Changes in High Demand Hours

Note: This figure plots plant-level hourly average out-of-merit changes by region. High demand hours
are defined as hours when total CEMS generation was in the 13th quantile (13,837 MWh) or greater.
Estimates for AES-owned plants are indicated with black lines, while all other estimates are orange.
Details on the calculations are given in the text.

41

Table 1: California Electricity Generation By Source, 2011
Category

Subcategory

Percentage

Fossil Fuels

Natural Gas
Coal
Other Fossil Fuels
Total

44.3
1.0
1.7
47.0

Nuclear

San Onofre
Diablo Canyon
Total

9.0
9.2
18.3

Renewables

Hydroelectric
Geothermal
Wind
Solar (PV and Thermal)
Other Renewables
Total

21.1
6.3
3.9
0.4
3.0
34.7

Total

100.0

Note: These data come from the U.S. Department of Energy Power Plant Operations
Report, which reports net generation from all electric generating plants larger than one
megawatt. We include all facilities operating in California. “Other Fossil Fuels” includes
petroleum coke, distillate petroleum, waste oil, residual petroleum, and other gases. “Other
Renewables” includes wood, wood waste, municipal solid waste, and landfill gas.

42

Table 2: California Electricity Generation, 2011-2012

Average Monthly
Generation,
Million MWh
2011

Average Monthly
Generation,
Million MWh
2012

Change

Panel A: By Generation Category, EIA Data
Natural Gas
Wind
Solar (PV and Thermal)
Other Renewables
Geothermal
Coal
Other Fossil Fuels
Hydroelectric
Nuclear

7.41
0.65
0.07
0.50
1.05
0.17
0.29
3.54
3.06

9.97
0.81
0.12
0.53
1.04
0.11
0.22
2.28
1.54

2.56
0.17
0.04
0.02
0.00
-0.05
-0.08
-1.25
-1.51

Panel B: By Type of Natural Gas Plant, EIA Data
Independent Power Producer Non-Cogen
Electric Utility
Industrial Non-Cogen
Commercial Non-Cogen
Commercial Cogen
Independent Power Producer Cogen
Industrial Cogen

2.63
2.24
0.03
0.02
0.14
1.37
0.99

4.48
2.98
0.11
0.02
0.13
1.36
0.90

1.85
0.73
0.07
0.00
-0.01
-0.01
-0.09

8.47
5.77
2.25
1.58
1.55

2.35
0.32
0.14
-0.89
-1.51

Panel C: By Generation Category, CAISO Data
Thermal
Imports
Renewables
Large Hydroelectric
Nuclear

6.12
5.45
2.11
2.47
3.07

Note: This table reports the average monthly net electricity generation in California in 2011
and 2012, measured in million MWh. As described in the text, the EIA data describe all
U.S. generating facilities with more than one megawatt of capacity. We include generation
from all facilities in California. In Panel A, “Other Renewables” includes wood, wood waste,
municipal solid waste, and landfill gas. “Other Fossil Fuels” includes petroleum coke, distillate
petroleum, waste oil, residual petroleum, and other gases. Panel C describes electricity sold
through the California Independent System Operator, including four categories of generation
from inside California, and “imports” which includes all electricity coming from out of state.

43

Table 3: The Effect of the SONGS Closure on the Regional Pattern of Generation

Average Hourly Change in Net Generation, By Region
Southern
California
(SP26)

Central
California
(ZP26)

Northern
California
(NP15)

(1)

(2)

(3)

Panel A: All Hours
Merit-Order Change (MWh)

892
(18)

300
(15)

944
(18)

Out-of-Merit Change (MWh)

150
(73)

20
(66)

-140
(79)

Panel B: Weekday Summer Afternoons
Merit-Order Change (MWh)

1068
(47)

259
(17)

822
(39)

Out-of-Merit Change (MWh)

237
(144)

76
(61)

-260
(119)

Panel C: High Demand Hours
Merit-Order Change (MWh)

1207
(44)

174
(30)

753
(35)

Out-of-Merit Change (MWh)

431
(144)

4
(57)

-381
(129)

Observations (Hour by Unit)
Number of Generating Units
Number of Plants
Total Capacity (MW)

2,285,140
94
42
15,922

267,410
11
5
2,887

1,920,490
79
43
11,776

Note: This table reports our estimates of the change in generation that resulted from the SONGS closure on
January 31, 2012. We report both “merit-order” and “out-of-merit” effects. The merit-order calculation gives
the increase in generation at marginal units, assuming 2,150 MWh of lost generation from SONGS. The out-ofmerit calculation gives the difference between actual and expected generation, as explained in the text. For all
calculations our sample includes hourly observations between April 20, 2010 and January 31, 2013. We exclude
generating units that enter or exit during the sample period. As indicated by the column headings, we report
estimates for three California regions as defined by the Path-15 and Path-26 transmission interconnections.
Panel A reports estimated impacts for all hours. Panel B reports estimates for 2 p.m. to 5 p.m. in months June
through September. Panel C reports estimates for hours when total CEMS generation was in the 13th quantile
(13,837 MWh) or greater. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered by sample month.

44

Table 4: The Effect of the SONGS Closure on Thermal Generation Costs

Average Hourly Change in Total Generation Cost, By Region
Southern
California
(SP26)

Central
California
(ZP26)

Northern
California
(NP15)

(1)

(2)

(3)

Panel A: All Hours
Merit-Order Change ($000’s)

28.6
(0.6)

7.9
(0.4)

26.5
(0.5)

Out-of-Merit Change ($000’s)

7.1
(2.9)

0.5
(1.7)

-3.0
(2.5)

Panel B: Weekday Summer Afternoons
Merit-Order Change ($000’s)

41.6
(1.6)

7.5
(0.5)

27.4
(1.4)

Out-of-Merit Change ($000’s)

8.8
(5.1)

1.4
(1.6)

-9.1
(4.2)

Panel C: High Demand Hours
Merit-Order Change ($000’s)

49.7
(1.9)

5.7
(0.8)

27.8
(1.4)

Out-of-Merit Change ($000’s)

16.3
(4.8)

-0.5
(1.7)

-14.5
(4.8)

Observations (Hour by Unit)
Number of Generating Units
Number of Plants
Total Capacity (MW)

2,285,140
94
42
15,922

267,410
11
5
2,887

1,920,490
79
43
11,776

Note: This table reports estimates of the cost of meeting the lost generation from SONGS during the first twelve
months following the closure. The format of the table and underlying data are identical to Table 3, but we have
used our measures of marginal cost for each generating unit to calculate the change in total generation cost.
As we explain in the text, this includes changes in fuel expenditures and other marginal costs, but not capital
costs or fixed O&M. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered by sample month.

45

Table 5: The Total Impact of the SONGS Closure
Total Impact during the Twelve
Months following the Closure
(Millions of Dollars)

Merit-Order Net Increase in Generation Costs

311
(3.1)

Out-of-Merit Net Increase in Generation Costs

40
(10.7)

Value of Increased Carbon Dioxide Emissions

316
(5.8)

Note: This table reports our estimates of the total economic and environmental impact of the
SONGS. The “merit-order net increase” subtracts annual generation costs at SONGS from the
merit-order changes to thermal generation costs. The “out-of-merit” increase is the effect of
insufficient transmission capacity. As we explain in the text, these generation costs includes
changes in fuel expenditures and other marginal costs, but not capital costs or fixed O&M. For
comparison, annual fixed O&M at nuclear plants is around $340 million per year. Carbon is
valued at $35/ton, as described in the text. All dollar amounts in year 2013 dollars. Standard
errors (in parentheses) are clustered by sample month.

46

47

High Desert

Moss Landing

Sunrise

Inland Empire

Calpine Sutter

Gateway

Cosumnes

4

5

1

2

3

4

5

SMUD

PG&E

Calpine

General Electric

EME† and ChevronTexaco

Dynegy

Tenaska

NRG

La Paloma Gen Co, LLC

Calpine

SCE

Calpine

Calpine

La Paloma Gen Co, LLC

Dynegy

Owner

Zone

Marginal Cost
($ per MWh)

SP15

NP15

SP15

ZP26

NP15

25/26/26/26

26/27/27

25/26/26

26/26/26/26

27/27/27/27/37/37

NP15

SP15

SP15

ZP26

SP15

27/27/27/27/37/37

39/39/40

41/41/42/44/44

26/26/26/26

26/26

Comb Cyc

Comb Cyc

Comb Cyc

Comb Cyc

Comb Cyc

NP15

NP15

NP15

SP15

ZP26

26/26

27/27

25/26

24/25

25/25

Panel C. Out-of-Merit Decreases, Top Five

Comb Cyc / Boiler

Comb Cyc

Boiler

Comb Cyc

Comb Cyc

Panel B. Out-of-Merit Increases, Top Five

Comb Cyc

Comb Cyc

Comb Cyc

Comb Cyc

Comb Cyc / Boiler

Panel A. Merit-Order Increases, Top Five

Plant Type

523

590

564

752

577

2541

492

954

1066

596

1068

896

764

1066

2541

Capacity
(Megawatts)

41

84

101

61

101

227

91

23

168

54

126

126

142

168

227

Merit-Order
Change
(MWhs)

-41

-72

-94

-111

-114

59

82

87

100

143

3

25

-37

100

59

Out-of-Merit
Change
(MWhs)

Note: The regressions for this table are identical to those in Table 3, but at the plant level. Owner and plant type data are from CEMS documentation,
cross-checked against industry sources. Marginal cost numbers are from authors’ calculations, described in the text. Capacity in MW is the maximum
observed capacity in our sample. † EME refers to Edison Mission Energy.

Cabrillo I Encina

Mountainview

5

3

Delta

4

La Paloma

Pastoria

3

2

La Paloma

2

Otay Mesa

Moss Landing

1

1

Plant Name

Rank

Table 6: Most Affected Plants, All Hours

48

Moss Landing

AES Alamitos

AES Redondo

El Segundo

Cabrillo I Encina

Coolwater

Cabrillo I Encina

Otay Mesa

El Segundo

Ormond Beach

AES Alamitos

AES Redondo

Panoche

Los Esteros Critical

Sunrise

1

2

3

4

5

1

2

3

4

5

1

2

3

4

5

Zone

Marginal Cost
($ per MWh)

SP15

SP15

SP15

SP15

NP15

41/41/42/44/44

41/42

40/44/55/64

41/41/42/43/46/47

27/27/27/27/37/37

SP15

SP15

SP15

SP15

SP15

40/41

41/42

26/26

41/41/42/44/44

36/38/38/38/41/42

Combust Turbine
Comb Cyc

EME† and ChevronTexaco

Combust Turbine

Boiler

Boiler

ZP26

NP15

NP15

SP15

SP15

25/25

37/37/37/38

35/35/35/35

40/44/55/64

41/41/42/43/46/47

Panel C. Out-of-Merit Decreases, Top Five

Boiler

Boiler

Comb Cyc

Boiler

Comb Cyc / Boiler

Panel B. Out-of-Merit Increases, Top Five

Boiler

Boiler

Boiler

Boiler

Comb Cyc / Boiler

Panel A. Merit-Order Increases, Top Five

Plant Type

Calpine

Energy Investors Fund

AES

AES

NRG

NRG

Calpine

NRG

NRG

NRG

NRG

AES

AES

Dynegy

Owner

577

186

412

1348

1934

1490

658

596

954

636

954

658

1348

1934

2541

Capacity
(Megawatts)

21

33

53

130

238

98

130

10

124

33

124

130

130

238

251

Merit-Order
Change
(MWhs)

-77

-97

-116

-122

-196

108

113

117

154

257

154

113

-122

-196

-62

Out-of-Merit
Change
(MWhs)

Note: The regressions for this table are identical to those in Table 3, but at the plant level. Owner and plant type data are from CEMS documentation,
cross-checked against industry sources. Marginal cost numbers are from authors’ calculations, described in the text. Capacity in MW is the maximum observed
capacity in our sample. High demand hours are defined as hours when total CEMS generation was in the 13th quantile (greater than 13,837 MWh). † EME
refers to Edison Mission Energy.

Plant Name

Rank

Table 7: Most Affected Plants, High Demand Hours

Table 8: Separating Alamitos and Redondo

Average Hourly Change, By Region

AES

Southern
California,
Excluding
AES

Central
California

Northern
California

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Panel A: All Hours
Merit-Order Change (MWh)

110
(15)

781
(15)

300
(15)

944
(18)

Out-of-Merit Change (MWh)

-32
(60)

182
(53)

20
(66)

-140
(49)

Panel B: Weekday Summer Afternoons
Merit-Order Change (MWh)

339
(31)

729
(27)

259
(17)

822
(39)

Out-of-Merit Change (MWh)

-311
(94)

548
(105)

76
(61)

-260
(119)

Panel C: High Demand Hours
Merit-Order Change (MWh)

455
(42)

752
(34)

174
(30)

753
(35)

Out-of-Merit Change (MWh)

-310
(127)

742
(111)

4
(57)

-381
(129)

Observations (Hour by Unit)
Number of Generating Units
Number of Plants
Total Capacity (MW)

340,340
14
3
4,167

1,944,800
80
39
11,755

267,410
11
5
2,887

1,920,490
79
43
11,776

Note: The format of the table and underlying data are identical to Table 3, but we
have separated plants owned by AES from other Southern plants. The three AES
plants are Alamitos, Redondo Beach, and Huntington Beach. AES and JPMorganChase had tolling agreements for all three plants.

49

