NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TESTING ASSET PRICING THEORY ON SIX HUNDRED YEARS OF STOCK RETURNS:
PRICES AND DIVIDENDS FOR THE BAZACLE COMPANY FROM 1372 TO 1946
David le Bris
William N. Goetzmann
Sébastien Pouget
Working Paper 20199
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20199
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2014

We would like to thank Bruno Biais, Chloé Bonnet, Claude Denjean, René Garcia, José Miguel Gaspar,
Alex Guembel, Pierre-Cyrille Hautcœur, Christian Julliard, Ralph Koijen, Augustin Landier, Laurence
Lescourret, Junye Li, Patrice Poncet, Jean-Laurent Rosenthal, Sandrine Victor, Maxime Wavasseur
and especially Marianne Andries and Nour Meddahi, as well as seminar and conference participants
at the Toulouse School of Economics, the CIFAR-IAST conference, UC Irvine, HEC, ESSEC, and
Casa de Velazquez - Madrid for helpful comments and suggestions. We also wish to thank Geneviéve
Douillard and Daniel Rigaud, from the Archives Départementales de la Haute-Garonne, for her help
in finding and reading original documents. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w20199.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by David le Bris, William N. Goetzmann, and Sébastien Pouget. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Testing Asset Pricing Theory on Six Hundred Years of Stock Returns: Prices and Dividends
for the Bazacle Company from 1372 to 1946
David le Bris, William N. Goetzmann, and Sébastien Pouget
NBER Working Paper No. 20199
June 2014, Revised June 2014
JEL No. G12,N13,N23
ABSTRACT
We use the Bazacle company of Toulouse's unique historical experience as a laboratory to test asset
pricing theory. The Bazacle company is the earliest documented shareholding corporation. Founded
in 1372 and nationalized in 1946, it was a grain milling firm for most of its 600 year history. We collect
share prices and dividends over its entire lifespan. The average dividend yield in real terms was slightly
in excess of is 5% per annum, while the long-term price growth was near zero.
The company's unique full-payout dividend policy allows us to estimate an asset pricing model with
fundamentally persistent dividends and a time-varying risk correction. The model is not rejected by
the data. Variations in expected future dividends are found to explain between one-sixth and one-third
of variations in prices. Moreover, the risk correction is correlated with macroeconomic shocks, in particular
with the volatility of grain prices.
David le Bris
KEDGE Business School
680 cours de la Libération
33405 Talence
France
david.lebris@gmail.com
William N. Goetzmann
School of Management
Yale University
Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520-8200
and NBER
william.goetzmann@yale.edu

Sébastien Pouget
Toulouse School of Economics
University of Toulouse
21 Allée de Brienne
31000 Toulouse
France
spouget@univ-tlse1.fr

The present value relation is fundamental to economics and finance. It provides an
analytical framework for asset valuation and the calculation of discount rates, and it serves
as a benchmark for assessing market efficiency and the process by which economic agents
form and use expectations about the future.
Testing the present value relation for traded financial securities like stocks and bonds
has presented some challenges because of the role played by expectations and time-varying
correction for risk. While it is simple to state that the present value of an asset should be
equal to the expected discounted future value of the benefits it confers to its owner, the
process by which expectations are formed and maintained must naturally be quite broad
and complex because it must incorporate an entire future world of possibilities. Moreover,
the appropriate level of price adjustment to account for risk is unobservable.
We use the unique experience of an extraordinarily long-lived company, called the Honor
del Bazacle, as a laboratory to test the present value relation.

1

The Bazacle company was

formally incorporated in 1372 via a merger of lesser firms that had operated in Toulouse since
the 11th century. Shares of the company were owned and regularly traded by individuals
and institutions over the course of its history. Following its conversion to a hydroelectricity
generation company in 1888, the company listed on the Paris Stock Exchange and traded
there until nationalization in 1946. Thanks to the available archives, we have share price
and dividend data over most of a six century period during which the company operated on
the bank of the Garonne river.
This company offers a particularly suitable testbed for asset pricing theory because it
displays long periods of time with observable returns and without major technological or
governance changes. Moreover, unlike most modern corporations, the firm maintained a
dividend policy of paying out all profits each year. This peculiar feature allows us to estimate
1

Using long time-series in financial economics has proved fruitful as illustrated by the studies of Homer
and Sylla (2005), Goetzmann and Ibbotson (2006), Siegel (2007), Dimson, Marsh, and Staunton (2008), le
Bris D. and Hautcœur (2010), and Dimson and Spaenjers (2011).

2

an asset pricing model without the confounding effects of precautionary smoothing. The
firm’s dividends thus reflect a fundamental, stationary economic process that was presumably
well understood by investors, even at the date of the firm’s incorporation.
Another factor that makes the Bazacle company a valuable case for study is that, over its
extensive lifespan, shocks to consumption were frequent and significant in the form of wars,
plague epidemics, and famines. Our data thus enable us to assess how the risk correction
varies with macroeconomic events.
Although there are some institutional differences between the Honor del Bazacle and a
modern industrial corporation which we explain below, Bazacle shareholders enjoyed limited
liability, annual shareholder meetings, transparent accounting, a rotating board of directors,
full transferability of shares and regular receipt of pro-rata dividends. We find dividends and
prices to be stationary, consistent with the relatively stable business model of the Bazacle
company. The dividend yield slightly exceeds 5% in real terms over the entire period.
Dividends and prices were highly volatile. The average annual real total return exceeded
20% but the real capital gain over the entire period was essentially zero, taking into account
the final disposition of the firm.
To study the rationality of the pricing of Bazacle company’s shares, we set up an asset
pricing model with persistent dividends and a time-varying risk correction. The dividend
is assumed to follow an ARMA (1,1) process. The discount rate is stochastic and assumed
equal to the risk-free rate plus a shock, modeled as a white noise. The covariance between
the shock to the discount rate and the shock to dividends represents the risk discount that
corrects the price of the Bazacle shares for systematic risk.2 This risk correction is assumed to
be autoregressive of order one. Given these assumptions, we explicitly derive the equilibrium
2

Since, as shown below, Bazacle’s dividends and prices are stationary, our model and empirical analyses
focus directly on prices and dividends. The risk correction thus corresponds to a discount in the price of
shares: riskier assets require lower prices for investors to be willing to hold them. If we instead had to deal
with returns and dividend growth, the risk correction would materialize as a premium, i.e., an additional
rate of return that compensates investors for holding risky assets.

3

pricing formula: we show that the price is a linear function of dividends, dividend shocks,
and the risk correction.
We then estimate the model on the Bazacle company’s dividends and prices expressed
in real terms, i.e., in kilos of silver. We proceed in the following manner. We first fit an
ARMA(1,1) model to the dividend process. We extract the ARMA parameters as well as
the shocks to dividends. We then run a GLS regression of the share price on the dividends
and the dividend shocks. This enables us to estimate the parameters of the pricing function.
The autocorrelation of the regression residuals enables us to identify the evolution of the
risk correction.
We test the model by studying overidentification restrictions. In particular, both the
risk-free rate and the average dividend are determined by two equations. We test the model
by using the delta method. Our period of interest ranges from 1441, the first year for which
we have both dividend and price data, up to 1946. We check that our results hold if we
use different subsample periods. The 1532-1815 period is particularly interesting because we
have very few missing data after 1532, and because the business activity and the governance
did not change over this entire period.
Our estimates show that the dividend process is persistent with an autoregressive coefficient around 0.80 and a moving-average coefficient around -0.35. Estimating the pricing
equation, we find that prices are positively related to dividends and negatively related to
shocks to dividends. This is in line with the asset pricing model’s predictions given the
respectively positive and negative autoregressive and moving-average coefficients estimated
for the dividend process. This indicates that the basic pricing equation has good qualitative
properties. Moreover, we find that between 15% and 43% of the variations in share prices
are related to variations in dividends and dividend shocks. Finally, our overidentication tests
indicate that we cannot reject the basic asset pricing model at the 95% confidence level.
These findings speak to the literature on the predictability of stock returns and dividend

4

growth.3 Our findings about the existence of a link between share prices and expected
future dividends are in line with recent results documented by Chen (2009) using US data
on dividends starting from 1872 up to World War II, by van Binsbergen and Koijen (2010)
on US data from 1946 to 2007 using a Kalman filter approach applied to dividends, and by
Chen, Da, and Priestley (2012) from 1871 to 2006 using net payout and earnings (which are
more difficult to smooth than dividends). For example, van Binsbergen and Koijen (2010)
indicate that between 13% and 31% of variation in the price-dividend ratio is explained by
variations in expected dividend growth. Our result that cash-flow news explain a significant
portion of Bazacle share price variations is also consistent with Vuolteenaho (2002)’s finding
that firm-level stock returns are mainly driven by cash-flow news.
To gain more insight into the macroeconomic forces driving the risk correction, we regressed the correction onto several macroeconomic variables. These macroeconomic variables
proxy for bad times and include plague, famine, war, and riot episodes. We also introduce
the yearly average of the Wheat/Rye price ratio in the regressors because historians have
documented that rye prices increase more than wheat prices during bad times. Finally, we
study how the volatility of the monthly Wheat/Rye price ratio, a proxy for consumption
uncertainty, affects the risk correction.
We find that the risk correction increases with the volatility of the Wheat/Rye price ratio.
This result is in line with long-run risk asset pricing models that emphasize the importance of
volatility risk for risk correction (see, e.g., Bansal and Yaron (2004), Hansen, Heaton and Li
(2008), Bonomo, Garcia, Meddahi and Tédongap (2011), and Bansal, Kiku, Shaliastovitch
and Yaron (2014)) but also with the standard consumption-based asset pricing model with
constant relative risk aversion (see Cochrane (2005) for a review). War episodes are also
marginally correlated with the risk correction.4
3

See for example Fama and French (1988), Campbell and Shiller (1988), Goetzmann and Jorion (1993,
1995), Bossaerts and Hillion (1999), Stambaugh (1999), Goyal and Welch (2003, 2006), Menzly, Santos, and
Veronesi, (2004), Ang and Bekaert (2005), Cochrane (2008), and Pástor and Stambaugh (2009).
4
Muir (2014) offers complementary insights on the formation of risk correction by studying asset pricing in

5

Our study complements the literature that empirically tests the consumption-based asset
pricing model. Our findings, that proxies for bad times correlate with the risk correction,
echo the recent results showing that various proxies for consumption or consumption risk
can be related with asset prices (see, e.g., Lettau and Ludvigson (2001), Aı̈t-Sahalia, Parker,
and Yogo (2004), Parker and Julliard (2005), and Savov (2011)).5
Overall, our results suggest that modern asset pricing theory, derived from the modeling
of consumption risk and yielding the present-value relation, is relevant for the pricing of the
Bazacle company’s shares from the Middle Ages onward. For the time period we consider,
people were not instructed on how to apply asset pricing theory. Finding that this theory
is consistent with the data is thus interesting because it cannot be due to investors being
trained in the principles of modern finance. Instead, risk correction and rational expectations
about future dividends and prices appear naturally as an economic response to uncertainty.
The paper is organized as follows. In the next section we provide historical background
on the company. Section 3 presents our data sources. In section 4 we adapt the basic asset
pricing theory to the peculiar circumstances of the Bazacle company, taking into account the
fact that dividends are stationary and sometimes negative. Section 5 details our econometric
methodology. Section 6 presents our results. Section 7 concludes.
the last 140 years in 14 countries. He shows that war episodes are associated with an increase in consumption
risk and in risk premia, but that risk premia increase even more during financial crises despite no further
increase in consumption risk. His results suggest that financial intermediaries play an important role in
today’s capital markets. In the time period we study in our paper, final investors directly held assets,
so financial intermediaries might have played a less significant role (even if they were important for some
financial markets, such as the credit market; see, for example, the studies by Hoffman, Postel-Vinay, and
Rosenthal (1992, 2000) on French notaries in the seventeenth, eighteenth and nineteenth centuries). We
are thus able to study asset pricing in sub-periods abstracting from many potential frictions induced by
delegation of asset management to financial intermediaries.
5
A test of the CCAPM, using consumption data and based, for example, on empirical likelihood methodologies in spirit of Ghosh, Julliard and Taylor (2013) and Almeida and Garcia (2014), is left for future
research.

6

1.

Historical background

Sicard (1953) provides a detailed study of the Honor del Bazacle up to 1472.6 Our contribution is the collection of data for the company over the period following 1472. For this we
rely on corporate records extant in the Haute-Garonne and Toulouse archives. These contain
information on transaction prices, revenues, expenses and dividends. They are also the principal basis for our understanding of corporate operations up through modern times. In this
section we provide a brief history of the company and an overview of relevant institutional
details useful for understanding share prices and dividends.

1.1

Brief history

The Bazacle company was – and still is – located on the right bank of the Garonne river
near a natural ford used since antiquity. Figure 1 shows the exact location of the mills in
the Toulouse city area. A mill in this location was first mentioned in 1071 and, by 1248,
12 mills operated at the Bazacle. These smaller mill companies merged in 1372 to form the
Honor del Bazacle. Shares in the company were called uchaux and shareholders were called
pariers. Its principal source of revenue was a fee of 1/16 of the grain brought to the mill,
which was distributed periodically through the year to shareholders (these distributions were
called partisons).7

[Insert Figure 1 here]

The firm also leased secondary, unoccupied milling spaces and fishing rights to the Bazacle
section of the river and these secondary revenues covered a portion of operating expenses.
6

See also Saboly (2001), Goetzmann and Pouget (2011) and le Bris, Goetzmann and Pouget (2014) for
more historical information on the Bazacle company.
7
The fee charged by mills in the Toulouse region was fixed by the municipal authorities in the 12th
century. Clients were free to direct their wheat to any mill but all mills were required to charge the same
regulated fee. Competition to attract clients could thus only affect quality but not pricing of milling services.
Mills could also try and increase their profitability by increasing their productivity.

7

The remaining operational deficits were charged during the year to shareholders who paid
their contribution (called talha) in specie. An annual record of the talha and a time-series
for the price of wheat allow us to calculate the dividend for a significant portion of the firm’s
history (i.e., for 417 years). Records of share transfers in notarial registers, in the books of
the company, in fiscal registers, and in newspapers provide a time-series of share prices (data
on prices are available for 364 years). For example, Figure 2 shows the register of pariers
from 1530 for Jean de Bernuy, a rich pastel merchant from Toulouse. We use a time-series
of silver prices to convert share prices and dividends into real terms.

[Insert Figure 2 here]

1.2

Was the Honor del Bazacle truly a corporation?

Sicard (1953) makes a strong case that the Honor del Bazacle was essentially a corporation
as we now define it. Its shares were fully transferable. Records of the sale of shares show
that approval of the firm was not required for the ownership transfer. It had a juridical
personality. Legal proceedings from as early as the 14th century treat the Honor del Bazacle
as a legal entity apart from its shareholders. It had limited liability. When shareholders
could not pay their talhas, their uchaux reverted to the company. Shares entitled owners to
an equal distribution of dividends.
The firm was a private, profit-seeking enterprise. The investors in the Honor del Bazacle
did not have a direct role in the firm’s management, except through the duties related to
participation in the board of directors. The governance of the firm resembled that of modern
corporations. The company operations were controlled by a rotating board of directors
appointed by a shareholder vote at an annual meeting, a time at which financial accounts
were produced and the talha determined. By the mid 16th century, the governance and
8

management structure of the Honor del Bazacle included a chief operating officer, a treasurer
and a clerk. This basic structure continued into the 19th century.
The Honor del Bazacle converted its operations to hydroelectricity generation in 1888 and
became a Société Anonyme called Société Toulousaine du Bazacle in 1910. Its shares traded
on both the Toulouse and Paris stock exchanges in the early 20th century. It was nationalized
in 1946 along with all French electricity producers to form EDF, the national public electricity
utility. Although a full discussion of the early development of the corporate form is not
the topic of this paper, relevant factors contributing to its emergence in Toulouse included
a feudal tradition of transferable, fractional property rights (called pariage) and a welldeveloped law of commerce that allowed and enforced commercial and financial contracts,
including loans, mortgages and partnerships.

2.

Data

2.1

Share prices

The founding charter, with agreed valuation of the contributed shares of the underlying 12
firms that constituted the company, is still extant in the archives of Toulouse. This charter
gives us the first stock price of our series. From that point onward, transactions of shares
in the Bazacle company were recorded by notaries, along with the price in livres tournois,
which was the currency of account of the region. There are 38 prices recorded for Bazacle
shares over the period 1375 to 1450.8 During this time, the Bazacle company had between
80 and 96 uchaux and between 60 to 90 shareholders. Fractional transactions of uchaux were
allowed, so the number of uchaux did not necessarily limit the number of shareholders.
A natural question is whether recorded prices reflect arms-length transactions or transfers
8

The first price of the Bazacle company’s shares in 1372 is obtained from the consolidating merger
agreement. There are also 15 prices for shares in predecessor companies prior to the merger. We do not use
these prices in the present analysis.

9

among family members at below market rates. An approximate test for this is to examine
whether the lowest price per uchau in a given year varies with the median or average price.
We find that they do. Another approach is to compare the variation in share prices across
similar firms. According to Sicard (1953), the share prices for the Bazacle’s major rival
firm, the Castel Narbonens, moved roughly together with Bazacle shares during the 1375 to
1450 period, consistent with the hypothesis that prices reflected consistent if not rational
economic valuation.
Our data collection effort takes up where earlier data collection left off (i.e., in 1450).
However, rather than relying on notarial records of public sales, we use company shareholder
registers. The Honor del Bazacle maintained meticulous documentation about distributions
to shareholders, but only a few registers from the 15th century were preserved. From the
early 16th century onward, the series of registers offers a nearly complete record of share
ownership and transfer. Each page of the shareholder account book (i.e., register of partisons)
corresponds to one parier (i.e., one shareholder) and indicates the grain received during a
given year. When share transactions occurred, a notation in the margin recorded the date,
the price and the name of the new parier. This enabled the company to distribute the grain
dividend to the appropriate owner.
For the period after 1532, we are able to collect transaction data from a new register
(the register of pariers, created by the company to follow the owners of uchaux) that reports
not only transactions but also the number of uchaux in each shareholder’s account. Each
page of the register of pariers corresponds to one shareholder with the name and the number
of uchaux he or she owned. Potential successive sales of uchaux are written below his or
her name. Fractional ownership of uchaux was common, with, for example, one transaction
record for 1/60th of a “demi-uchau” (i.e., 1/120th of a share).
This format was very similar to municipal real estate registers, providing some insight
into the analogy recognized by Toulouse citizens of the time between real and financial

10

property and their corresponding rights to use and enjoyment. Four successive registers of
this kind provide transaction data up until 1878. Thus, the system implemented during
the Renaissance remained the same until the end of the 19th century. This continuity in
financial procedure allows us to presume that the basic definition of share ownership and
transactions itself remained stable for a long period of time. Unfortunately, one register is
missing for the period 1817-1853.
Fortunately, a last source of prices comes from a tax (of 1%) on notary-recorded transactions (called “centième denier”) created in 1703. The bureau of Toulouse recorded in an
annual register the tax collected indicating the date, contracting parties, nature, object and
price of the transaction. This tax still exists and has been called “Droits d’enregistrement”
since the Revolution. Most of these registers are available in the archives of the HauteGaronne. For years without price from others sources, i.e., between 1703 and 1887, we went
through the entire registers to find transactions.
After 1887, the local newspaper, “La Dépêche du Midi”, provides data from the “Bourse
de Toulouse” where the uchaux traded, and we collect price data from this source, although
it lacks volume information. In addition, national newspapers and the “Cote Officielle de la
Bourse de Paris” reported share prices, since the firm was listed on the Paris stock exchange
in 1910. For this last period, we collected the last price of the year that could be identified.
The time series of prices for Honor del Bazacle shares provides a record of equity investment value from the late Middle Ages to the middle of the 20th century. Figure 3 plots the
latest available price of each year, in livres tournois and in silver. The gap from 1450 to 1532
is the period between the end of the notarial records studied by Sicard (1953) and Wolff
(1954) and the beginning of complete corporate registers. After 1532, the series is nearly
continuous. In real terms, share prices remained relatively stable through time.

[Insert Figure 3 here]

11

Prices and dividends tend to move together. This is an evidence in favor of the fact
that share prices reflect information included in dividends. Below, we set up a model with
predictable dividends that formally captures this idea.
Most of the low prices for Bazacle shares were associated with the destruction of the mills
or of their dam system. Uchaux prices were low after a flood damaged the Bazacle dam in
1638, and 25 pariers failed to pay their talhas. In 1709, ice flows on the Garonne completely
destroyed the Bazacle dam. Whereas the price of one uchau typically exceeded the price of
20 tons of wheat, it fell to the price of 0.76 tons of wheat or 878 grams of silver in October,
1709. This crisis caused a high talha, a number of forfeited shares, and eventually led to the
purchase of half of the uchaux by an engineer, M. Abeille who recapitalized the firm and
restored the mills.
The dam was again destroyed in 1736 and uchaux prices dropped in that year to 7.24
tons of wheat or 3.2 kg of silver. A fire destroyed the mills in 1814 imposing a very high
(and the last) talha of 4.5 kg of silver (1,000 francs) leading to another low price of 5.48
tons or 8.1 kg of silver in 1816. Another fire in 1887 resulted in a quasi-bankruptcy and
financial restructuring that led to the conversion to electricity generation in the late 1880’s.
The financial conditions of the nationalization in 1946 explain the last two low figures. In
sum, most of the periods of low uchaux prices were associated with natural disasters that
destroyed the mills or the milldam.
Figure 4 shows the number of transactions per year. By any modern measure, the
turnover is quite low. Prior to 1888, the average number of transactions per year was less
than four, and for the period prior to 1532, the average was less than 1. The volume of
transactions varies considerably through time, however. For example, the 16th century was
a period of relatively high volume, as was the period around the French Revolution. In
addition there were a few instances of massive sales. 16.25% of the capital turned over in
1597, 20.50% in 1639, 50% in 1714, and 28.50% in 1738 due to auctions of shares after

12

non-payment of a high talha. 21.30% turned over in 1791 due to expropriation and resale of
clerical and “émigrés” holdings.

[Insert Figure 4 here]

The low turnover was certainly due, in part, to an unusual transaction tax on new
shareholders. A new parier was required to host a dinner for the board of directors and to
display at that time the notary act of his purchase. The dinner was likely expensive because
the requirement was eventually changed to a fee of 60 livres in 1731 – about 1% of the value
of a share at that time. As a comparison, the cost of the notary (for the act and the tax)
was 4.4% in the 19th century.

2.1.1

Share outstanding

Despite its very long life, the capital structure of the firm is straightforward to reconstruct.
The Appendix reports the history of the firm’s outstanding capital. The company started
in 1372 with 80 uchaux. As of 1384, 16 new uchaux had been created and exchanged
for two mills that remained independent after the initial merger – an early example of a
corporate acquisition. The number of uchaux rose from 96 to 100 in 1535 for reasons unclear
– perhaps to simply make the accounting easier. When some shares occasionally reverted to
the firm due to shareholder surrender, these were immediately auctioned, keeping the shares
outstanding constant. Most of the time, when the firm needed new money, a high talha was
imposed, instead of new uchaux issued.
The firm raised no significant outside capital from 1535 until 1714 when the number
of uchaux increased to 128. A major capital infusion was necessary in order to repair the
milldam. After incurring large expenses without resuming operations for years, many pariers
defaulted on their talhas, and their uchaux were auctioned. However, these shares failed to

13

find acquirers. At this point, the enterprising engineer, M. Abeille, offered to invest capital
to complete the repairs in exchange for half of the equity. As part of the restructuring, 28
new shares were issued. He raised investment capital from Genevan financiers, and the mills
resumed operations in 1720 after 12 years of inactivity.
In 1803 (on 9 prairial XI), 8 new uchaux were created and sold to finance repairs. In
1888, following a devastating fire and a strategic reassessment, each uchau was divided into
4 shares. In 1910, the firm merged with the “Société Toulousaine d’Electricité” to create the
“Société Toulousaine du Bazacle”: each shareholder from the Bazacle received, per share, 70
Francs and 6 shares of the new company. Between 1927 and 1928, the capital of the firm was
reorganized (in the form of a merger between different kinds of stocks followed by a split).
From that time until the nationalization in 1946, the capital was only affected by a stock
issuance in 1943.

2.2

Dividends

As discussed above, calculating dividends requires information about the distribution of
grain to shareholders, the value of this grain and the annual assessment of the talha. We
discuss each of these in turn.

2.2.1

Distribution of grain: Partison

The distribution of grain (the “partison”) occurred around 13 times per year on average until
1817, at which point dividends were paid in specie. We collected data from the registers
for about 4,000 partisons, beginning in 1439. These registers indicate the quantity of wheat
paid to each shareholder during the year.
There are two series of yearly registers of partisons: one series records the partison per day
of partison and a second series records the partison per shareholder for purposes of control.
For a given year, if one parier did not receive the correct amount, the register mentioned the
14

quantity that should be reported to the next year to compensate for the missing quantity.

2.2.2

Grain value

Shareholders received the wheat to their account as a result of partisons, and then could
readily monetize it through sale, although they could also retain grain for their own use.
Indeed, registers of partisons mention the price of wheat on the day of the partison after
1584 and otherwise only on the occasion of a sale of wheat by the firm on behalf of the
shareholder to pay the talha.
Before 1584, we obtain data on the monthly price of wheat in Toulouse from Frêche and
Frêche (1967) that allows us to convert the dividends into a single unit of account (livres
tournois then converted into kg of silver) for purposes of analysis.

2.2.3

Talha

Data on the talha, the annual shareholder contribution to expenses, come from three sources:
partison registers, registers of the general meetings during which shareholders voted the
amount of the talha, and the accounting registers which recorded the monetary transactions
of the firm. Talha became less frequent through the 18th century. Instead, some partisons
were sold for cash – “brulées” – for the benefit of the firm.
The talha was a contribution denominated in livres tournois except during the French
Revolution. After February 1796, due to the extreme inflation of paper money during the
revolution, the amount of the talha was set as a percentage of the partison. After this date,
and despite the return of a strong currency with the ‘Franc Germinal” in 1803, the principle
of the talha was never reintroduced, except for one last, huge talha in 1814 to repair the
mills.
The talha de facto disappeared after 1796 but left a trace in the accounting. Up until
1816, the main revenues of the firm came from the sale of wheat on partison dates. After

15

these dates, the amount paid to the shareholders appeared as an expense in the accounting
of the firm. A standard dividend appeared after 1843, which corresponds to the year of the
Bazacle’s first modern accounting, ending a system that began in the 14th century.

2.2.4

Net Dividend

For the period before 1816, we calculate the yearly dividend as the value of the partisons
during the year minus the amount of the talha for that year. From 1816 to 1843, the dividend
was a payment made by the firm to shareholders after operating costs were deducted from
revenues. After 1843, the firm distributed a standard dividend. We collect these data from
the accounting registers and, after 1887, from various newspapers.
The dividend record is somewhat more complete than the share price transaction record.
Only 30 dividend records exist for the entire period 1372-1531, but there is only 1 missing
year between 1532 and 1813. There are 33 years of missing dividend information between
1814 and 1887 due to a missing register, and none after this date.
Dividends could of course be negative because we calculate them as the difference between the partisons valued at prevailing wheat prices and the talha payment each year. As
explained above, large negative dividends generally corresponded to years in which floods
destroyed the mills or the milldam and thus can also be thought of as occasional capital
investment in repair.
From an econometric perspective, an important advantage of the annual complete disbursements of profits is that the firm did not smooth dividends, nor did it self-finance from
year-to-year using internal cash flows. Figure 3 shows the annual net dividends, expressed
in grams of silver in order to adjust for inflation.9 There are a dozen years in which dividends were negative; in four of these, pariers were required to make net payments equivalent
to three to five kilograms of silver per uchau. This allows us to estimate an asset pricing
9

The Appendix gives more information on the expression of dividends and prices in kilograms of silver.

16

model in the absence of managerial dividend smoothing which has long been recognized as
an econometrically complicating factor in predictive regressions.

2.3

Macroeconomic data

In order to test the link between the pricing of shares and consumption risk, we collected
various macroeconomic data. When analyzing the link between asset pricing and macroeconomic conditions, we focus on the period from 1532 to 1815 because this is a period with a
fixed business technology and governance, as well as a dividend payment in grain.
A first measure of bad times is the ratio between the price of wheat and the price of
rye. Rye is in general less appreciated than wheat and its price is lower than the price of
wheat. Moreover, according to historians, rye is an inferior good: in bad times, consumption
switches more to rye, and the Wheat/Rye price ratio decreases towards one.10 We compute
the yearly average of the monthly ratio between the prices of wheat and rye. Moreover,
to capture uncertainty surrounding consumption, we compute the yearly volatility of the
monthly Wheat/Rye price ratio. Wheat and rye constitute an important part of consumption
for the time period between 1532 and 1815.
We also gather evidence on general political, social and economic events such as wars,
famines, riots, and plague epidemics. We collected this evidence from various sources and
restrict our attention to events in the Toulouse region.11 Our long-term time-series with
significant and severe macroeconomic variations is ideal to explore the hypotheses articulated
by Rietz (1988) and Barro (2006).
As a control variable, we finally collected data on major damages that devastated the
Bazacle mills or milldam. These are micro-events but could also be associated with the
general consumption situation in Toulouse since the Bazacle company’s mills were the largest
10

See for example Labrousse (1933) and Baulant (1968).
The sources include Schneider (1989), Rives (1969), Dom Devic and Dom Vaissète (1745), Dularier
(1876), Raynal (1759), and Roucaud (1919).
11

17

in the Toulouse region and the suspension of their activity could have significantly affected
consumption and the general economy in Toulouse.

2.4

Descriptive statistics

Table 1 reports summary statistics about the annual returns on Bazacle shares. Statistics are
computed using the price closest to the end of each calendar year. We use data in kilograms
of silver to neutralize the effect of monetary inflation. Prices and dividends are missing for
various years. For capital appreciation returns, we only use years for which prior and current
year prices exist. For income returns, we require the dividend from the current year and a
price from the previous year. We present statistics for the full sample as well as for various
sub-periods, the Middle-Ages from 1371 up to 1531 (for which we do not have a lot of data),
the milling activity period from 1532 to 1887 (for which we have plenty of data), and the
electricity period from 1888 up to 1946.

[Insert Table 1 here]

We are able to calculate the dividend yield for 327 years in the full sample. The average
dividend yield over this entire period from 1372 to 1946 is around 5%. This holds for all the
time periods we consider, suggesting stability in income return over centuries. The standard
deviation is around 7% over the full sample period indicating that important fluctuations in
the dividend yield were not unusual.
Figure 5 shows the time series of the dividend yield per share. The interruption around
the dam destruction and repair in the early 18th century and the period before conversion
to electricity production at the end of the 19th century are the only two major periods over
which dividend yields were zero. Most of the other gaps are due to missing data. The
series is also clearly stationary over the long run. Prices seem to adjust to different levels of
18

(expected) dividends. We give a closer look at this issue in the next sections. For example,
real dividends exceeded 1,000 grams of silver in the 16th century and were considerably
less than that in the 18th century, however yields in the two periods were not dramatically
different.

[Insert Figure 5 here]

Over the periods from 1532-1888 and from 1889-1946, the average annual real capital
gains were 18% and 6%, respectively. The geometric means of the capital gain (not reported
here) were negative from 1372 to 1946 and this is also the case for all the sub-periods we
consider. Such a near-zero long term capital gain is consistent with the dividend policy of
the firm for much of its history – to pay out all earnings.12 A real price appreciation close to
zero is consistent with the fact that prices appear to be stationary. The difference between
the low compound growth rate and the high arithmetic mean of the capital appreciation
series is consistent with a a log-normal distribution with high volatility.
The volatility of annual capital appreciation series, ranged between 58% and 134% per
annum after 1532. Such high levels of price uncertainty however would not be particularly
unusual in the context of modern equity volatility. The highest volatility was experienced in
the earlier period, 1532-1888, which also witnessed several major disasters.

3.

Asset pricing model

This section adapts the standard asset pricing model to the specificities of the Bazacle
company. In particular, unreported Phillips-Perron tests do not reject stationarity of the
dividend and price processes. Moreover, dividends can be negative. We will thus seek to
derive equilibrium share prices rather than rates of return.
12

This was also the norm for stocks in other markets during the 19th century; see Goetzmann, Ibbotson
and Peng (2001).

19

We start with the basic pricing formula that derives from an investor’s first-order condition when maximizing expected utility from inter-temporal consumption (see, for example,
Cochrane (2005)):
Pt = Et [Mt+1 (Dt+1 + Pt+1 )] .

(3.1)

Mt+1 is the stochastic discount factor at date t + 1. It is a random variable that represents
bad times coming at date t + 1. Dt+1 is the dividend distributed at date t + 1. Pt+1 is the
post-dividend share price at date t + 1.
We now give more structure to this equation. To capture the stationarity of the dividend
process, we assume that dividends follow an ARMA(1,1) process:13

D
Dt+1 = α + βDt + γD
t + t+1 ,

(3.2)

D
with E(D
t+1 ) = Et (t+1 ) = 0.

We model the time varying stochastic discount factor as:

Mt+1 =


1
1 + M
t+1 ,
1+r

(3.3)

M
with E(M
t+1 ) = Et (t+1 ) = 0. The variable r represents the risk-free rate of return.
D
Define the risk correction as πt = −Covt (M
t+1 , t+1 ). We assume that:

π̂t = πt − E(πt ) = δπ̂t−1 + πt ,

(3.4)

π
with E(πt ) = Et−1 (πt ) = Covt (M
t+1 , t+1 ) = 0.

We now have enough structure to solve explicitly for the share price. To do so, we start
13
Unreported tests based on the Akaike Information Criterion suggest that an ARMA(1,1) model provides
the best description of our dividend data, in the class of ARMA models. This echoes the findings of Yang,
Koo and Wilson (1992), who find that an ARMA(1,1) model is a good fit for wheat yields (the grain milled
by the Bazacle company), and of Bessler (1980), who tests subjective farmer beliefs about the inter-temporal
crop yield variation with an ARIMA model and finds reasonable beliefs about time-series model parameters.

20

with the pricing conjecture:
Pt = a + bDt + cD
t − dπ̂t .

(3.5)

According to this conjecture, the share price depends on:
• the current dividend and dividend shock because these variables allow to predict future
dividends;
• a risk correction that compensates investors for consumption risk.
We plug the above pricing conjecture taken at date t + 1 into Equation 3.1 to obtain:



Pt = Et Mt+1 a + (b + 1) Dt+1 + cD
.
t+1 − dπ̂t+1

We rewrite this expression as a function of date-t variables by using Equations 3.2 and
3.3. Rearranging yields:

Pt =

(b + 1) γ D (b + c + dδ + 1) γ
a + (b + 1) α − (b + c + 1) E(πt ) (b + 1) β
+
Dt +
 −
π̂t .
1+r
1+r
1+r t
1+r
(3.6)

This equation indicates that the pricing conjecture given by Equation 3.5 is satisfied.
Moreover, after identification of Equations 3.6 and 3.5 term by term, we solve for the underlying parameters values:
1 + r α 1 + r + γ E(πt )
−
,
1+r−β r
1+r−β r
β
b=
,
1+r−β
γ
c=
,
1+r−β
1+r+γ
d=
.
(1 + r − β) (1 + r − δ)
a=

(3.7)
(3.8)
(3.9)
(3.10)

These parameters indicate how share prices respond to the expected level of dividends
21

and of risk correction (parameter a), to the current dividend and dividend shock (parameters
b and c), and to the current level of risk correction required by investors (parameter d).

4.

Econometric methodology

This section discusses how we identify and estimate the deep parameters of our asset pricing model. It also indicates how we can test the model by using various overidentifying
restrictions.

4.1

Identification and estimation method

It is straightforward to see that parameters α, β, and γ are directly identified using the
estimation of Equation 3.2 on dividend data. This estimation also yields an estimate of
the process {D
t }. We estimate the ARMA(1,1) process given by Equation 3.2 by maximum
likelihood.
Estimating Equation 3.5, using price and dividend data and the estimates of the dividend
shocks, enables to identify parameters a, b, and c. Since both d and the variance of πt are
associated multiplicatively, we cannot directly identify them separately. However, we can
identify δ, the autoregressive coefficient of the process π̂t , as the autocorrelation between the
residuals of the regression of Pt on Dt and D
t . The GLS regression given by Equation 3.5 is
estimated by maximum likelihood. The parameter d is identified thanks to Equation 3.10.
We can then identified the variance of πt .
The last parameter that we can identify is the average risk correction, E(πt ). We do so
by plugging in Equation 3.7 the parameter r extracted from Equations 3.8 or 3.9 as well as
the parameters estimated thanks to Equation 3.2. We obtain the following formula:

E(πt ) =

(1 + r) α − ar (1 + r − β)
.
1+r+γ
22

To evaluate the statistical significance of our parameters’ estimations, p-values are based
on standard errors computed with the delta method.

4.2

Overidentifying restrictions

The risk-free rate is determined by two formulae, Equations 3.8 and 3.9. Combining these
two equations, we obtain a first overidentifying restriction:
β γ
− = 0.
b
c

(4.11)

Provided that both the dividend and price processes are stationary, the unconditional
expectation of dividends, E(Dt ), is also determined by two different formula, Equations 3.2
and 3.5. Combining these two equations, we obtain a second overidentifying restriction:
α
E(Pt ) − a
−
= 0.
1−β
b

(4.12)

We build confidence intervals for the left-hand side of these two overidentifying restrictions via the delta method. This enables us to test whether the asset pricing model is or not
rejected by the data.

5.

Empirical results

We first focus on the estimation of the dividend process and then proceed to study the
pricing of the Bazacle shares. Finally, we relate the risk correction embedded in share prices
to various macroeconomic variables representing bad times.
We use several sample periods to gauge the robustness of the results. Our analysis
starts in 1441 which is the first year for which we could collect both a price and a dividend
observation. The full sample period is interesting because it is the longest time series that
23

we could gather, from 1441 to 1946. Another interesting sample period ranges from 1532 to
1815 because it is a time in which there was no change in the business activity nor in the
governance of the Bazacle company. For simplicity, missing values are linearly interpolated.
This is not a major concern since, after 1532, we have very few missing data and the results
are robust across time periods.

5.1

Dividend process

The results of Equation 3.2’s estimation on dividend data are presented in Table 2. As mentioned above, unreported Phillips-Perron tests indicate that we cannot reject the hypothesis
that the dividend process is stationary. This is in line with the stable business model of
the Bazacle company based on the normally predictable force of the river and the regular
seasonal crop yields brought to the mill. Some shocks are also present due to changes in the
price of wheat and to occurrences of major damages, for example.

[Insert Table 2 here]

We then fit an ARMA(1,1) model to the dividend series that we collected. The estimation
indicates that the dividend process is persistent. The parameter β is indeed positive and
close to 1 in all the sample periods considered. Dividend shocks appear to revert: the
parameter γ is indeed negative. But this reversal does not cancel the persistence: overall,
the sum of the parameters is significantly positive. This indicates that there is predictability
in the dividend process. The next subsection tests whether share prices accurately reflect
this predictability.

24

5.2

Share prices

We use share prices, dividends and the dividend shocks extracted above to estimate the
pricing Equation 3.5.14 The GLS regression that it describes is estimated via maximum
likelihood. The results are in Table 3.

[Insert Table 3 here]

The coefficients b and c are significant, indicating that share prices incorporate some
information from dividends and dividend shocks. Moreover, the signs of the coefficients,
positive for b and negative for c, are in line with the asset pricing model’s predictions:
Equations 3.8 and 3.9 predict that, provided that the denominator is positive, the signs of
b and c should be the same as the signs of β and γ, respectively. This is exactly what we
find in the data. This provides us with a first indication that asset pricing theory is useful
to qualitatively understand our data.
Based on the estimates presented in Table 3, we can estimate what proportion of share
price variations are due to changes in expectations of future dividends. This is in spirit of
the seminal analyses of Shiller (1981) and Leroy and Porter (1981). Taking the variance of
the price as given in Equation 3.5 indicates that the proportion of price volatility associated
b2 Var(Dt )+c2 Var(D
t )
. This proportion is
with variation in dividends and dividend shocks is:
Var(Pt )
indicated in Table 3 under the title pseudo-R2 .
The proportion of price variations explained by changes in expectations of future dividends ranges from 15% to 43%. This result is in line with recent conclusions from the
empirical asset pricing literature. Chen (2009) uses data on the aggregate US stock market
and shows that dividend-price ratio changes predict future dividends over the period ranging
14

As mentioned above, unreported Phillips-Perron tests indicate that we cannot reject the hypothesis that
the price process is stationary.

25

from 1872 to World War II. Such predictability disappears in the second part of the twentieth
century, possibly because of the tendency to smooth dividends.
Moreover, Chen, Da, and Priestley (2012) use data from 1871 to 2006 and show that,
using net payout and earnings (that are more difficult to smooth) instead of dividends,
predictability does not disappear after WWII. It is remarkable that, during the period before
1815 during which dividends of the Bazacle company corresponded exactly to earnings, we
find the closest relationship between share prices and expectations of future dividends.
Also, using a Kalman filter approach on data from 1946 to 2007, van Binsbergen and
Koijen (2010) are able to identify some predictability of future dividends thanks to the
dividend-price ratio: they find that between 13% and 31% of the variation in the pricedividend ratio is explained by variations in expected dividend growth. These figures are
very similar to what we find for the Bazacle company over several centuries. Finally, our
result that dividend forecasts explain a significant portion of Bazacle share price variations
is consistent with Vuolteenaho (2002)’s finding that, in the US market from 1954 to 1996,
firm-level stock returns are mainly driven by cash-flow news.
We also estimate the autoregressive coefficient of the risk correction, δ. Table 3 shows
this to be high – between 0.67 and 0.81 depending on the sample period. This suggests that
the risk correction is persistent. The persistence in the risk correction appears higher than
that of the dividend. This result is also consistent with the findings of van Binsbergen and
Koijen (2010) who show that expected returns are more persistent than expected dividend
growth rates.
We test the asset pricing model by studying the two overidentification restrictions displayed in Equations 4.11 and 4.12. We use the delta method to generate standard errors
and 95% confidence intervals for the left-hand side of these equations. The results are in
Table 4.
[Insert Table 4 here]
26

The 95% confidence intervals for all the sample periods include 0. We thus cannot reject
the hypothesis that the equalities in Equations 4.11 and 4.12 are true at a conventional level
of significance. Moreover, the model is only rejected with very high p-values (and thus low
levels of confidence), higher than 46%.
Our asset pricing model, in addition to making predictions that are qualitatively verified,
cannot be quantitatively rejected at usual levels of significance. This result suggests that,
during a time period in which investors were not trained to apply asset pricing theory, its
principles and quantitative predictions are not rejected by the data.
Our estimates, not reported here, suggest that the risk-free rate is not different from 0
at the 95% confidence level. A low risk-free rate makes sense given that we are focusing on
real rates and given the low average growth for most of the time period under consideration.
Also, the average risk correction in proportion of the share price, a variable that corresponds
to the risk premium, is estimated between 0.75% and 1.56%.

5.3

Risk correction

To shed some light on the nature of the risk correction, we study whether it is related
to macroeconomic variables that proxy for bad times. The macroeconomic variables we use
represent plague, famine, war, and violence episodes that affected the Toulouse region. These
variables are coded as dummy variables taking the value 1 the year the event took place and 0
otherwise. We also include the Wheat/Rye price ratio because, as indicated above, historians
have argued that it tends to decrease during bad times. Finally, we include the volatility of
the ratio over a given year as a proxy for the uncertainty surrounding consumption.
We control for the occurrence of damages to the river dam or the mills. These damages
called for capital infusion that shareholders were not always able to deliver, potentially due
to liquidity constraints. Such liquidity issues, when they occurred, could have negatively
affected share prices over and above future dividend expectations and risk correction.
27

We focus here on the period from 1532 to 1815 because it corresponds to a time of
stationary business activity and corporate governance. It is also a period in which important
macroeconomic events for the Toulouse region can be clearly identified.
Equation 3.5 enables us to extract the risk correction as π̂t = −

Pt −a−bDt −cD
t
.
d

We then

regress this risk correction on the various macroeconomic variables indicated above, using a
GLS approach to account for autocorrelation. The results are in Table 5.

[Insert Table 5 here]

Table 5 indicates that the risk correction is positively related to the volatility of the
wheat-price ratio.15 The increase in the risk correction during bad times could be due to an
increase in risk aversion or to an increase in risk (see Cochrane (2005) for a discussion of
these various aspects) in the context of the standard consumption-based asset pricing model.
It could also reflect the pricing of volatility risk as predicted by long-run risk models (see
for example, Bansal and Yaron (2004)). Further tests are required in order to differentiate
these various consumption-based models using our data.
The risk correction appears marginally related to war episodes. This result indicates that
disasters are important for understanding risk correction in asset markets. In this sense, they
are in line with the emphasis of Rietz (1988), Barro (2006), and Gabaix (2012) on disaster
risk being an important driver of asset pricing. In our context, the Bazacle shares seem to
constitute a hedge against war episodes since the discount in share prices (that compensates
for risk) is lower in times of war. This is a reminiscence of the result documented by le Bris
(2012) according to which stock prices of French companies increased during World war II.
The risk correction is not associated with famine episodes. This result might indicate
that shareholders, who were in general rich individuals or religious institutions, did not
15

We obtain the same results if we introduce our macroeconomic variables directly in the estimation of
the pricing equation 3.5.

28

really suffer during these catastrophes. If this is indeed the case, it is reasonable for the risk
correction, that is set by the marginal shareholder, to not depend on famines. This line of
reasoning is related with the analysis of Aı̈t-Sahalia, Parker, and Yogo (2004) who rationalize
the equity premium by the fact that stocks are held by rich people whose consumption of
luxury good is a better candidate to price stocks than the consumption of more common
goods.
Overall, our results indicate that consumption risk is an important driver for asset pricing
in the time period we consider. This echoes recent results obtained on more recent data by
using novel ways of measuring consumption (see, e.g., Parker and Julliard (2005), and Savov
(2011)).

6.

Conclusion

The Bazacle company existed over several centuries, and for much of that time, it generated
a variable flow of dividends punctuated by occasional disasters. Shares in this early example
of corporate enterprise were traded at market prices. Our analysis examines whether future
expected dividends are being accurately reflected in share prices, and studies the nature of
the risk correction included in these prices. Risk for Bazacle shareholders included not only
volatility but also the possibility of ruinous events, one of which caused the re-capitalization
of the company in the early 18th century.
Perhaps the simplest but most remarkable result of our study is that real income returns,
measured by the dividend yield, were slightly in excess of 5% over most of the firm’s life.
Including annual capital appreciation, the arithmetic total return was roughly 20% – a
slightly deceptive number because invested capital over the entire period of study would
have yielded only the 5% dividend return. This is because the geometric average of price
appreciation was nearly null.

29

Another remarkable result is that basic asset pricing theory cannot be rejected on the
Bazacle data. Changes in expectations of future dividends explain between 15% and 43%
of the variation in prices, depending on the time period we consider. Moreover, the risk
correction that is embedded in share prices is positively correlated with the volatility of
grain prices. Overall, using the Bazacle company as a laboratory to test asset pricing theory,
we find strong evidence in favor of basic principles of asset valuation.

30

7.

Appendix

7.1

History of Outstanding Capital
Period

Number and nature of shares

Reason

1372-1374

80 divisible

Merger of independent mills

1374-1384

88 divisible

Purchase of a mill

1384-1535

96 divisible

Purchase of another mill

1535-1714

100 divisible

Unknown

1714-1804

128 divisible

M. Abeille receives half of the shares

1804-1888

136 divisible

8 shares are issued to pay for repairs

1888-1910

544 divisible

Split 1:4

1910-1928

6,450 non-divisible

Merger with “Toulousaine d’Electricité”

1928-1943

205,875 non-divisible

Unification of different stocks and split 5:1

1943-1946

319,375 non-divisible

Issue of new shares

31

7.2

Adjustment for Inflation

There is considerable research into the question of how best to measure inflation over the
very long term, however we take silver prices as the primary index since it was the basis for
the French monetary system and the only metal used in the Toulouse mint after 1540.
A few details are necessary to interpret the silver price series. Before 1803, all uchaux
and wheat prices (except for the very first prices which were sometimes quoted in gold) are
quoted in livres tournois, the main unit of account in France during the pre-1803 period.
Livres tournois had an official and a market rate of exchange to silver and we require the
market rate. Unfortunately, data on the market rate of exchange between livre tournois and
silver are only available at a low frequency. For example, we just have seven exchange rates
for the period 1372-1533. Thus we are forced to linearly interpolate these values. After 1533,
exchange rates are frequent.
After 1803, prices are in Franc germinal, which had a fixed conversion rate of 1 livre
tournois to 0.9877 franc. Between 1803 and 1876, the value of the Franc germinal remains
stable in silver thanks to the Gold/Silver standard (1 franc = 5 grams of silver at 900/1000
thus 4.5 grams of pure silver). After 1876, France adopted the pure gold standard. Between
1877 and 1946, we convert gold into silver using the rate of 15.5 grams of silver for a gram
of gold which is the fixed rate established during the Silver/Gold standard until 1876.
The most problematic periods for adjusting to real values are France’s experiments with
fiat money. For a brief period in 1719 and 1720, France replaced metallic currency with
paper money – a decision that was quickly reversed following a monetary crisis. This event
seems not to have affected the prices of uchaux in Toulouse, however. In the revolutionary
period from 1789 to 1796, France again issued paper money – Livres-assignats. We use
weekly values of the assignats in silver coins in the Haute-Garonne from Caron (1909).

32

References
[1] Aı̈t-Sahalia Y., Parker J., and Yogo M. (2004). Luxury Goods and the Equity Premium.
Journal of Finance 59, 2959-3004.
[2] Almeida C. and Garcia R. (2014). Assessing Misspecied Asset Pricing Models with
Empirical Likelihood Estimators, forthcoming in Journal of Econometrics.
[3] Ang, A., and Bekaert G. (2007). Stock return predictability: Is it there? Review of
Financial Studies 20, 651-707.
[4] Bansal, R., and Yaron A. (2004). Risks for the long run: A potential resolution of asset
pricing puzzles. Journal of Finance 59, 1481-1509.
[5] Bansal, R., Kiku D., Shaliastovich I., and Yaron, A. (2014). Volatility, the Macroeconomy and Asset Prices. Forthcoming Journal of Finance.
[6] Baron M. (1917). La monnaie de Toulouse : historique, organisation, juridiction, thèse
en droit, Toulouse, Bonnet.
[7] Barro R. (2006). Rare disasters and asset markets in the twentieth century. Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 121, 823-866.
[8] Baulant, M. (1968). Le prix des grains à Paris de 1431 à 1788. Annales Economies,
Sociétés, Civilisations, 23.3, pp. 520-540.
[9] Bessler, A. (1980). Aggregated personalistic beliefs on yields of selected crops estimated
using ARIMA processes. American Journal of Agricultural Economics 62, 666-674.
[10] van Binsbergen, J., Brandt, M., and Koijen, R. (2012). On the Timing and Pricing of
Dividends. The American Economic Review, 102(4), 1596-1618.

33

[11] Bonnet C. (2013). Jean de Bernuy, les moulins du Bazacle et l’espace urbain : stratégies
et réseaux à Toulouse, 1500-1555. Master thesis. Université Le Mirail, Toulouse.
[12] Bonomo M., Garcia R., Meddahi N. and Tédongap R. (2011). Generalized Disappointment Aversion, Long-run Volatility Risk, and Asset Prices. Review of Financial Studies
24, 82-122.
[13] Bordes, F. (2006). Formes et enjeux d’une mémoire urbaine au Bas Moyen Age: Le
premier Livre des Histoires de Toulouse (1295-1532), Tome 3 : Entre Histoire et
Mémoire Urbaine, Thèse Doctorat Histoire, Toulouse.
[14] Bossaerts, P., and Hillion P. (1999). Implementing statistical criteria to select return
forecasting models: what do we learn? Review of Financial Studies 12, 405-28.
[15] le Bris D. (2012). Wars, inflation and stock market returns in France, 1870-1945. Financial History Review 19, 337-361.
[16] le Bris, D., Goetzmann, W. N., and Pouget S. (2014). Modern Introduction to Germain
Sicard’s The Mills of Toulouse. Yale University Press, forthcoming.
[17] le Bris D., Hautcœur P.-C. (2010), A Challenge to the Triumphant Optimists, A Blue
Chips Index for the Paris Stock Exchange (1854-2007). Financial History Review 27,
141-183.
[18] Campbell, JY and RJ Shiller (1988). The dividend-price ratio and expectations of future
dividends and discount factor. Review of financial studies.
[19] Caron, P. (1909). Tableaux de dépréciation du papier-monnaie. Imprimerie Nationale,
Paris.
[20] Cochrane, J. (2005). Asset pricing. Princeton University Press.

34

[21] Cochrane, J. (2008). The dog that did not bark: A defense of return predictability,
Review of Financial Studies 21, 15331575.
[22] Cogley, T., and Sargent, T. J. (2008). The market price of risk and the equity premium:
A legacy of the Great Depression? Journal of Monetary Economics,55(3), 454-476.
[23] Dom Devic, and Dom Vaissète (1745). Histoire Générale du Languedoc, volume 5,
Jacques Vincent, Paris.
[24] Dimson, E., Marsh, P., and Staunton, M. (2008). Triumph of the optimists: 101 years
of global investment returns. Princeton University Press.
[25] Dimson, E., and Spaenjers C. (2011). Ex post: the investment performance of collectible
stamps. Journal of Financial Economics 100, 443-458.
[26] Dularier (ed.), (1876). Histoire Générale du Languedoc. Tome 13. Privat, Toulouse.
[27] Fama, E. F., and French, K. R. (1988). Dividend yields and expected stock returns,
Journal of Financial Economics 22, 3-25.
[28] Fourasti (1969). L’Evolution des prix à long terme. PUF, Paris.
[29] Frêche G. and Frêche G. (1967). Les prix des grains, des vins et des légumes à Toulouse
(1486-1868). PUF, Paris.
[30] Gabaix, X. (2012), Variable Rare Disasters: An Exactly Solved Framework for Ten
Puzzles in Macro-Finance. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(2), 645-700.
[31] Ghosh A., Julliard C. and Taylor (2013). What is the Consumption-CAPM missing?
An Information-Theoretic Framework for the Analysis of Asset Pricing Model, Working Paper, Carnegie Mellon University, London School of Economics, and Manchester
Business School.
35

[32] Goetzmann, W. N., Ibbotson, R. G., and Peng, L. (2001). A new historical database for
the NYSE 1815 to 1925: Performance and predictability. Journal of Financial Markets
4, 1-32.
[33] Goetzmann W. N. and Ibbotson R. G. (2006). The Equity Risk Premium: Essays and
Explorations. Oxford University Press.
[34] Goetzmann, W. N., and Jorion, P. (1993). Testing the Predictive Power of Dividend
Yields. Journal of Finance 48, 663-679.
[35] Goetzmann, W. N., and Jorion, P. (1995). A longer look at dividend yields. Journal of
Business, 483-508.
[36] Goetzmann, W. N., and Pouget, S. (2011). A shareholder lawsuit in fourteenth century Toulouse, in Origins of Shareholder Advocacy, Edited by Jonathan G.S. Koppell,
Palgrave-MacMillan.
[37] Goyal, A., and Welch I. (2003). Predicting the equity premium with dividend ratios.
Management Science 49, 639-54.
[38] Goyal, A., and Welch I. (2006). A comprehensive look at the empirical performance of
the equity premium prediction. Review of Financial Studies 21, 1455-1508.
[39] Hansen, L. P., Heaton J. C., and Li N. (2008). Consumption strikes back? Measuring
long-run risk. Journal of Political Economy 116, 260-302.
[40] Hoffman P.T., Postel-Vinay G. and Rosenthal J.-L. (1992). Private Credit Markets in
Paris 1690-1840. Journal of Economic History 52, 293-306.
[41] Hoffman P.T., Postel-Vinay G. and Rosenthal J.-L. (2000), Priceless markets, the political economy of credit in Paris, 1660-1870, University of Chicago Press, Chicago and
London.
36

[42] Homer S. and Sylla R. (2005). A History of Interest Rates. Fourth Edition, Wiley.
[43] Jacks, D. S., O’Rourke, K. H., and Williamson, J. G. (2011). Commodity price volatility
and world market integration since 1700. Review of Economics and Statistics, 93(3),
800-813.
[44] Labrousse, E. (1933). Esquisse du mouvement des prix et des revenus en France au
XVIIIème siècle. Dalloz, Paris.
[45] Leroy-Ladurie E., (2004). Histoire humaine et comparée du climat, canicules et glaciers,
XIIIème-XVIIIème sicle. Paris.
[46] Leroy S. and Porter R. (1981). The present-value relation: tests based on implied variance bounds. Econometrica 49, 555-574.
[47] Lettau, M., and Ludvigson S. (2001). Resurrecting the (C)CAPM: A Cross-Sectional
Test When Risk Premia Are Time-Varying. Journal of Political Economy 109, 12381287.
[48] Menzly, L., Santos T., and Veronesi P. (2004). Understanding predictability. Journal of
Political Economy 112, 1-47.
[49] Munro, J. H., (2003). The Medieval Origins of the Financial Revolution: Usury, Rentes
and Negotiability. The International History Review 25(3), 505-562.
[50] Neal, L. (1993). The rise of financial capitalism: International capital markets in the
age of reason. Cambridge University Press.
[51] Pástor, L., and Stambaugh R.F. (2009). Predictive systems: Living with imperfect
predictors. Journal of Finance 64, 1583-1628.
[52] Parker J. and Julliard C. (2005). Consumption Risk and the Cross Section of Expected
Returns. Journal of Political Economy 113, 185-222.
37

[53] Raynal J. (1759). Histoire de la ville de Toulouse. JF Forest, Toulouse.
[54] Rietz, T. A. (1988). The equity risk premium a solution. Journal of monetary Economics,
22(1), 117-131.
[55] Rives (1969).
[56] Roucaud J. (1919). La peste à Toulouse des origines au XVIIIème sicle. Thèse en
mdecine, Toulouse.
[57] Rutterford, J. (2004). From dividend yield to discounted cash flow: a history of UK
and US equity valuation techniques. Accounting, Business & Financial History, 14(2),
115-149.
[58] Saboly, M. (2001). L’analyse d’une crise: les Moulins du Bazacle, une étude de cas
moderne?. Entreprises et histoire, (1), 70-88.
[59] Savov A. (2011). Asset Pricing with Garbage, Journal of Finance 66, 177-201.
[60] Schneider, R. A. (1989). Public Life in Toulouse, 1463-1789: From Municipal Republic
to Cosmopolitan City. Cornell University Press.
[61] Shiller, R. J. (1981), The Use of Volatility Measures in Assessing Market Efficiency. The
Journal of Finance, 36: 291304.
[62] Sicard, G. (1953). Aux origines des sociétés anonymes. Les moulins de Toulouse au
Moyen Age. Armand Colin, Paris.
[63] Siegel J. (2007). Stocks for the Long Run. Fourth Edition, McGraw-Hill.
[64] Stambaugh, R.F. (1999). Predictive regressions. Journal of Financial Economics 54,
375-421.

38

[65] Vuolteenaho, T. (2002). What drives firm-level stock returns? Journal of Finance 57,
233-264.
[66] Wolff, P. (1954). Commerce et marchands de Toulouse, v.1350-v.1450. Plon, Paris.
[67] Yang, S-R., Koo, W. and Wilson, W. (1992). Heteroskedasticity in Crop Yield Models.
Journal of Agricultural and Resource Economics, 17(1).

39

Table 1: Summary statistics
Table 1 reports summary statistics about the annual returns on Bazacle shares. Statistics are computed
using the price closest to the end of each calendar year. We use data in kilograms of silver. Prices and
dividends are missing for some years. For the dividend yield, we require the dividend from the current
year and a price from the previous year. For capital gains returns, we only use years for which prior and
current year prices exist. We do the same to compute price changes which represent the difference between
current and prior share prices. We present statistics for the full sample as well as for various sub-periods,
the Middle-Ages from 1371 up to 1531 (for which we do not have a lot of data), the milling activity period
from 1532 to 1888 (for which we have plenty of data), and the electricity period from 1889 up to 1946.

Data in Silver

Dividend Yield
Mean St. Dev.

1372-1946
Obs. (p-value)

5.16%
327

7.55%
(0.00)

15.48%
295

122.36%
(0.03)

30.72
295

6697
(0.94)

1372-1531

4.94%
3
5.14%
270
5.29%
54

6.11%
(0.16)
8.16%
(0.00)
3.34%
(0.00)

-2.70%
11
18.44%
232
6.13%
52

36.68%
(0.81)
134.86%
(0.04)
58.86%
(0.45)

-271.48
11
75.25
232
-104.05
52

1168
(0.44)
6366
(0.86)
8640
(0.93)

1532-1888
1889-1946

Capital Gain
Mean
St. Dev.

40

Price Change
Mean
St. Dev.

Table 2: Dividend process estimation
Table 2 reports the estimation of an ARMA(1,1) model applied to the dividend process. The estimated
D
equation is: Dt+1 = α + βDt + γD
t + t+1 , with Dt being the dividend distributed during year t. We
D
assume that E(D
t+1 ) = Et (t+1 ) = 0. Non-reported Phillips-Perron tests indicate that we cannot reject the
hypothesis that the dividend process is stationary. We fit the model via Maximum Likelihood.

Period
1441-1946
1532-1946
1532-1888
1532-1815

α p-val
β
181 0.00 0.80
229 0.00 0.77
214 0.00 0.77
144 0.00 0.84

p-val
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

γ
-0.35
-0.32
-0.35
-0.38

p-val
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

Table 3: Estimation of the asset pricing equation
Table 3 reports maximum likelihood estimations of GLS regressions representing the pricing equation: Pt =
D
P
a + bDt + cD
t + t . Dt and t are the dividend and the dividend shock during year t, respectively. The
residual P
t captures the risk correction and is assumed to follow an AR(1) process with an autoregressive
parameter δ. Non-reported Phillips-Perron tests indicate that we cannot reject the hypothesis that the
share price process is stationary. The pseudo-R2 represents the proportion of price volatility associated with
b2 Var(Dt )+c2 Var(D
t )
variation in dividends and dividend shocks and is equal to:
.
Var(P )
t

Period
1441-1946
1532-1946
1532-1888
1532-1815

a
p-val
b
14,682 0.00 3.90
15,295 0.00 4.09
14,356 0.00 4.71
12,217 0.00 6.59

p-val
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

c
p-val pseudo-R2
-1.84 0.01
15%
-1.96 0.01
17%
-2.45 0.01
24%
-3.51 0.00
43%

41

δ
p-val
0.81 0.00
0.77 0.00
0.77 0.00
0.76 0.00

Table 4: Testing the model
Table 4 reports, for the two overidentifying conditions of our model, the bounds of the 95% confidence
intervals as well as the p-values at which the model is rejected. The model is rejected with a p-value of
5% if zero is not part of the 95% confidence interval. These two overidentifying conditions are related to
the risk-free rate and to the unconditionally expected dividend that are, each of them, characterized by
two equations. The confidence intervals and p-values are based on standard errors computed with the delta
method.

Period
1441-1946
1532-1946
1532-1888
1532-1815

risk-free rate restriction
lower bound higher bound p-val reject
-0.073
0.108
0.71
-0.064
0.109
0.61
-0.049
0.086
0.60
-0.030
0.068
0.46

42

expected dividend restriction
lower bound higher bound p-val reject
-683
598
0.90
-664
568
0.88
-616
562
0.93
-535
476
0.91

Table 5: GLS regression of the risk correction on macroeconomic variables
Table 5 reports the results of a GLS regression of the risk correction onto various macroeconomic variables
that capture bad times. These macroeconomic variables are dummies that indicate years in which plague
epidemics, famines, wars, and riots occurred in the Toulouse region. They also include the yearly average
of the monthly Wheat/Rye price ratio that, according to historians, tends to be low in bad times, and the
yearly volatility of the monthly Wheat/Rye price ratio, as a measure of economic uncertainty. As a control
variable, we include a dummy that indicates years with major damages that devastated the Bazacle mills or
milldam. The focus is on the 1532-1815 time period. Estimation is done by maximum likelihood.

Variables
AR1
Intercept
Plague
Famine
War
Violence
Damage
Wheat/Rye
Volatility Wheat/Rye

43

Coef p-val
0.8
0.00
69.9 0.66
27.1 0.65
40.3 0.30
-95.2 0.13
16.6 0.64
53.2 0.33
10.4 0.91
340.0 0.01

Figure 1: Bazacle company’s location in Toulouse on the river Garonne.
This Figure shows the location of the Bazacle company (red dot) at the northwest of Toulouse
on a map from 1631 from Melchior Tavernier. The Bazacle mills’ dam is also visible on the
map.

44

Figure 2: A register of pariers (i.e., shareholders) from 1530.
This Figure shows an example of register of pariers from 1530. The parier is Jean de Bernuy,
a rich pastel merchant from Toulouse. Various transactions are written at different points
in time reflecting the various times at which Jean de Bernuy or his heirs have sold their
uchaux (i.e., shares). The original document is available at the “Archives Départementales
de la Haute-Garonne” in Toulouse. This picture is taken from Bonnet (2013).

45

60	  

6	  

40	  

4	  

20	  

2	  

0	  
1372	  

0	  
1422	  

1472	  

1522	  

1572	  

1622	  

1672	  

1722	  

1772	  

1822	  

1872	  

1922	  

-­‐20	  

-­‐2	  

-­‐40	  

-­‐4	  

-­‐60	  

-­‐6	  

Figure 3: Bazacle share prices and dividends from 1372 to 1946 (in kilograms of silver).
This Figure shows Bazacle company’s end-of-year share price and dividend from 1372 to
1946. Missing data before 1532 are due to lack of information. The data is in kilograms of
silver to control for monetary inflation. The left axis is for share prices (in black), the right
one for dividends (in grey).

46

0	  
1372	  
1381	  
1390	  
1399	  
1408	  
1417	  
1426	  
1435	  
1444	  
1453	  
1462	  
1471	  
1480	  
1489	  
1498	  
1507	  
1516	  
1525	  
1534	  
1543	  
1552	  
1561	  
1570	  
1579	  
1588	  
1597	  
1606	  
1615	  
1624	  
1633	  
1642	  
1651	  
1660	  
1669	  
1678	  
1687	  
1696	  
1705	  
1714	  
1723	  
1732	  
1741	  
1750	  
1759	  
1768	  
1777	  
1786	  
1795	  
1804	  
1813	  
1822	  
1831	  
1840	  
1849	  
1858	  
1867	  

50	  

40	  

30	  

20	  

10	  

Figure 4: Number of transactions per year from 1372 to 1888 (in shares).

This Figure shows the number of share transaction for the Bazacle company from 1372 to
1888, the grain milling period of the Bazacle company. Missing data before 1532 are due to
lack of information.

47

30%	  

20%	  

10%	  

0%	  
1372	  

1422	  

1472	  

1522	  

1572	  

1622	  

1672	  

1722	  

1772	  

1822	  

1872	  

-­‐10%	  

-­‐20%	  

-­‐30%	  

Figure 5: Dividend yield from 1372 to 1946.
This Figure shows the dividend yield. For an observation to be recorded, we require the
dividend from the current year and a price from the previous year to be available. Price and
dividend data used to compute the dividend yield are in kilograms of silver.

48

1922	  

