                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   MODEL DISAGREEMENT AND ECONOMIC OUTLOOK

                                            Daniel Andrei
                                             Bruce Carlin
                                            Michael Hasler

                                        Working Paper 20190
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20190


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2014




We would like to thank Tony Berrada, Mike Chernov, Julien Cujean, Jerome Detemple, Bernard Dumas,
Barney Hartman-Glaser, Julien Hugonnier, Arvind Krishnamurthy, Francis Longstaff, Hanno Lustig,
Nick Roussanov, Pascal St.-Amour, Wei Xiong, and Hongjun Yan for their useful advice. We would
also like to acknowledge comments from conference and seminar participants at the SFI meeting in
Gerzensee, the International Forum on Long-Term Risks in Paris, UCLA Anderson, and the SFS Finance
Cavalcade. Financial support from the Swiss Finance Institute, NCCR FINRISK of the Swiss National
Science Foundation, UCLA, and the University of Toronto is gratefully acknowledged. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Daniel Andrei, Bruce Carlin, and Michael Hasler. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Model Disagreement and Economic Outlook
Daniel Andrei, Bruce Carlin, and Michael Hasler
NBER Working Paper No. 20190
June 2014
JEL No. G12

                                              ABSTRACT

We study the impact of model disagreement on the dynamics of asset prices, return volatility, and
trade in the market. In our continuous-time framework, two investors have homogeneous preferences
and equal access to information, but disagree about the length of the business cycle. We show that
model disagreement amplifies return volatility and trading volume by inducing agents to have different
economic outlooks, which generates a term structure of disagreement. Different economic outlooks
imply that investors will trade even if they do not disagree about the current value of fundamentals.
Also, we find that while the absolute level of return volatility is driven by long-run risk, the variation
and persistence of volatility (i.e., volatility clustering) is driven by disagreement. Compared to previous
studies that consider model uncertainty with a representative agent or those that study heterogeneous
beliefs with no model disagreement, our paper offers a theoretical foundation for the GARCH-like
behavior of stock returns.


Daniel Andrei                                        Michael Hasler
UCLA                                                 105 St. George Street
ddandrei@gmail.com                                   Toronto, ON
                                                     M5S 1E6
Bruce Carlin                                         Michael.Hasler@rotman.utoronto.ca
Anderson Graduate School of Management
UCLA
110 Westwood Plaza, Suite C413
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
and NBER
bruce.carlin@anderson.ucla.edu
1       Introduction
The field of finance is currently grappling with the fact that there are limits to applying the
standard Bayesian paradigm to asset pricing. Specifically, in a standard Bayesian framework,
beliefs are updated with a particular model in mind. However, as noted by Hansen and
Sargent (2007), many economic models cannot be trusted completely, thereby introducing
the notion of model uncertainty. Theoretically, though, as long as the potential set of models
that all agents in an economy consider is the same ex ante, the Bayesian framework can
still apply because agents can update their beliefs about which model explains the economy.
However, if the agents consider different sets of models or they adhere to different paradigms,
then disagreement will persist regarding which model is best to describe the world or predict
the future. It is this notion of model disagreement that we focus on in this paper and
characterize its effects on asset prices, return volatility, and trade in the market.
     Empirically, model disagreement appears to be important. For example, in a recent pa-
per by Carlin, Longstaff, and Matoba (2013), the authors study the effects of disagreement
about prepayment speed forecasts in the mortgage-backed securities market on risk premia,
volatility, and trading volume. Indeed, the prepayment models that traders use are often
proprietary and differ from each other, while the inputs to these models are publicly observ-
able (e.g., unemployment, interest rates, inflation). In that paper, the authors show that
disagreement is associated with a positive risk premium and is the primary channel through
which return volatility impacts trading volume.
     In this paper, we analyze a continuous-time framework in which investors exhibit model
disagreement and study how this affects the dynamics of asset prices and trading volume.
In our setup, two investors have homogenous preferences and equal access to information,
but disagree about the length of the business cycle. Each investor knows that the expected
dividend growth rate mean-reverts, but uses a different parameter that governs the rate
at which this fundamental returns to its long-term mean. The disagreement is commonly
known, but each agent adheres to his own model when deciding whether to trade.1
     Using disagreement about the length of the business cycle is natural and plausible. For
example, Massa and Simonov (2005) show that forecasters strongly disagree on recession
probabilities, which implies that they have different beliefs regarding the duration of re-
cessionary and expansionary phases. The origin of this disagreement may arise from many
sources. Indeed, there still remains much debate regarding the validity of long-run risk
models (e.g., Beeler and Campbell (2012); Bansal, Kiku, and Yaron (2012)). Additionally,
in practice agents might use different time-series to estimate the mean-reversion parameter
    1
    This form of disagreement arises if agents are uncertain about the interpretation of public information,
even after observing infinitely many signals (Acemoglu, Bimpikis, and Ozdaglar, 2010).



                                                     2
(e.g., use consumption versus production data). Likewise, their estimation methods may
differ (e.g., fitting the model to past analyst forecast data versus a moving-average of output
growth versus performing maximum-likelihood Kalman filter estimation). Finally, as Yu
(2012) documents, least-squares and maximum-likelihood estimators of the mean-reversion
speed of a continuous-time process are significantly biased. Some investors might be aware
of the existence of this bias and would adjust their estimation accordingly, whereas other
investors might ignore it.2
    In our equilibrium model, two distinct quantities turn out to be important determinants
of asset prices and trade in the market. The first is the disagreement over fundamentals,
which is the instantaneous difference in beliefs about the expected growth rate in the econ-
omy. The second is the difference in economic outlooks, which affects expectations of future
economic variables and takes into account how both agents will disagree over fundamentals
in the future. The differences in economic outlooks at all horizons into the future are dic-
tated by the term structure of disagreement. Interestingly, different outlooks amplify return
volatility and trading volume, even when the agents agree about the current fundamentals.
To show this, we perform a numerical analysis that compares an economy populated by a
representative agent to that populated by two agents with model disagreement. Both set-
tings are otherwise observationally equivalent in terms of their average expected growth rate
and average uncertainty. Additionally, we set the disagreement over fundamentals to zero.
We show that the volatility with model disagreement is higher than what an observationally
equivalent representative agent economy generates. Also, while there is no trade in the rep-
resentative agent economy, as the difference in economic outlook increases, trading volume
follows suit. These results imply that model disagreement not only amplifies volatility, but
also provides an important mechanism by which uncertainty affects trade.
    Also in the equilibrium of our model, we show that while the absolute level of volatility
is driven primarily by long-run risk, the variation and persistence of volatility (i.e., volatility
clustering) is driven by disagreement. Disagreement is persistent and increases the volatility
of the risk-adjusted discount factor and consequently also the volatility of stock returns.3
Persistent transmission from investors beliefs to stock market volatility via disagreement
causes excess volatility, which is time-varying and persistent. We disentangle the impact of
disagreement from the impact generated by the other driving forces by decomposing stock
return volatility. We show that, indeed, disagreement is the main driving force of persistent
   2
     We further justify the assumption of different parameters in Appendix A.1 by performing a simulation
exercise in which we let the agents estimate the mean-reversion parameter with different methods. We show
that the difference between the estimated parameters is typically substantial, even though we perform 1,000
simulations of economies of length of 50 years at quarterly frequency.
   3
     Persistent disagreement is consistent with empirical findings by Patton and Timmermann (2010) and
Andrade, Crump, Eusepi, and Moench (2014).



                                                    3
fluctuations in stock market volatility, whereas the level of the volatility is mainly driven by
long-run risk, as the long-run risk literature (Bansal and Yaron, 2004) suggests.4
    Our results help to explain three well-known characteristics about financial market volatil-
ity. First, volatility systematically exceeds that justified by fundamentals (Shiller, 1981;
LeRoy and Porter, 1981). Indeed, we show that model disagreement amplifies volatility,
over and above the usual effect of uncertainty. Second, volatility is time-varying (Schwert,
1989; Mele, 2008). This arises naturally out of our model because disagreement is mean-
reverting. Last, volatility is persistent (Engle, 1982; Bollerslev, 1986; Nelson, 1991), occur-
ring in clusters. This persistence (or predictability) has been described extensively in the
empirical literature, but there is a paucity of theoretical explanations. We show that model
disagreement generates a new channel of persistence transmission from investors beliefs to
stock market volatility and we fit a GARCH model on simulated stock returns to show that
volatility is indeed persistent. Our paper proposes therefore a theoretical foundation for the
GARCH-like behavior of stock returns.
    Finally, we conclude the paper with a survival analysis. Indeed, in any model with
heterogeneous agents, whether all types survive in the long-run is a reasonable concern.
To address this, we perform simulations and show that all agents in our economy with
model disagreement survive for long periods of time, consistent with previous findings in
the literature (Yan, 2008). Based on this, we posit that model disagreement can have long-
lasting effects on asset prices without eliminating any players from the marketplace, which
likely makes our analysis economically important.
    Our approach contrasts with previous work and thus adds to the previous finance lit-
erature. As already mentioned, Hansen and Sargent (2007) studies model misspecification
and model uncertainty, but does so for a single investor.5 In contrast, our study investigates
the consequence of disagreement about models in an economy with different investors. We
assume that investors disagree about the model governing the economy. Certainly, there are
many other forms of disagreement; in particular, several papers feature a setting in which
investors agree on the model governing the economy but disagree on the information that
they receive (see, e.g., Scheinkman and Xiong 2003, Dumas, Kurshev, and Uppal 2009, or
Xiong and Yan 2010). These models are able to generate excess volatility but they do not
identify the cause of persistent fluctuations in volatility.
   4
     We define long-run risk here as the risk associated to a persistent expected dividend growth rate only.
In Bansal and Yaron (2004) long-run risk captures the risk associated to a persistent expected dividend
growth rate, a persistent dividend growth volatility, and a persistent expected dividend growth volatility.
In contrast, we do not assume that any fundamental variable features stochastic volatility. Instead, stock
return volatility becomes stochastic in equilibrium exactly because agents disagree about the magnitude of
long-run risk. We thus argue that long-run risk per se is not a cause of fluctuations in volatility, whereas
disagreement about long-run risk endogenously gives rise to such fluctuations.
   5
     See also Uppal and Wang (2003), Maenhout (2004), Liu, Pan, and Wang (2005), and Drechsler (2013).


                                                     4
    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the model and its
solution. Section 3 explores how model disagreement affects volatility and trading volume.
Section 4 addresses the survival of investors. Section 5 concludes. All derivations and
computational details are in Appendix A.


2    Model Disagreement
Consider a pure exchange economy defined over a continuous time horizon [0, ∞), in which
a single consumption good serves as the numéraire. The underlying uncertainty of the
economy is characterized by a 2-dimensional Brownian motion W = {Wt : t > 0}, defined
on the filtered probability space (Ω, F, P). The aggregate endowment of consumption is
assumed to be positive and to follow the process:

                                 dδt
                                     = ft dt + σδ dWtδ                                      (1)
                                 δt
                                 dft = λ(f − ft )dt + σf dWtf ,                             (2)

where W δ and W f are two independent Brownian motions under the objective probability
measure P. The expected consumption growth rate f , henceforth called the fundamental, is
unobservable and mean-reverts to its long-term mean f¯ at the speed λ. The parameters σδ
and σf are the volatilities of the consumption growth and of the fundamental.
    There is a single risky asset (the stock), defined as the claim to the aggregate consumption
stream over time. The total number of outstanding shares is unity. In addition, there is also
a risk-free bond, available in zero-net supply.
    The economy is populated by two agents, A and B. Each agent is initially endowed with
equal shares of the stock and zero bonds, can invest in these two assets, and derives utility
from consumption over his or her lifetime. Each agent chooses a consumption-trading policy
to maximize his or her expected lifetime utility:
                                                 ∞
                                                               c1−α
                                            Z                        
                                        i                −ρt    it
                                 Ui = E              e              dt ,                    (3)
                                             0                 1−α

where ρ > 0 is the time discount rate, α > 0 is the relative risk aversion coefficient, and
cit denotes the consumption of agent i ∈ {A, B} at time t. The expectation in (3) depends
on agent i’s perception of future economic conditions. Agents value consumption streams
using the same preferences with identical risk aversion and time discount rate but, as we will
describe below, have heterogeneous beliefs.




                                                     5
2.1     Learning and Disagreement
The agents commonly observe the process δ, but have incomplete information and heteroge-
neous beliefs about the dynamics of the fundamental f . Specifically, the agents agree that
the fundamental mean-reverts but disagree on the value of the mean-reversion parameter λ.
As such, they have different perceptions about the length of the business cycle.
   Agent A’s perception of the aggregate endowment and the fundamental is

                                    dδt                  δ
                                        = fAt dt + σδ dWAt                                                  (4)
                                     δt
                                   dfAt = λA f¯ − fAt dt + σf dWAt
                                                                f
                                                       
                                                                   ,                                        (5)

where WAδ and WAf are two independent Brownian motions under agent A’s probability
measure PA . On the other hand, agent B believes that

                                    dδt                  δ
                                        = fBt dt + σδ dWBt                                                  (6)
                                     δt
                                   dfBt = λB f¯ − fBt dt + σf dWBt
                                                                f
                                                       
                                                                   ,                                        (7)

where WBδ and WBf are two independent Brownian motions under agent B’s probability
measure PB . Both agents agree on the long-term mean of the fundamental f¯ and on the
volatility of the fundamental σf .6
    Neither agent uses the right parameter λ. Instead, the true parameter λ is assumed to
lie somewhere in between the parameters perceived by the agents. As such, there are 3
probability measures: the objective probability measure P and the two probability measures
PA and PB as perceived by agents A and B.
    The agents both observe the aggregate endowment process δ and use it to estimate
the fundamental f under their respective probability measures.7 Since they use different
models, they have different estimates of f . Define fbA and fbB as each agent’s estimate of the
unobservable fundamental f :

                                     fbit ≡ Eit [fit ] ,   for i ∈ {A, B},                                  (8)
   6
     We have considered extensions of the model where agents have heterogeneous parameters f¯ and σf , with
similar results. The parameter bearing the main implications is the mean-reversion speed λ and thus we
choose to focus on heterogeneity about it and to isolate our results from other sources of belief heterogeneity.
   7
     We assume that the only public information available is the history of the aggregate endowment process
δ. The model can also accommodate public news informative about the fundamental, but here we chose
not to obscure the model’s implications and we abstract away from additional public news. The effects of
heterogeneous beliefs about public news are well-understood (see, e.g., Scheinkman and Xiong (2003) or
Dumas et al. (2009) among others).




                                                           6
which are computed using standard Bayesian updating techniques. Learning is implemented
via Kalman filtering and yields8
                                                γi c δ
                         dfbit = λi f¯ − fbit dt + dW it ,          for i ∈ {A, B},                     (9)
                                                  σδ

where γi denotes the posterior variance perceived by agent i and Wciδ represents the normal-
ized innovation process of the dividend under agent i’s probability measure
                                                                     
                                       cδ       1         dδt
                                      dW it   =               − fit dt .
                                                                b                                      (10)
                                                σδ        δt

The process in Equation (10) has a simple interpretation. Agent i observes a realized growth
of dδt /δt and has an expected growth of fbit dt. The difference between the realized and the
expected growth, normalized by the standard deviation σδ , represents the surprise or the
innovation perceived by agent i.
    The posterior variance γi (i.e., Bayesian uncertainty) reflects incomplete knowledge of
the true expected growth rate. It is defined by9
                                        s                      
                                                      σf2
                  γi ≡ Varit [fit ] = σδ2    λ2i +         − λi  > 0,    for i ∈ {A, B} .            (11)
                                                      σδ2

Equation (11) shows how γi depends on the initial parameters. The posterior variance
increases with the volatility of the fundamental σf and with the volatility of the aggregate
endowment σδ , and decreases with the mean-reversion parameter λi . Intuitively, if λi is small
then agent i believes the process f to be persistent and thus the perceived uncertainty in the
estimation is large. Since agents A and B use different mean-reversion parameters, it follows
that their individual posterior variances are different, that is, one of the agents will perceive
a more precise estimate of the expected growth rate. Therefore, one of the agents appears
“overconfident” with respect to the other agent, although overconfidence here does not arise
from misinterpretation of public signals as in Scheinkman and Xiong (2003) or Dumas et al.
(2009), but from different underlying models.
    The innovation processes W c δ and Wc δ are Brownian motions under PA and PB , respec-
                                 A        B
   8
     See Theorem 12.7 in Liptser and Shiryaev (2001) and Appendix A.2 for computational details.
   9
     As in Scheinkman and Xiong (2003) or Dumas et al. (2009), we assume that the posterior variance
has already converged to a constant. The convergence arises because investors have Gaussian priors and
all variables are normally distributed. This generates a deterministic path for the posterior variance and a
quick convergence (at an exponential rate) to a steady-state value.




                                                       7
tively. They are such that agent i has the following system in mind

                         dδt                    cδ
                               = fbit dt + σδ dW   it                                      (12)
                          δt
                                                      γi c δ
                         dfbit = λi (f¯ − fbit )dt + dW   it ,   i ∈ {A, B}.               (13)
                                                      σδ

A few points are worth mentioning. First, although the economy is governed by two Brownian
motions under the objective probability measure P (as shown in (1)-(2)), there is only one
Brownian motion under each agent’s probability measure Pi . This arises because there is
only one observable state variable, the aggregate endowment δ. Second, the instantaneous
variance of the observable process δ is the same for both agents, which is not the case for
the instantaneous variance of the filter fbi . Because of the “overconfidence” effect induced by
different parameters λ, one of the agents will perceive a more volatile filter than the other.
    Furthermore, agreeing to disagree implies that each agent knows how the other agent
perceives the economy and that they are aware that their different perceptions will generate
disagreement—although they observe the same process δ. This important feature (that the
aggregate endowment process is observable and thus it should be the same for both agents)
provides the link between the two probability measures PA and PB . Writing the aggregate
consumption process (12) for both agents and restricting the dynamics to be equal provides a
relationship between the innovation processes W   c δ and Wc δ (technically, a change of measure
                                                    A        B
        A     B
from P to P ):

                                 δ      δ   1 b         
                              dW
                               cAt = dW
                                      cBt +    fBt − fbAt dt.                              (14)
                                            σδ

      Equation (14) shows how one can convert agent A’s perception of the innovation process
cδ
W      to agent B’s perception Wc δ . The change of measure consists of adding the drift term
 A                                B
on the right hand side of (14). For example, suppose that agent A has an estimate of the
expected growth rate of fbAt = 1%, whereas agent B’s estimate is fbBt = 3%. Assume that
the realized growth rate (observed by both agents) turns out to be dδt /δt = 2%. It follows
that agent B was optimistic and dW    c δ = −0.01/σδ , whereas agent A was pessimistic and
                                        Bt
      δ
dWAt = 0.01/σδ .
  c
      The extra drift term in Equation (14) comprises the difference between each agent’s
estimates of the growth rate (fbBt − fbAt ) or the disagreement, which we denote hereafter by
gbt . We can now use this relationship to compute the dynamics of gbt , under one of the agent’s
probability measure, say PB .

Proposition 1. (Evolution of Disagreement) Under the probability measure PB , the dynam-



                                                   8
ics of disagreement are given by
                                                                   
                                                             γA               γB − γA c δ
        gt = dfbBt − dfbAt = (λA − λB )(fbBt − f¯) −
       db                                                     2
                                                                + λA gbt dt +        dWBt .            (15)
                                                             σδ                  σδ

Proof. See Appendix A.3


    Proposition 1 characterizes the dynamics of disagreement10 , which yields several proper-
ties that make it different from previous models of overconfidence that have been studied in
the literature. First, if one of the agents believes in long-run risk, disagreement is persistent.
Second, if agents have different degrees of precision in their estimates (which happens to be
the case when they use different parameters λ), disagreement is stochastic. Third, because
its long-term drift is stochastic, disagreement will never converge to a constant but will
always be regenerated—even without a stochastic term.
    To see this, observe that Equation (15) shows that disagreement is mean-reverting around
a stochastic mean, driven by fbB . This arises because λA 6= λB . If agents adhered to the
same models, disagreement would revert to zero, as in Scheinkman and Xiong (2003) and
Dumas et al. (2009). In contrast, in our setup, the mean is driven by fbB because the agents
use different models. In addition, if one of the agents, say agent B, believes in long-run risk,
disagreement becomes persistent because it mean reverts to a persistent fbB .11
    To appreciate the relationship between the agents’ precision and the stochastic nature
of disagreement, let us focus on the stochastic term in the dynamics of disagreement ex-
pressed in Equation (15). This term arises because γA 6= γB . As previously observed in
Equation (11), different posterior variances are a result of different mean-reversion parame-
ters. This generates stochastic shocks in disagreement. Although models of overconfidence
(Scheinkman and Xiong, 2003; Dumas et al., 2009) generate a similar stochastic term, a
key difference arises in our setup. To see this, suppose we shut down this stochastic term.
This can be done by properly adjusting the initial learning problem of the agents.12 Equa-
tion (15) shows that, even though the stochastic term disappears, disagreement will still be
time-varying—and persistent—precisely due to the first term in its drift. In contrast, shut-
ting down the stochastic term in models of overconfidence eliminates disagreement through
prompt convergence toward its long-term mean, zero. This highlights the “structural” form
of disagreement generated by different economic models.
  10
     The dynamics of disagreement in (15) comprise only W   cB but not W cA . Without loss of generality, we
choose to work under agent B’s probability measure PB ; however, by using (14), we could easily switch to
agent A’s probability measure and all the results would still hold.
  11
     Alternatively, if agent A believes the fundamental is persistent, then we can write the dynamics of
disagreement under PA and the same intuition holds.
  12
     Precisely, we can consider that agents have different parameters σf chosen in such a way that γA = γB .
This will shut down the stochastic term in Equation (15).


                                                     9
2.2    Economic Outlook
Now, let us consider how model disagreement affects each agent’s relative economic outlook.
Since each agent perceives the economy under a different probability measure, any random
economic variable X, measurable and adapted to the observation filtration O, now has two
expectations: one under the probability measure PA , and the other under the probability
measure PB . Naturally, they are related to each other by the formula

                                      EA [X] = EB [ηX] ,                                       (16)

where η measures the relative difference in outlook from one agent to the other.

Proposition 2. (Economic Outlook) Under the probability measure PB , the relative differ-
ence in economic outlook satisfies

                               dPA                 R t          2
                                            − 21           1
                                                                      ds− 0t    1    cδ
                                                                         R
                                                             g
                                                          σδ s
                                                                                  g
                                                                                  b dW
                                                                               σδ s
                          ηt ≡            =e        0                                 Bs
                                                                                           ,   (17)
                                                             b
                               dPB   Ot


where Ot is the observation filtration at time t and η obeys the dynamics

                                      dηt    1     cδ .
                                          = − gbt dWBt                                         (18)
                                       ηt    σδ

Proof. See Girsanov’s Theorem.


    On the surface, the expression in (17) is simply the Radon-Nikodym derivative for the
change of measure between the agents’ beliefs. But this has a natural economic interpretation
here as the difference in economic outlook between the agents, since it captures the difference
in expectations that each agent has for the future. This contrasts with previous papers that
use ηt to express differences in the sentiment between agents (Dumas et al., 2009). In
our setting, agents do not have behavioral biases like overconfidence or optimism. Rather,
because they adhere to different models of the world, they rationally have different economic
outlooks, which are not a function of how they are feeling per se (i.e., sentiment).
    One important implication of Proposition 2 is that disagreement over fundamentals and
economic outlook are different entities. In fact, relative outlook is a function of disagreement,
and there may be differences in the agents’ outlook even though they agree today on the
underlying fundamentals of the economy. This is because disagreement in our setup expresses
the difference in beliefs about the expected growth rate today, while outlook enters into the
expectations of future economic variables and thus captures the way in which agents’ beliefs
will differ into the future.


                                                   10
                                    1.04


                                    1.02



                        Ei0 [δu ]
                                      1


                                    0.98
                                           0   1   2      3     4   5   6
                                                        Years
                          Figure 1: Different economic outlooks
   Expectation of future aggregate consumption computed by agent A (solid blue line) and
   agent B (dashed red line). The state variables at time t = 0 are δ0 = 1, fbB0 = −1%, gb0 = 0,
   and η0 = 1. Other parameters for this example are listed in Table 1.


    This is best appreciated by observing that the relative difference in outlook in (17) is a
function of the integral of disagreement that is realized over a particular horizon, not just the
disagreement that takes place at one particular instant. This implies that two agents may
have very different outlooks, even though they currently agree on the fundamentals in the
market. That is, even though their models currently yield the same fundamentals, because
they use different models, they will have different outlooks for the future. This will drive the
results in future sections where we show that trading volume may be substantial even when
there is currently no disagreement about fundamentals: trade will still take place because
the agents take into account that they will disagree in the future (i.e., they have different
economic outlooks).
    To see this more clearly, consider the following example. Suppose that, at t=0, fbA0 =
fbB0 = −1%. Because gb0 = 0, both agents agree that the economy is going through a
recession. Furthermore, assume that agent B believes the economic cycles are longer than
agent A, that is, λB = 0.1 whereas λA = 0.3. Figure 1 shows the different economic outlooks
that agents hold, even though they are in agreement today. It calculates the expectation of
future dividends, Ei0 [δu ]. Agent A (solid blue line) believes that the economy will recover
quickly, in about two years, whereas agent B (dashed red line) believes that it will take six
years for the economy to get back to its initial level of aggregate consumption.
    It is also instructive to observe in (18) that disagreement affects the evolution of relative
outlook. It is the primary driver of fluctuations in ηt . When gbt is large, ηt will also have large
fluctuations. Note, however, that even though dηt is zero when gbt = 0, ηt itself can take any


                                                   11
positive value and thus it still bears implications for the pricing of assets in the economy.


2.3     Equilibrium Pricing
To compute the equilibrium, we first write the optimization problem of each agent under
agent B’s probability measure PB . Since we have decided to work (without loss of gener-
ality) under PB , let us write from now on and for notational ease the following conditional
expectations operator

                                             Et [·] ≡ EB [· | Ot ] .                                       (19)

   The market is complete in equilibrium since under the observation filtration of both
agents there is a single source of risk. Consequently, we can solve the problem using the
martingale approach of Karatzas, Lehoczky, and Shreve (1987) and Cox and Huang (1989).13

Proposition 3. (Equilibrium) Assume that the coefficient of relative risk aversion α is an
integer.14 The equilibrium price of the risky asset at time t is
                                                        Z     ∞
                                               St =               Stu du,                                  (20)
                                                          t


where Stu is

                                             α  
                                                                             "  j       #
                      ξuB
                                          X   α                     α−j      ηu
                                                                                   α
       Stu = Et           δu = e−ρ(u−t) δtα       ω(ηt )j [1 − ω(ηt )]    Et         δu1−α ,               (21)
                      ξtB                   j=0
                                                j                              η t



where ξ B denotes the state-price density perceived by agent B
                                                   "         1/α                  1/α #α
                                                        ηt                       1
                                 ξtB = e−ρt δt−α                       +                       ,           (22)
                                                        κA                      κB

and ω(η) denotes agent A’s share of consumption
                                                                      1/α
                                                                  ηt
                                                                  κA
                                       ω (ηt ) =         1/α                  1/α .                    (23)
                                                     ηt                      1
                                                     κA
                                                                   +        κB

  13
     The martingale approach transforms the dynamic consumption and portfolio choice problem into a
consumption choice problem subject to a static, lifetime budget constraint.
  14
     This assumption greatly simplifies the calculus. To the best of our knowledge, it has been first pointed
out in Yan (2008) and Dumas et al. (2009). If the coefficient of relative risk aversion is real, the computations
can still be performed using Newton’s generalized binomial theorem.



                                                            12
The risk free rate r and the market price of risk θ are
                                                                                    
                                         1   α − 1                    2            2
            rt = ρ + αfbBt − αω(ηt )b
                                    gt +           ω(ηt )(1 − ω(ηt ))b
                                                                     gt − α(α + 1)σδ                   (24)
                                         2 ασδ2
                             gbt
            θt = ασδ + ω(ηt ) .                                                                        (25)
                             σδ

Proof. The proof mainly follows Dumas et al. (2009) and is provided in Appendix A.4. The
moment-generating function in Equation (21) is solved in Appendix A.5.


    Equation (22) shows how the state-price density ξ B depends on the outlook variable η.
Since disagreement gb directly drives the volatility of the state-price density (as shown in
Equation 18), it follows from (22) that persistence in disagreement generates persistence in
the volatility of the state-price density. Therefore, even though in our model agents disagree
about a drift component, it directly impacts the diffusion of the state price density and
consequently all the equilibrium quantities.
    The optimal share of consumption, stated in Equation (23), is exclusively driven by the
outlook variable η. If η tends to infinity, which means that agent A’s perception of the
economy is more likely than agent B’s perception15 , then agent A’s share of consumption
tends to one. Conversely, if η tends to zero, then ω(η) converges to zero. Unsurprisingly,
agent A’s consumption share increases with the likelihood of agent A’s probability measure
being true.
    The single-dividend paying stock, expressed in Equation (21), consists in a weighted sum
of expectations, with weights characterized by the consumption share ω(·), which itself is
driven by the economic outlook η. It is instructive to study first the case α = 1 (log-utility
case), when the price of the single-dividend paying stock becomes

                                   Stu = ω(ηt )SAt
                                                u                  u
                                                   + [1 − ω(ηt )] SBt ,                                (26)

where Situ is the price of the asset in a hypothetical economy populated by only group i
agents. A similar aggregation result is provided by Xiong and Yan (2010). In contrast, when
the coefficient of relative risk aversion is greater than one, the aggregation must be adapted
to accomodate the additional intermediary terms (for j = 1, ..., α − 1) in the summation
(21). In fact, the summation has now α + 1 terms and the price of the single dividend paying
  15
    This can be seen from Equation (18): high η can arise either if (i) agent B is optimistic (b
                                                                                               g > 0) and W
                                                                                                          cB
shocks are negative or if (ii) agent B is pessimistic (b
                                                       g < 0) and W
                                                                  cB shocks are positive.




                                                    13
stock becomes
                                     α  
                                     X  α
                           Stu   =               ω(ηt )j [1 − ω(ηt )]α−j Sjt
                                                                          u
                                                                             ,             (27)
                                     j=0
                                            j

        u
where Sjt is the price of the asset in a hypothetical economy populated by agents with relative
economic outlook η j/α (j = 0 corresponds to agent B and j = α corresponds to agent A).
Since the binomial coefficients in (27) sum up to one, the price is therefore a weighted average
of α + 1 prices arising in representative agent economies populated by agents with relative
economic outlook η j/α . Hence, the outlook variable η not only affects the price valuation
through the expectations in (21), but also through the weights in the summation (27).
    The weighted average form (27) highlights the origin of fluctuations in stock price volatil-
ity and the key role played by disagreement and the relative outlook η. The intuition is as
follows. The relative outlook η fluctuates in the presence of disagreement and causes in-
vestors to speculate against each other. This speculative activity generates fluctuations in
consumption shares: if the hypothetical investor j’s model is confirmed by the data, he or
she will consume more and thus his or her weight in the pricing formula (27) increases.
The price Stu will therefore approach Sjt  u
                                             not only through the expectation but also through
changes in the relative weights. These fluctuations in relative weights further amplify the
impact of disagreement on the stock price.


3    Return Volatility and Trading Volume
We analyze the impact of model disagreement on the stock return volatility and trading vol-
ume. We show that economic outlook plays a pivotal role in generating excess volatility and
trading volume in financial markets. We then turn to the implications of model disagreement
and different economic outlook for the level, fluctuations, and persistence of volatility.

Proposition 4. (Stock Return Volatility) The time t stock return volatility satisfies
                                                                       R∞   ∂Stu
                                     σ(Xt )> ∂X
                                             ∂St
                                                      σ(Xt )>           0 ∂Xt
                                                                                 du
                         |σt | =                t
                                                    =    R∞                           ,    (28)
                                           St                      0
                                                                       Stu du

where σ(xt ) denotes the diffusion of the state vector x = (ζ, fbB , gb, µ). The stock return
diffusion, σt , can be written
                                                                 
                                   Sf γB Sg               γB − γA     −Sµ
                         σt = σδ +        +                         +      gbt ,           (29)
                                    S σ     S                σδ        Sσδ
                                   | {z δ} |               {z     }   | {z   }
                                        ≡σf,lr            ≡σg,lr              ≡σg,i



                                                     14
where Sf , Sg , and Sµ represent partial derivatives of stock price with respect to fbB , gb, and
µ ≡ ln η respectively.

Proof. The diffusion of the state vector (ζ, fbB , gb, µ) is obtained from Equations (12), (13),
(15), and (18). Multiply these with Sζ /S = 1, Sf /S, Sg /S, and Sµ /S to obtain (29).


     Equation (29) shows that the stock return diffusion σ consists in the standard Lucas
(1978) volatility σδ and three terms representing the long-run impact of changes in the esti-
mated fundamental fbB (denoted by σf,lr ), the long-run impact of changes in the disagreement
gb (denoted by σg,lr ), and the instantaneous impact of changes in the disagreement gb (denoted
by σg,i ). Since we assume the volatility of the dividend σδ to be constant, the volatility of
the price-dividend ratio is exclusively driven by these last 3 terms. Therefore, all the fol-
lowing interpretations apply to both the stock return volatility and the volatility of the
price-dividend ratio.


3.1    Economic Outlook, Excess Volatility, and Trading Volume
We use a numerical example to show how model disagreement leads to excess volatility, even
when gb is currently zero. Specifically, we compare an economy populated by a representative
agent to one populated by two agents with model disagreement, when the two settings
are observationally equivalent in terms of their average expected growth rate and average
uncertainty. By shutting down the direct effect of disagreement, this exercise highlights the
key role played by differences in economic outlook in generating excess volatility.
    The calibration is provided in Table 1. These parameters are adapted from Brennan
and Xia (2001) and Dumas et al. (2009), with a few differences. We choose lower values
for the volatility of the fundamental and the dividend growth volatility. For the preference
parameters, we choose a smaller coefficient of relative risk aversion and a positive subjective
discount rate.

               Parameter                                       Symbol     Value
               Relative Risk Aversion                            α          3
               Subjective Discount Rate                           ρ       0.015
               Agent A’s Initial Share of Consumption            ω0        0.5
               Consumption Growth Volatility                     σδ        0.03
               Mean-Reversion Speed of the Fundamental           λA        0.3
                                                                 λB        0.1
               Long-Term Mean of the Fundamental                  f¯      0.025
               Volatility of the Fundamental                     σf       0.015
                                    Table 1: Calibration



                                               15
                                     0.2             λA = λB = 0.1




                        Volatility
                                     0.1



                                      0

                                           γA                       γB
                                                Uncertainty
            Figure 2: Amplification of volatility through model disagreement
   The graph compares stock volatility in two economies that are observationally equivalent
   with respect to (i) uncertainty, (ii) average views of the agents on the growth rate, and
   (iii) disagreement. The only difference between the economies is the existence of model
   disagreement in one of them, case represented by the red dashed line. The blue solid line
   thus depicts an observationally equivalent representative agent economy. Parameters are
   provided in Table 1.


    The mean-reversion speed chosen by agent B is 0.1, corresponding to a business cycle
half-life of approximately seven years. Agent B consequently believes in long-run risk. On
the other hand, agent A, who choses λA = 0.3, believes that the length of the business is
shorter with a perceived half-life of approximately two years. We assume that the true λ lies
somewhere in between λB and λA , and thus neither agent has a superior learning model.
    Suppose now that in one economy a representative agent uses a mean-reversion parameter
λrep ∈ [0.1, 0.3]. Different levels of λrep result in different levels of uncertainty, denoted
hereafter γrep . As such, if the agent believes the growth rate of the economy to be persistent,
uncertainty is higher—due to the long-run risk effect—and thus volatility is higher. This
is reflected by the blue solid line in Figure 2. If the representative agent believes λrep to
be 0.3, then uncertainty takes the value γA . As λrep decreases, uncertainty rises up to γB ,
which is attained for λrep = 0.1. To keep it simple, we assume that the filtered growth rate
of the representative agent is fbrep = f¯. Figure 2 thus confirms the direct, positive, effect of
uncertainty on volatility in a representative agent economy.
    Now, compare this to a second economy where there is model disagreement and assume
that there are equal consumption weights for the agents (i.e., ωA = ωB = 1/2) and equal
expected growth rates (i.e., fbrep = fbA = fbB = f¯). To make the comparison meaningful,
we keep the underlying uncertainty equal to the previous case, so that with λB = 0.1 and
λA ≥ 0.1, uncertainty in the representative agent economy equals the weighted average


                                                16
uncertainty in the heterogeneous agent economy; that is, λA solves

                                          γrep ≡ ωA γA + ωB γB .                                           (30)

We then compute the volatility that arises for all values of λA which solve (30) and with
λB = 0.1 fixed.
    The red dashed line in Figure 2 shows that model disagreement amplifies volatility with
respect to a representative agent economy. This is meaningful because the two economies
are observationally equivalent. Indeed, (i) uncertainty is the same and equals γrep , (ii) the
average views of agents on the growth rate are the same and equal f¯, and (iii) disagreement
is the same and equals gb = 0. The only difference between these economies is the existence
of model disagreement, which presumably is not observable by the econometrician. But
this difference generate excess volatility through different economic outlooks—even if agents
agree today, they hold different economic outlooks about the future.16 Given this, it appears
that, through the different economic outlooks that it generates, model disagreement am-
plifies volatility beyond that observed in an observationally equivalent representative agent
economy.
    Now, we consider how model disagreement affects trading volume in the economy. Trad-
ing volume represents the absolute value of the change in agents’ risky position. Measuring
trading volume is straightforward in discrete time. In continuous time, however, diffusion
processes have infinite variation. We therefore follow Xiong and Yan (2010) and proxy trad-
ing volume with the volatility of agents’ risky position changes.17 For this matter, picking
agent A or agent B gives the same measure of trading volume. In order to be consistent
with what has been done so far, we choose to focus on agent B.
    The number of assets held by agent B, is given by the martingale representation theorem:

                                                         ∂VBt
                                          πB,t St σt =        σ(xt )                                       (31)
                                                          ∂xt

where VBt is the wealth of agent B at time t (provided in Appendix A.4) and xt = (ζ fbB gb µ)
is the state vector of the economy. Equation (31) states that fluctuations in the price of
the risky asset, scaled by the number of assets held by agent B, are perfectly matched to
fluctuations in agent B’s wealth. In other words, the agent’s position in the risky asset is
set in such a way to replicate wealth fluctuations. Naming the term on the right hand side
  16
      Separate calculations show that volatility is further amplified with respect to the dashed red line when
gbt < 0 (i.e., when the long-term agent B is pessimistic) and remains almost unchanged with respect to the
dashed red line when gbt > 0 (i.e., when the long-term agent B is optimistic).
   17
      Trading actually occurs in discrete time and it is thus reasonable to measure changes in position across
small intervals (but finite). On average these changes increase with the volatility of investors’ risky position
changes.


                                                      17
          Economy                                        Parameters      Trading volume
          (1) No model disagreement                λA    = 0.3, λB = 0.3        0
          (2) Moderate model disagreement          λA    = 0.3, λB = 0.2      0.085
          (3) Severe model disagreement            λA    = 0.3, λB = 0.1      0.200
          (4) Moderate model disagreement          λA    = 0.2, λB = 0.1      0.155
          (5) No model disagreement                λA    = 0.1, λB = 0.1        0
                     Table 2: Model disagreement and trading volume


σVB ,t , the position in the risky asset is

                                                       σVB ,t
                                              πB,t =                                      (32)
                                                       St σt

    We are interested in measuring fluctuations in this position. These fluctuations can be
gauged either by simulations, or by simply computing the absolute value of the position’s
diffusion:

                               ∂πB,t      ∂πB,t γB ∂πB,t γB − γA ∂πB,t 1
                 σ (πB,t ) =         σδ +          +            −        gbt              (33)
                                ∂ζt       ∂ fbB σδ   ∂b
                                                      g     σδ    ∂µt σδ

Inspecting (33), the last term shows how disagreement directly moves trading volume. Of
course, it does enter indirectly as well through the partial derivatives, as do the other state
variables.
    By the same train of thought as before, we assume that gb = 0 so we can compare
economies populated by two agents having model disagreement with those populated by
a representative agent. Table 2 describes the five distinct economies we analyze, which
are different with respect to the set of parameters (λA , λB ) considered. Severity of model
disagreement is measured by the distance between the parameters λA and λB . As such, two
of the economies feature moderate model disagreement (economies 2 and 4), one economy
features more severe model disagreement (economy 3), and the last two economies have a
representative agent (economies 1 and 5).
    The last column of Table 2 shows that the level of trading volume increases with the
severity of model disagreement. Clearly, trading volume is zero in the representative agent
cases (economies 1 and 5). In between, agents take on speculative positions against each
other, which increases trading volume. These results also show that investors change their
positions even though disagreement today is zero, i.e., gb = 0. They do so because they know
that their underlying models are different and thus they have different economic outlooks.
Once again, the key variable in generating trading volume is not disagreement per se, but
the relative economic outlook.



                                                  18
3.2     Characteristics of Volatility
We turn now to the analysis of the characteristics of stock return volatility. We highlight the
key role played by the relative outlook variable η in the propagation of disagreement shocks
to volatility shocks. We then show that, while the level of volatility is mostly driven by
long-run risk as in Bansal and Yaron (2004), both the variation and persistence of volatility
are driven by disagreement.

3.2.1   Level and Variation of Volatility

Coming back to Proposition 4, a direct analysis of the stock diffusion formula (29) is obscured
by the presence of the partial derivatives Sf , Sg , and Sµ . These derivatives depend on the
state variables themselves and thus are time-varying. In order to gain more intuition and to
understand which terms drive the level of volatility and which ones drive its fluctuations, we
simulate the last three terms in Equation (29). Simulations are done at weekly frequency
for 100 years. Figure 3 illustrates one simulated path of the stock return diffusion and its
components. The significant driver of changes in stock market volatility is the fourth term
in Equation (29), σg,i , whereas terms representing long-run changes in disagreement, σg,lr ,
and long-run changes in the estimated fundamental, σf,lr , are slightly time-varying but have
less significant impact on the dynamics of volatility.
    The fourth term in Equation (29) is therefore key to understanding the impact of dis-
agreement on stock return volatility. This term consists in the partial derivative of the stock
price with respect to the relative outlook variable η multiplied by the volatility of η, which
itself is directly driven by disagreement (according to 18). Both disagreement and economic
outlook therefore play a role in driving volatility, by the following mechanism. When agents
are in disagreement, they hold different economic outlooks and thus the stock price fluctuates
in order to accommodate speculative trading by both agents. Higher disagreement generates
large fluctuations in economic outlook (according to 18) and thus large changes in the stock
price. One can therefore say that disagreement drives the volatility of stock returns through
changes in the relative economic outlook.
    To disentangle the role played by disagreement from the role played by the relative
economic outlook, we plot in the left panel of Figure 4 the fourth diffusion component σg,i
and the disagreement gb. The correlation coefficient between the two lines in this particular
example yields a value of 0.95. In the right pannel of Figure 4 we plot the distribution of
the correlation between the diffusion term and disagreement for 1,000 simulations and we
find that the coefficient stays mainly between 0.8 and 1. It is therefore disagreement which
drives the fluctuations in σg,i , whereas the relative economic outlook is the primary channel
through which these fluctuations are transmitted to stock market volatility.


                                              19
                                           σg,lr
                          0.05


                             0            σδ

                                                        σg,i
                         −0.05
             Diffusion




                         −0.1
                                                    Stock return diffusion
                         −0.15

                                                          σf,lr
                         −0.2


                                 0   10   20       30      40 50 60          70   80   90   100
                                                           Time (years)
                  Figure 3: Stock return diffusion and its components
   One simulated path (100 years) of the stock return diffusion and its components. Simulations
   are performed at weekly frequency, but lines are plotted at quarterly frequency to avoid
   graph cluttering. The diffusion components σf,lr , σg,lr , and σg,i are defined in Equation
   (29). The calibration is provided in Table 1.


    We examine whether the dynamics illustrated on Figure 3 are particular to one simulation.
To this end, we plot in Figures 5 and 6 the distributions of the averages and variances of
σf,lr , σg,lr , and σg,i . Averages and variances are computed over the length of each simulation
which is chosen to be 100 years at weekly frequency.
    Figure 5 shows that the diffusion components σg,lr and σg,i do not have a significant
impact on the level of volatility. The level of volatility is primarily determined by the fbB -
term defined by σf,lr . It is worth mentioning that the fbB -term is negative because in our
model the precautionary savings effect dominates the substitution effect. Indeed, a positive
shock in the fundamental increases future consumption. Because agents want to smooth
consumption over time, they increase their current consumption and so reduce their current
investment. This tendency to disinvest outweighs the substitution effect (which pushes
investors to invest more) and implies a drop in prices as long as agents are sufficiently
risk averse (α > 1). Hence the stock return diffusion component determined by changes
in the fundamental, σf,lr , is negative. The smaller the mean-reversion speed λB , the more
negative the σf,lr component, and consequently the larger stock return volatility becomes.
The reason is that a small mean-reversion speed implies a significant amount of long-run


                                                               20
       0.05
                                                                                                         0.4
                       gb
               0                                                                                         0.3

                                σg,i                                                                     0.2
  −0.05
                                                                                                         0.1
                            Correlation(ση , gb) = 0.95
    −0.1
                                                                                                         0
                   0   20      40     60       80     100      0       0.2    0.4    0.6     0.8     1
                              Time (years)                              Correlation Coefficient

                  Figure 4: Volatility component σg,i and disagreement gb
   The left panel depicts one 100 years simulation of the volatility component σg,i and the
   associated disagreement gb. Simulations are performed at weekly frequency, but lines are
   plotted at quarterly frequency to avoid graph cluttering. The volatility term σg,i is defined in
   Equation (29). The calibration is provided in Table 1. The right panel shows the distribution
   of the correlation between σg,i and gb. This correlation is computed over an horizon of 100
   years (simulated at weekly frequency), for 1,000 simulations.

               0.3
                        Mean (σf,lr )                                   Mean (σg,i )      Mean (σg,lr )
   Frequency




               0.2


               0.1


                   0
                            −0.15            −0.1              −0.05            0             0.05
            Figure 5: Distribution of the average of the diffusion components
   The average over 1,000 simulations of each of the last three diffusion components in Equation
   (29) is computed over a 100 years horizon, at weekly frequency. The calibration is provided
   in Table 1.


risk and therefore the stock price is very sensitive to movements in the fundamental, as in
Bansal and Yaron (2004).
    We try now to understand which components drive the variability of stock return diffu-
sion. This is shown in Figure 6, which depicts the variances of the diffusion components and
confirms the conclusions drawn from the example depicted in Figure 3. Variations incurred
by the stock return diffusion are almost exclusively generated by variations in the third and


                                                          21
                         Var (σf,lr )              Var (σg,lr )               Var (σg,i )

               0.4
                                        0.3                       0.15
   Frequency



                                        0.2                        0.1
               0.2
                                        0.1                       0.05

                0                          0                         0
                     0   0.0005 0.001          0   0.0005 0.001          0   0.0005 0.001
          Figure 6: Distribution of the variance of the diffusion components
   The variance over 1,000 simulations of each of the last three diffusion components in Equa-
   tion (29) is computed over a 100 years horizon, at weekly frequency. The calibration is
   provided in Table 1.


fourth diffusion terms, σg,lr and σg,i , which are both driven by disagreement. Indeed, varia-
tions in σf,lr are relatively small. We can therefore conclude that the level of the volatility is
mainly driven by the persistence of the expected consumption growth, whereas fluctuations
in volatility are driven by differences of beliefs regarding the persistence of the expected
consumption growth.

3.2.2          Persistence of Volatility

We turn now to the time-varying properties of volatility and address the question whether
the fluctuations in volatility generated by disagreement are persistent. Indeed, stock return
volatility clusters in our model because of the following mechanism. As shown in Proposition
1, disagreement gb mean-reverts to a stochastic mean driven by fbB . Because one of the agents
(in this case agent B) believes the fundamental is persistent, agent B’s estimation of the
fundamental fbB is persistent and so becomes the disagreement. Given that the disagreement
enters the diffusion of state-price density through the outlook variable η (see Proposition
2) and then enters volatility through the last component in Equation (29), stock return
volatility clusters. This mechanism, new to our knowledge, shows how persistence in the
fundamental (a component of the drift) can transmute into the diffusion of stock return and
generate volatility clustering.
    To provide evidence that persistent disagreement indeed implies GARCH-type dynamics,
we simulate 1,000 paths of stock returns over a 100 years horizon at weekly frequency. For
each simulated path we compute the demeaned returns, , by extracting the residuals of the




                                                   22
                                                               0.2
                    0.15
        Frequency                                            0.15

                     0.1
                                                               0.1

                    0.05                                     0.05

                      0                                          0
                           0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05                   0.94      0.95 0.96 0.97 0.98
                              ARCH Parameter β1                           GARCH Parameter β2
               Figure 7: Model implied ARCH and GARCH parameters
   Distribution of the ARCH and GARCH parameters, resulted from 1,000 simulations over
   100 years, at weekly frequency. The calibration is provided in Table 1.


AR(1) regression

                                       rt,t+1 = α0 + α1 rt−1,t + t+1 ,                          (34)

where rt,t+1 stands for the stock return between time t and t + 1. The demeaned returns 
is then fitted to a GARCH(1,1) process defined by

                                       t = σt zt , where zt ∼ N(0, 1)                           (35)
                                      2
                                     σt+1 = β0 + β1 2t + β2 σt2 .                               (36)

    Figure 7 illustrates the distribution of the ARCH parameter β1 and the GARCH parame-
ter β2 . Their associated t-stats range between 6 and 11 for the ARCH parameter and between
150 and 350 for the GARCH parameter. First, the large t-stats suggest that the estimated
parameters are significant. Second, the values of β1 , β2 , and in particular their sum show
that stock return volatility clusters and is close to be integrated. That is, the model implied
volatility clusters because its main driver—the disagreement among agents—is persistent.

3.2.3          Volatility Clustering in Alternative Theoretical Models

We conclude this section with two questions. First, can a single agent framework generate
volatility clustering? Second, if agents’s difference of beliefs is generated by overconfidence
instead of disagreement (Scheinkman and Xiong, 2003; Dumas et al., 2009), can we also
observe volatility clustering?
    To address the first question, we observe that in a single agent model the last two terms

                                                      23
in Equation (29) disappear and volatility depends only on σδ and σf,lr . The analysis above
indicates that this second term does not move significantly. Therefore, without disagreement
there are no significant fluctuations in volatility and thus single agent models have difficulties
in generating volatility clustering.
    Turning now to the second question, Proposition 1 shows that disagreement mean-reverts
around a persistent fbB and thus itself becomes persistent. In contrast, disagreement gener-
ated by overconfidence, as in Dumas et al. (2009), is not easily persistent, even though both
agents would be long-term believers. The reason is that disagreement mean-reverts around
zero with a parameter equal to λ + γ/σδ2 (see Lemma 2 in Dumas et al. 2009). Because of
the second term, this parameter is large under usual calibrations, which is not enough to
generate persistent dynamics.
    On a final note, in Appendix A.6, Table 6, we perform a robustness analysis which
further confirms the role played by disagreement for generating persistence and fluctuations
in volatility. The analysis consists in comparing the properties of the model implied volatility
for different calibrations. Consistent with our theoretical results, we find that strong long-
run risk increases the average level of volatility, while severe disagreement increases both the
variation and the persistence of volatility.


4     Survival
In our model we make the assumption that the fundamental is unobservable. It is conse-
quently reasonable to assume that both investors have different beliefs regarding the dy-
namics of an unobservable process. Furthermore, it would be arbitrary and non-realistic
to assume that one of the two agents has the correct beliefs i.e. the right model in mind.
This raises two questions: what is the true data-generating process and how long do agents
survive given this true data-generating process? This section is devoted to a discussion of
these two questions.
    In order to investigate how long each agent survives, we have to assume a realistic data-
generating process in the sense that it has to be consistent with agents beliefs. Indeed,
although both agents might realistically have wrong beliefs, they agents are not too far from
the truth. Therefore, we assume that the true data-generating process is

                                  dδt
                                      = ft dt + σdWtδ                                        (37)
                                  δt
                                  dft = λ(f¯ − ft )dt + σf dWtf ,                            (38)

where W δ and W f are two independent Brownian motions under the true probability measure


                                                24
                           0.6

                          0.55


            EP [ω(ηT )]
                           0.5

                          0.45

                           0.4
                                 0   100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1,000
                                                Horizon T (years)
                  Figure 8: Expected share of consumption of agent A
   Expectation under the true probability measure P of the consumption share of Agent A,
   ω(ηT ). 10,000 simulations over 1,000 years are performed. The calibration is provided in
   Table 1.


P. The true mean-reversion speed λ is assumed to be the average of agents A and B estimated
mean-reversion speeds. Table 3 provides the values of the true and perceived mean-reversion
speeds as well as their corresponding half-lives. Both agents misperceive the true length of
the business cycle, but one overestimates it whereas the other underestimates it.

                                         Belief        λ Half-Life
                                         Agent A      0.3  2.31
                                         True value   0.2  3.46
                                         Agent B      0.1  6.93
           Table 3: Mean-reversion speed and length of the business cycle


    To investigate the speed at which agent A or agent B disappears from the economy,
we follow Yan (2008) and compute the P-expectation of the consumption share of agent A.
To this end we first simulate the dividend process using the true data-generating process
provided in (37) and (38). Then, we perform each agent’s learning exercise and we compute
the expectation of the consumption share of agent A, ω(ηT ), for T ranging from 0 to 1, 000
years.
    Figure 8 depicts the P-expectation (i.e., under the true probability measure) of the con-
sumption share of agent A over 1,000 years. This expected consumption share slightly
decreases on average. Investors who believe in long-run risk are expected to save more and
thus have a lower survival index (Yan, 2008). Nevertheless, Figure 8 shows that both shares
of consumption remain very close to each other and that both agents survive for more than
1,000 years. This is also consistent with Yan (2008). We conclude therefore that the type of
disagreement considered here is economically important over long horizons.


                                                      25
5    Conclusion
We consider a theoretical framework in which two agents interpret information using different
economic models of the economy. Specifically, in our setup agents disagree on the length of
the business cycle. We analyze the asset pricing implications of such disagreement.
    We first show that the disagreement is strongly persistent, affects the volatility of the
stochastic discount factor and consequently impacts the stock return volatility. Disagreement
generates different expectations of future economic variables, or different economic outlooks,
which further amplify the return volatility and the trading volume. We decompose the
dynamics of volatility and show that disagreement is the main driver of volatility fluctuations,
while the absolute level of volatility is driven primarily by long-run risk. We thus provide a
theoretical foundation of the GARCH-like behavior of stock returns.
    Several questions are the subject of our ongoing research. First, we assume that investors
do not change their economic models. It is important to understand how our results would
change if agents were to perform the full learning exercise. Our expectation is that investors’
estimates should end up close to the true model only after a very long time. Indeed, an
accurate estimator of the mean-reversion speed of a relatively persistent process requires
a large sample of data. In addition, the large set of plausible models governing the real
economy makes it virtually impossible for the agents to end up in agreement.
    The learning uncertainty is by construction constant in our setup. This is because we do
not consider here any additional news (newspapers, quarterly reports, economic data, and so
on). In a setting with additional news and in which investors’ attention to news is fluctuating,
uncertainty will fluctuate. Our conjecture is that spikes in attention will exacerbate the
disagreement among agents, further amplifying the effects on volatility described in this
paper. It is therefore important to study the synergistic relationships between attention,
uncertainty, and disagreement and their impact on asset prices.
    Finally, our model generates a term structure of disagreement whose shape is governed by
the difference between the mean-reversion parameters. Empirically observed term structures
of disagreement (as in Patton and Timmermann (2010) or Andrade et al. (2014)) can there-
fore help estimating the magnitude of the difference between these parameters. The term
structure of disagreement should also have implications on the pricing of firms with different
characteristics and probably explain well-known anomalies such as the value premium.




                                              26
A      Appendix
A.1      Kalman/Maximum-Likelihood vs. Particle Filtering
Let us assume that the true data-generating process satisfies
                                       dδt
                                           = ft dt + σδ dWtδ                                             (39)
                                       δt
                                       dft = λ(f¯ − ft )dt + σf dW f ,
                                                                    t                                    (40)

where W δ and W f are independent Brownian motions. The true parameters defining the dynamics
of the dividend δ and the fundamental f are provided in Table 4.

                 Parameter                                               Symbol     Value
                 Dividend Growth Volatility                                σδ        0.03
                 Mean-Reversion Speed of the Fundamental                   λ         0.2
                 Long-Term Mean of the Fundamental                         f¯       0.025
                 Volatility of the Fundamental                             σf       0.015
                                      Table 4: True parameters

   We simulate dividend data at quarterly frequency over a 50-year horizon18 using the true data-
generating process defined in Equations (39) and (40) and the parameters provided in Table 4.
Each agent uses the quarterly dividend data to estimate the following discrete-time model
                                                             √
                                                 
                                δt+∆            1 2
                          log          = ft − σδ ∆ + σδ ∆1,t+∆                              (41)
                                  δt            2
                                  ft+∆ = Af ft + Bf + Cf 2,t+∆ ,                            (42)
                                              σf √
where Af = e−λ∆ , Bf = f¯ 1 − e−λ∆ , Cf = √2λ
                                     
                                                   1 − e−2λ∆ , and 1 , 2 are independent Gaussian
random variables with mean 0 and variance 1.
    Although agents have the same information at hand, we assume that they use different econo-
metrics techniques to perform their estimation exercise. Agent A estimates the unobservable fun-
damental and the parameters by applying the Kalman filter together with Maximum-Likelihood
(Hamilton, 1994), while agent B applies the particle filtering algorithm presented in Liu and West
(2001).19
    Table 5 shows that agent A and B obtain parameter estimates of the dividend volatility σδ , the
long-term mean of the fundamental f¯, and the volatility of the fundamental σf that are relatively
close to each other. Their estimation of the mean-reversion speed λ, however, differs significantly
from one another. Indeed, the absolute difference between the mean-reversion speed estimated by
agent A and that estimated by agent B is worth 0.1742. Relative to the true value of the parameter,
the difference in the estimated mean-reversion speeds is about 87%, whereas it is less than 25%
for all other parameters. Therefore, this calibration exercise motivates, first, our assumption to
consider heterogeneity in mean-reversion speeds only and, second, our choice to consider mean-
reversion speeds such that |λA − λB | = 0.2.
  18
      The frequency and horizon considered match those of the Real GDP growth time-series available on the
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia’s website.
   19
      We would like to thank Arthur Korteweg and Michael Rockinger for providing us with various particle
filtering codes. The particle filtering algorithm of Liu and West (2001) estimates, at each point in time, the
unobservable fundamental and the parameters of the model.


                                                     27
             Definition                                                    Symbol         Value
             Absolute Difference in
             Dividend Growth Volatility                                   |σAδ − σBδ |    0.0022
             Absolute Difference in
             Mean-Reversion Speed of the Fundamental                      |λA − λB |      0.1742
             Absolute Difference in
             Long-Term Mean of the Fundamental                             |f¯A − f¯B |   0.0056
             Absolute Difference in
             Volatility of the Fundamental                                |σAf − σBf |    0.0032
             Relative Difference in
                                                                           |σAδ −σBδ |
             Dividend Growth Volatility                                        σδ
                                                                                          0.0749
             Relative Difference in
                                                                            |λA −λB |
             Mean-Reversion Speed of the Fundamental                            λ
                                                                                          0.8683
             Relative Difference in
                                                                            |f¯A −f¯B |
             Long-Term Mean of the Fundamental                                   f¯
                                                                                          0.2254
             Relative Difference in
                                                                           |σAf −σBf |
             Volatility of the Fundamental                                     σf
                                                                                          0.2105
   Table 5: Estimated parameters: maximum-likelihood vs. particle filter
   Agent A applies the Kalman-filter together with Maximum-Likelihood, while agent B applies
   the particle filter algorithm of Liu and West (2001). The parameter values σBδ , λB , f¯B ,
   and σBf are those obtained at the terminal time. Numbers reported above are medians
   computed over 1,000 simulations.


A.2     Filtering Problem
Agent A’s learning problem
Following the notations of Liptser and Shiryaev (2001), the observable process is

                           dδt                           f         δ
                               = (A0 + A1 fAt )dt + B1 dWAt + B2 dWAt                              (43)
                           δt
                                                          f         δ
                               = (0 + 1 · fAt )dt + 0 · dWAt + σδ dWAt .                           (44)

The unobservable process fA satisfies
                                                       f          δ
                        dfAt = (a0 + a1 fAt )dt + b1 dWAt + b2 dWAt                                (45)
                                                               f
                             = (λA f¯ + (−λA )fAt )dt + σf dWAt          δ
                                                                 + 0 · dWAt .                      (46)

Thus,

                                     bob = b1 b01 + b2 b02 = σf2                                   (47)
                                    BoB = B1 B10 + B2 B20 = σδ2                                    (48)
                                     boB =   b1 B10   +   b2 B20   = 0.                            (49)




                                                  28
                                          A
The estimated process defined by fbAt = EP (fAt |Ot ) has dynamics

                                                                      dδt
             dfbAt = (a0 + a1 fbAt )dt + (boB + γAt A01 )(BoB)−1 (        − (A0 + A1 fbAt )dt),   (50)
                                                                      δt
where the posterior variance γAt solves the ODE

                γ̇At = a1 γAt + γAt a01 + bob − (boB + γAt A01 )(BoB)−1 (boB + γAt A01 )0 .       (51)

Assuming that we are at the steady-state yields

                 a1 γAt + γAt a01 + bob − (boB + γAt A01 )(BoB)−1 (boB + γAt A01 )0 = 0.          (52)

Consequently,
                                                                 γA c δ
                                   dfbAt = λA (f¯ − fbAt )dt +      dWAt                          (53)
                                                                 σδ
where
                                            q
                                      γA =    σδ2 (σδ2 λ2A + σf2 ) − λA σδ2                       (54)
                                                                
                                      δ     1 dδt
                                   dW
                                    cAt   =             − fbAt dt .                               (55)
                                            σδ δ t

Agent B’s learning problem
The estimated process is defined by fbBt = EB (fBt |Ot ). Doing the same computations as before
yields
                                                               γB c δ
                                   dfbBt = λB (f¯ − fbBt )dt +    dWBt ,                          (56)
                                                               σδ
where
                                         q
                                     γB = σδ2 (σδ2 λ2B + σf2 ) − λB σδ2                           (57)
                                                            
                                      δ  1    dδ t
                                   dW
                                    c =
                                      Bt            − fBt dt .
                                                       b                                          (58)
                                         σδ δt

A.3     Proof of Proposition 1
The dynamics of fbA under the measure PB are written
                                                    γA                    γA c δ
                       dfbAt = λA (f¯ − fbAt )dt + 2 (fbBt − fbAt )dt +      dWBt
                                                    σδ                    σδ
                                                                 γA          γA c δ
                             = λA f¯dt + λA gbt dt − λA fbBt dt + 2 gbt dt +     dWBt             (59)
                                                                 σδ           σδ

because by Girsanov’s Theorem

                                           δ      δ  1
                                        dW
                                         cAt = dW
                                                cBt + gbt dt.                                     (60)
                                                     σδ




                                                     29
Consequently, the dynamics of gb satisfy

                  gt ≡ dfbBt − dfbAt
                 db                                                                                (61)
                                                    
                                        ¯         γA          γB − γA c δ
                     = (λA − λB )(fBt − f ) − λA + 2 gbt dt +
                                     b                               dWBt .                        (62)
                                                  σδ             σδ

A.4      Proof of Proposition 3
The optimization problem for agent B is
                                                   "Z             #
                                                        ∞   1−α
                                                           c
                                        max E        e−ρt Bt dt                                    (63)
                                         cBt      0        1−α
                                          Z ∞           
                                   s.t. E      ξtB cBt dt ≤ xB0 ,                                  (64)
                                               0

where ξ B denotes the state-price density perceived by agent B and xB0 is his or her initial wealth.
The problem for agent A (under the probability measure PB ) is
                                             "Z                   #
                                                  ∞         1−α
                                                           c
                                       max E        ηt e−ρt At dt                              (65)
                                        cAt     0          1−α
                                         Z ∞           
                                               B
                                  s.t. E      ξt cAt dt ≤ xA0 .                                (66)
                                           0

Note how the change of measure enters the objective function of agent A, but that the expectation
in the budget constraint (66) does not need to be adjusted. This is because the state-price density
inside the expectation, ξ B , is the one perceived by agent B.20
    The first-order conditions are
                                                        − 1
                                        cBt = κB eρt ξ B α                                         (67)
                                                          1
                                                κA ρt B − α
                                              
                                        cAt =      e ξ       ,                                     (68)
                                                ηt

where κA and κB are the Lagrange multipliers associated with the budget constraints of agents A
and B. Summing up the agents’ optimal consumption policies and imposing market clearing, i.e.,
cAt + cBt = δt , yields the state-price density perceived by agent B:
                                                " 
                                                      1/α    1/α #α
                                                  η t          1
                                ξtB = e−ρt δt−α           +                                (69)
                                                  κA          κB

   Substituting the state-price density ξ B in the optimal consumption policies yields the following
consumption sharing rules

                                         cAt = ω (ηt ) δt                                          (70)
                                         cBt = [1 − ω (ηt )] δt ,                                  (71)
  20                                    A
   Alternatively, we could
                         Ahave
                              defined
                                     ξA , the state-price
                                                          density under agent A’s probability measure.
Then, we would have E ξ 1x = E ηξ 1x = EB ξ B 1x for any event x. This implies that ξ B = ηξ A .
                      A           B




                                                        30
where ω(η) denotes agent A’s share of consumption, which satisfies
                                                                     1/α
                                                                 ηt
                                                                 κA
                                    ω (ηt ) =              1/α                 1/α .            (72)
                                                       ηt                     1
                                                       κA           +        κB

    We assume, as in Yan (2008) and Dumas et al. (2009), that the relative risk aversion α is an
integer. The state-price density at time T satisfies
                                         1/α  1/α !α
                         B    −ρT −α       1           ηT
                       ξT = e     δT               +                                        (73)
                                          κB           κA
                                           α           j
                              −ρT −α 1         α     ηT κB α
                                         X
                           =e     δT                                                        (74)
                                      κB       j      κA
                                               j=0
                                             α   j     j
                                           1 X α   1 α ηt κB α αj
                         =   e−ρT δT−α                         ηT                                   (75)
                                          κB    j  ηt    κA
                                               j=0
                                             α   j             j j
                                           1 X α   1 α     ω(ηt )
                         =   e−ρT δT−α                                ηTα ,                         (76)
                                          κB    j  ηt    1 − ω(ηt )
                                               j=0

where the last equality comes from the fact that
                                                                         1/α
                                                                     ηt
                                                                     κA
                                       ω(ηt ) =              1/α   1/α                          (77)
                                                         1
                                                        κB         + κηAt
                                                                  1/α
                                                                      1
                                                                     κB
                                   1 − ω(ηt ) =              1/α                   1/α          (78)
                                                         1                       ηt
                                                        κB               +       κA

and consequently
                                                     1
                                              ηt κB     α          ω(ηt )
                                                            =               .                       (79)
                                               κA                1 − ω(ηt )

Rewriting Equation (78) yields
                                  1/α               1/α                            α
                               1                  ηt                         1                1
                                          +                     =                               .   (80)
                              κB                  κA                     1 − ω(ηt )          κB




                                                            31
Thus the single-dividend paying stock price satisfies
                       B 
             T          ξ
           St = Et TB δT                                                                         (81)
                        ξt
                                                              j                 j j 
                                   −ρT δ −α   1 P α       α
                                                                 1   α      ω(ηt )
               (76) and (80)    e       T κB     j=0 j          ηt        1−ω(ηt )   ηTα 
                     =       Et                                 α                     δT     (82)
                                                          1           1 −α
                                              e−ρt 1−ω(η
                                                                                           
                                                             t)
                                                                        δ
                                                                     κB t
                                              j                 j j           
                                  Pα      α
                                               1  α      ω(η t )
                       −ρ(T −t) j=0 j ηt                1−ω(ηt )      ηTα
                                                                            δT1−α 
                                                                                   
               = Et e                               α                                        (83)
                                                1
                                                          δt−α
                                                                                   
                                             1−ω(ηt )

                                                        α   j             j  j      
                       −ρ(T −t)
                                                        X  α  1 α     ω(ηt )         α 1−α
                  =e              (1 −   ω(ηt ))α δtα                            Et ηT δT    .   (84)
                                                           j  ηt    1 − ω(ηt )
                                                        j=0

Finally the stock price is given by
                                                               Z       ∞
                                                        St =               Stu du.               (85)
                                                                   t

    The wealth of agent B at time t satisfies
                                                                       ∞
                                                                           ξuB
                                                              Z                     
                                              VBt = Et                         cBu du .          (86)
                                                               t           ξtB

    The definitions of agent B’s consumption, cB , the state-price density, ξ B , and the share of
consumption, ω(η), imply that
                                 
                                          1/α    1/α α                           
                                      1            ηu
      B                            κB       + κA
       ξ              −ρ(u−t)
   Et uB cBu = Et                                                              1−α 
                                                                                    
                       e                                 α     (1 − ω(η u ))δu               (87)
       ξt                            1/α        1/α                            
                                   1            ηt            −α
                                  κB        + κA             δt
                                                                                             
                                                     1/α " 1/α  1/α #α−1
                                                       1             1             ηu
                = Et e−ρ(u−t) κB (1 − ω(ηt ))α δtα                           +         δu1−α  .
                                                      κB            κB             κA
                                                                                                 (88)




                                                                   32
Since the relative risk aversion α is an integer we have
   "        1/α                1/α #α−1          1/α      "             #α−1
                                                                 ηu κB 1/α
                                                                     
         1                  ηu                   1                                  1
                    +                                       =              +1
        κB                  κA                  κB                κA               κB
                                                                 α−1 
                                                                               ηu κB j/α
                                                                                  
                                                               1 X α−1
                                                            =
                                                              κB        j       κA
                                                                    j=0
                                                                    α−1
                                                                    X                   j/α             j/α
                                                               1           α−1        1             ηt κB
                                                            =                                                       ηuj/α
                                                              κB            j         ηt             κA
                                                                    j=0
                                                                 α−1      j/α             j
                                                               1 X α−1
                                                            (79)            1         ω(ηt )
                                                            =                                     ηuj/α                             (89)
                                                              κB       j    ηt      1 − ω(ηt )
                                                                     j=0

Substituting Equation (89) in Equation (88) yields the desired result
                                                    α−1                                                      j/α           !
                  ξuB
                                                  X                                             
                                                          α−1                                           ηu
         Et           cBu        =   e−ρ(u−t) δtα              ω(ηt )j (1 − ω(ηt ))α−j Et                           δu1−α       .   (90)
                  ξtB                               j=0
                                                           j                                            ηt


A.5      State Vector and Transform Analysis
Finding the equilibrium price boils down to computing the following expectation:
                                j           h                    i
                            Et ηuα δu1−α = Et e(1−α 0 0 j/α 0 0 0)X ,                                                               (91)

where we define the augmented vector of state variables X by
                                                                        >
                                           X = ζ fbB gb µ gb2 gbfbB fbB2    .                                                       (92)

    In Equation (92), ζ represents the log aggregate consumption (ζ ≡ ln δ), whereas µ represents
the log relative outlook (µ ≡ ln η). Observe that the vector of state variables (initially four)
has been augmented by adding three quadratic and cross-product terms. By doing so, the initially
affine-quadratic vector (ζ, fbB , gb, µ)> is transformed into the affine vector X (see Cheng and Scaillet,
2007). It follows that the expectation in Equation (91) is the moment-generating function of an
affine vector and thus we can apply the theory of affine processes (Duffie, Pan, and Singleton, 2000)
to compute this quantity, which becomes
                        j                 h                    i
                          α 1−α
                    Et ηu δu           = Et e(1−α 0 0 j/α 0 0 0)X = eαe(u−t)+β(u−t)Xt .              (93)
                                                                              e



In Equation (93), α
                  e is a 1-dimensional function of the maturity u, with boundary condition α
                                                                                           e(0) = 0,
whereas β is a 7-dimensional function of the maturity u, with boundary condition β(0) = (1 −
         e                                                                              e
α 0 0 j/α 0 0 0).




                                                                   33
       In order to solve Equation (93), let us write the dynamics of the affine state-vector X as follows:

                                                                        cδ
                                                dXt = µ(Xt )dt + σ(Xt )dW                            (94)
                                                                          Bt
                                            µ(X) = K0 + K1 X                                         (95)
                                              
                                     σ(X)σ(X)>   = H0ij + H1ij · X.                                  (96)
                                                    ij

From Duffie (2010) we know that
                                                            
                                 Et (δu ηuχ ) = Et eζu +χµu = eαe(τ )+β(τ )Xt ,                    (97)
                                                                        e



where τ = u − t and  and χ are arbitrary constants. α
                                                     e and βe solve the following system of 8
Ricatti ODEs

                                                      e ) + 1 βe> (τ )H1 β(τ
                                       βe0 (τ ) = K1> β(τ                e )                         (98)
                                                             2
                                                             1
                                       e0 (τ ) = K0> α
                                       α              e(τ ) + βe> (τ )H0 β(τ
                                                                         e )                         (99)
                                                             2

with boundary conditions βe1 (0) = , βe2 (0) = 0, βe3 (0) = 0, βe4 (0) = χ, βe5 (0) = 0, βe6 (0) = 0,
βe7 (0) = 0, and α(0) = 0. This system cannot be directly solved in closed form. However, we
know that βe1 (τ ) =  and βe4 (τ ) = χ. Thus, the system can be written in a matrix Riccati form as
follows21

                                         Z 0 = J + B > Z + ZB + ZQZ,                                (100)

where
                                                                    
                                                  Γ    βe3 /2 βe2 /2
                                          Z = βe3 /2 βe5 βe6 /2                                   (101)
                                                                    
                                                βe2 /2 βe6 /2 βe7

and Γ is a function of τ . The matrices J, B, and Q satisfy

                                 − χ     
                    
                        0            2    2
                                (χ−1)χ
               J = − χ   2     2σδ 2
                                          0                                                        (102)
                         
                         2         0      0
                                                                                           
                                       0                                0              0
                                                             λ   σδ 2 +γ −γ χ+γ χ
               B = −γA  + γB  − (λA − λB )f¯ −
                                                              A        A
                                                                        σδ 2
                                                                             A B
                                                                                    λA − λB        (103)
                                                                        γ  χ
                                  γB  + f¯λB                         − σδ
                                                                         B
                                                                           2         −λB
                                                         
                      0           0               0
                             2(γA −γB )2    2γB (γB −γA ) 
               Q = 0                                     .                                        (104)
                    
                                 σδ 2            σδ 2
                                                   2
                              2γB (γB −γA )      2γB
                          0        σδ 2          σδ 2

Note that we set J11 and J23 to zero since they can be any real numbers. Using Radon’s lemma,
  21
       See Andrei and Cujean (2010) for detailed explanations related to this methodology.




                                                         34
we get

                                 Z(τ ) = Y −1 (τ )X(τ ) where X and Y satisfy                                          (105)
                                        0
                                    X = BX + JY, X(0) = [0]3×3                                                         (106)
                                        0                   >
                                       Y = −QX − B Y, Y (0) = I3×3 .                                                   (107)

The solution of this system is

           (X(τ ) Y (τ )) = (X(0) Y (0)) M (τ ), where M (τ ) is the matrix exponential                                (108)
                                           
                                  B −Q
                  M (τ ) = exp                 τ .                                                                     (109)
                                  J −B >

Note that the matrix exponential M (τ ) has to be computed using a Jordan decomposition. Indeed,
we have

                                                  M (τ ) = Sexp(Jo τ )S −1 ,                                           (110)

where Jo and S are, respectively, the Jordan and the similarity matrix extracted from the Jordan
decomposition. The Betas are consequently given by

                                             βe1 (τ ) =                                                               (111)
                                                                   P8
                                                        n01 + i=1 ni1           e ji τ
                                             βe2 (τ ) =                                                                (112)
                                                        b01 + 8i=1 bi1 eji τ
                                                               P

                                                        n02 + 8i=1 ni2 eji τ
                                                               P
                                             β3 (τ ) =
                                              e                                                                        (113)
                                                        b02 + 8i=1 bi2 eji τ
                                                               P

                                             βe4 (τ ) = χ                                                              (114)
                                                        n03 + 8i=1 ni3 eji τ
                                                               P
                                             β5 (τ ) =
                                              e                                                                        (115)
                                                        b03 + 8i=1 bi3 eji τ
                                                               P
                                                               P8
                                                        n 04 +      ni4 eji τ
                                             βe6 (τ ) =        Pi=1                                                    (116)
                                                        b04 + 8i=1 bi4 eji τ
                                                        n05 + 8i=1 ni5 eji τ
                                                               P
                                             β7 (τ ) =
                                              e                               .                                        (117)
                                                        b05 + 8i=1 bi5 eji τ
                                                               P

Notice that the function αe(τ ) is obtained through a numerical integration. Thus, this function is
not obtained in closed form. Since in our setup χ = αj and  = 1 − α, the stock price simplifies to
                     Z ∞
               St =       Stτ dτ                                                              (118)
                          0
                          α  
                          X  α
                  = δt                  ω(ηt )j (1 − ω(ηt ))α−j ×                                                      (119)
                                   j
                          j=0
                      Z   ∞
                                                                                2                          b2
                  ×           e−ρτ eαej (τ )+β2j (τ )fBt +β3j (τ )bgt +β5j (τ )bgt +β6j (τ )fBt gbt +β7j (τ )fBt dτ.   (120)
                                              e       b     e           e            e     b        e

                      0

Even though the above integral is computed numerically, the price process can be simulated very
efficiently.



                                                                35
A.6     Robustness Analysis
Table 6 confirms that disagreement and long-run risk have different impacts on stock-return volatil-
ity. Indeed, an increase in long-run risk increases the average level of volatility (Bansal and Yaron,
2004), while an increase in disagreement increases both the variation of volatility and the persistence
of volatility.

      Economy                         Parameter Mean Min.                Max.     Vol.   Persist.
      (1) No model disagreement        λA = 0.1
      and severe long-run risk         λB = 0.1 0.169 0.164              0.181   0.002    0.463
      (2) Moderate model disagreement  λA = 0.2
      and strong long-run risk         λB = 0.1 0.101 0.081              0.147   0.012    0.913
      (3) Severe model disagreement λA = 0.3
      and moderate long-run risk      λB = 0.1 0.085 0.046              0.199 0.028       0.997
      (4) Severe model disagreement    λA = 0.4
      and weak long-run risk           λB = 0.2 0.023 0.013              0.043   0.005    0.996
      (5) Severe model disagreement    λA = 0.5
      and no long-run risk             λB = 0.3 0.005 0.002              0.017   0.003    0.999
                  Table 6: Properties of volatility for various calibrations
   This table presents the mean, minimum, maximum, volatility, and persistence of volatility
   in five different models. Persistence is calculated as the sum of the parameters β1 and β2
   in the GARCH(1,1) estimation. In bold is the benchmark model considered throughout the
   paper. Numbers reported above are (annualized) averages computed over 1,000 simulations
   of weekly data over a 100-year horizon.




                                                  36
    References
 [1] Acemoglu, D., K. Bimpikis, and A. Ozdaglar (2010). Dynamics of information exchange in endoge-
       nous social networks. Working Paper . 2

 [2] Andrade, P., R. K. Crump, S. Eusepi, and E. Moench (2014, December). Noisy information and
       fundamental disagreement. Staff Reports 655, Federal Reserve Bank of New York. 3, 26

 [3] Andrei, D. and J. Cujean (2010). Global public signals, heterogeneous beliefs and stock markets
       comovement. Working paper, Unil and EPFL. 34

 [4] Bansal, R., D. Kiku, and A. Yaron (2012). An empirical evaluation of the long-run risks model for
       asset prices. Critical Finance Review 1, no. 1, 183–221. 2

 [5] Bansal, R. and A. Yaron (2004, 08). Risks for the long run: A potential resolution of asset pricing
       puzzles. Journal of Finance 59 (4), 1481–1509. 4, 19, 21, 36

 [6] Beeler, J. and J. Y. Campbell (2012). The long-run risks model and aggregate asset prices: An
       empirical assessment. Critical Finance Review 1, 141–182. 2

 [7] Bollerslev, T. (1986, April). Generalized autoregressive conditional heteroskedasticity. Journal of
       Econometrics 31 (3), 307–327. 4

 [8] Brennan, M. J. and Y. Xia (2001). Stock price volatility and equity premium. Journal of Monetary
       Economics 47 (2), 249 – 283. 15

 [9] Carlin, B. I., F. A. Longstaff, and K. Matoba (2013). Disagreement and asset prices. Working
       Paper . 2

[10] Cheng, P. and O. Scaillet (2007). Linear-quadratic jump-diffusion modeling. Mathematical Fi-
       nance 17 (4), 575–598. 33

[11] Cox, J. C. and C.-f. Huang (1989). Optimal consumption and portfolio policies when asset prices
       follow a diffusion process. Journal of Economic Theory 49 (1), 33 – 83. 12

[12] Drechsler, I. (2013, October). Uncertainty, Time-Varying Fear, and Asset Prices. Journal of
       Finance 68 (5), 1843–1889. 4

[13] Duffie, D. (2010, 08). Presidential address: Asset price dynamics with slow-moving capital. Journal
       of Finance 65 (4), 1237–1267. 34

[14] Duffie, D., J. Pan, and K. Singleton (2000, November). Transform Analysis and Asset Pricing for
       Affine Jump-Diffusions. Econometrica 68 (6), 1343–1376. 33

[15] Dumas, B., A. Kurshev, and R. Uppal (2009, 04). Equilibrium portfolio strategies in the presence
       of sentiment risk and excess volatility. Journal of Finance 64 (2), 579–629. 4, 6, 7, 9, 10, 12, 13,
       15, 23, 24, 31

[16] Engle, R. F. (1982). Autoregressive conditional heteroscedasticity with estimates of the variance
       of united kingdom inflation. Econometrica 50 (4), pp. 987–1007. 4

[17] Hamilton, J. D. (1994). Time series analysis. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univ. Press. 27

[18] Hansen, L. P. and T. J. Sargent (2007). Robustness. Princeton University Press. 2, 4

                                                      37
[19] Karatzas, I., J. P. Lehoczky, and S. E. Shreve (1987). Optimal portfolio and consumption decisions
       for a “small investor” on a finite horizon. SIAM Journal on Control and Optimization 25 (6),
       1557–1586. 12

[20] LeRoy, S. F. and R. D. Porter (1981, May). The present-value relation: Tests based on implied
       variance bounds. Econometrica 49 (3), 555–74. 4

[21] Liptser, R. S. and A. N. Shiryaev (2001). Statistics of Random Processes II. Springer Verlag, New
       York. 7, 28

[22] Liu, J., J. Pan, and T. Wang (2005). An equilibrium model of rare-event premia and its implication
       for option smirks. Review of Financial Studies 18 (1), 131–164. 4

[23] Liu, J. and M. West (2001). Combined parameter and state estimation in simulation-based filtering.
       pp. 197–217. 27, 28

[24] Lucas, Robert E., J. (1978). Asset prices in an exchange economy. Econometrica 46 (6), pp.
       1429–1445. 15

[25] Maenhout, P. J. (2004). Robust Portfolio Rules and Asset Pricing. Review of Financial Stud-
      ies 17 (4), 951–983. 4

[26] Massa, M. and A. Simonov (2005, October). Is learning a dimension of risk? Journal of Banking
      & Finance 29 (10), 2605–2632. 2

[27] Mele, A. (2008). Understanding stock market volatility: A business cycle perspective. Working
      Paper . 4

[28] Nelson, D. B. (1991, March). Conditional heteroskedasticity in asset returns: A new approach.
       Econometrica 59 (2), 347–70. 4

[29] Patton, A. J. and A. Timmermann (2010, October). Why do forecasters disagree? lessons from the
       term structure of cross-sectional dispersion. Journal of Monetary Economics 57 (7), 803–820. 3,
       26

[30] Scheinkman, J. A. and W. Xiong (2003). Overconfidence and speculative bubbles. The Journal of
       Political Economy 111 (6), 1183–1219. 4, 6, 7, 9, 23

[31] Schwert, G. W. (1989, December). Why does stock market volatility change over time? Journal of
       Finance 44 (5), 1115–53. 4

[32] Shiller, R. J. (1981, June). Do stock prices move too much to be justified by subsequent changes
       in dividends? American Economic Review 71 (3), 421–36. 4

[33] Uppal, R. and T. Wang (2003, December). Model Misspecification and Underdiversification. Jour-
       nal of Finance 58 (6), 2465–2486. 4

[34] Xiong, W. and H. Yan (2010, April). Heterogeneous expectations and bond markets. Review of
       Financial Studies 23 (4), 1433–1466. 4, 13, 17

[35] Yan, H. (2008, November). Natural Selection in Financial Markets: Does It Work? Management
       Science 54 (11), 1935–1950. 4, 12, 25, 31

[36] Yu, J. (2012). Bias in the estimation of the mean reversion parameter in continuous time models.
       Journal of Econometrics 169 (1), 114–122. 3

                                                    38
