NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INCOME INEQUALITY, SOCIAL MOBILITY, AND THE DECISION TO DROP
OUT OF HIGH SCHOOL
Melissa S. Kearney
Phillip B. Levine
Working Paper 20195
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20195

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2014

We are indebted to our BPEA discussants Robert Moffitt and Miles Corak and to Editor Janice
Eberly for detailed comments that have greatly improved the paper. We also thank Miles Corak,
Sue Dynarski, Nora Gordon, Caroline Hoxby, Judy Hellerstein, Robin McKnight, and Lesley
Turner for helpful conversations and comments on an earlier draft. We acknowledge helpful
comments from seminar participants at American University School of Public Policy, Notre
Dame University, Stanford University, University of New Hampshire, University of Texas at
Austin, the Federal Research Bank of Cleveland Workshop on Income Distribution, and the
NBER Universities Research Conference on Poverty, Inequality, and Social Policy. We thank
Riley Wilson for research assistance. We are grateful to the Smith Richardson Foundation for
providing financial support for this project. Any views expressed are those of the authors alone.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2014 by Melissa S. Kearney and Phillip B. Levine. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Income Inequality, Social Mobility, and the Decision to Drop Out of High School
Melissa S. Kearney and Phillip B. Levine
NBER Working Paper No. 20195
June 2014, Revised March 2016
JEL No. D31,I24,J24
ABSTRACT
It is widely documented that places with higher levels of income inequality have lower rates of
social mobility. But it is an open question as to whether this reflects a causal relationship. We
propose that one channel by which higher rates of income inequality might lead to lower rates of
upward mobility is through lower rates of human capital investment among low-income
individuals. Specifically, we posit that greater levels of income inequality could lead low-income
youth to perceive a lower return to investment in their own human capital. Such an effect would
offset any potential “aspirational” effect coming from higher educational wage premiums. The
data are consistent with this prediction: low-income youth are more likely to drop out of school if
they live in a place with a greater gap between the bottom and middle of the income distribution.
This finding is robust to a number of specification checks and tests for confounding factors. This
analysis offers an explanation for how income inequality might lead to a perpetuation of
economic disadvantage and has implications for the types of interventions and programs that
would effectively promote upward mobility among low-SES youth.

Melissa S. Kearney
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
3105 Tydings Hall
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
kearney@econ.umd.edu
Phillip B. Levine
Department of Economics
Wellesley College
106 Central Street
Wellesley, MA 02481
and NBER
plevine@wellesley.edu

Kearney and Levine, p. 1
I. INTRODUCTION
International comparisons show that the United States is a country that ranks high in its
level of income inequality and low in its level of social mobility. Corak (2006) – building on the
theoretical contributions made by Solon (2004) – was the first to show empirically that this
relationship is part of a broader pattern that exists across countries. Countries with high levels of
inequality also tend to exhibit lower rates of social mobility, as measured by greater
intergenerational income persistence. In a speech on January 12, 2012, Council of Economic
Advisors Chairman Alan Krueger popularized this relationship as “The Great Gatsby Curve.”
Using data on U.S. states, we construct a Gatsby Curve for the United States: Figure 1 shows that
states with greater levels of income inequality tend to have lower rates of social mobility. 1 This
positive cross-sectional relationship between rates of income inequality and intergenerational
income persistence often leads to claims about causality, implying that higher rates of income
inequality lead to lower rates of mobility. 2 But, it is very much an open question as to whether
income inequality actually causes lower rates of social mobility, and if so, through what
channels.
1

Social mobility is a concept that includes the likelihood of moving up or down in the income
distribution, which is specifically labeled as economic mobility, but also may include changes in
position in other distributions as well, like educational attainment, occupational status, and
health. We restrict our attention to economic mobility in this paper, but adopt the common
approach of using the terms social and economic mobility interchangeably. The specific mobility
measure used here is taken from Chetty, et al. (2014a), and reflects the correlation in the income
rank of parents and their adult child. It is worth noting that if we replaced the Gini coefficient
with alternative measures of income inequality, we see the same relationship. In particular, the
figure looks the same using the 50/10 ratio of income, which is our primary measure of income
inequality in this paper, as described below.
2
For example, Jason Furman, current Chair of the Council of Economic Advisers, stated “I think
we think all else being equal, more inequality will lead to less relative mobility,” (in The
Atlantic’s
Economy
Summit
2014
(available
at:
http://fora.tv/2014/03/18/conversation_with_jason_furman - 7:37 into the interview). Sawhill
(2014) asserts that when the rungs of the ladder are farther apart, it gets harder to climb them.

Kearney and Levine, p. 2
As an empirical matter, researchers have been unable to determine whether high income
inequality leads to lower rates of economic mobility. For example, the important, data-intensive
work of Chetty, Hendren, Kline, and Saez (2014a) documents that places with higher rates of
social mobility tend to be characterized by lower levels of income inequality, along with
differences in other characteristics like less residential segregation and lower rates of singleparenthood households. Despite the significant value of that research, it does not attempt to
estimate causal pathways either from income inequality to social mobility, or vice versa, nor
from inequality to other outcomes.
In this paper we propose and investigate one important channel through which higher
rates of income inequality might lead to lower rates of upward economic mobility of individuals
from low socioeconomic status (SES) backgrounds: curtailed investment in human capital. We
hypothesize that income inequality can negatively affect the perceived returns to investment in
education from the perspective of an economically disadvantaged adolescent – either through an
effect on actual returns and/or through an additional effect on the perception of those returns.
The notion we have in mind is that a greater gap between the bottom and the middle of the
income distribution might lead to a heightened sense of economic marginalization such that an
adolescent at the bottom of the income distribution does not see much value in investing in
his/her human capital. We call this “economic despair.” This could be due to adverse
neighborhood or school conditions driven by elevated rates of income inequality, but it need not
be. This mechanism offers an explanation within the standard human capital framework of
decision-making for why greater inequality – which might reflect in part a greater return to
human capital investment – does not necessarily lead to greater rates of educational attainment
for certain segments of the population.

Kearney and Levine, p. 3
To empirically explore this idea, we investigate whether places characterized by higher
rates of income inequality lead to lower rates of high school graduation among individuals from
low-SES families, controlling for individual and family demographics and broader contextual
factors. Greater educational attainment is a key pathway by which an individual from a lowincome background can move up in the income distribution and obtain a middle class life, or
potentially even higher. If children from low-income backgrounds are responding to large gaps
between their economic reality and middle-class life by dropping out of school, that would
perpetuate economic disadvantage and impeded rates of upward mobility. It would be a
mechanism through which income inequality and social mobility were causally linked and might
explain why certain places regularly seem to have high inequality and low mobility, or vice
versa. Furthermore, it would have profound implications for society and the types of
interventions needed to break the cycle.
Our discussion in Section II of relevant background facts and ideas addresses a number of
important issues. We describe some key reasons why the Gatsby Curve might not reflect a causal
negative relationship between income inequality and rates of social mobility. First, there is the
well-known empirical complication that the level of income inequality in a place is correlated
with many other factors that also might impact rates of social mobility. Empirically identifying
which factor is driving what is extremely difficult. Furthermore, some have argued that the
relationship might be merely descriptive, and not actually consequential.
In Section II we also describe an empirical puzzle that others have pointed out, namely
that income inequality has been rising for many decades with no observable decrease in social
mobility rates. We describe two features of our model and empirical results that might help
resolve this puzzle. First, we argue that adolescents’ perceptions and expectations about the

Kearney and Levine, p. 4
society around them and their place in it are likely shaped by the more permanent features of the
environment they grow up in, including long-term measures of inequality. Transitory or very
recent changes in inequality are less likely to have a profound effect on adolescents’ perceptions
and experiences. It might be the case that the effects of rising income inequality are not yet
manifested in observed rates of social mobility. Second, we propose that lower-tail income
inequality (as captured by the ratio of household income at the 50th and 10th percentiles of the
distribution – the “50/10 ratio”) is more relevant to thinking about upward mobility, than is
inequality at the top of the distribution. Lower-tail income inequality has been fairly flat over
recent decades.
In Section III we present a stylized model of the decision to drop out of high school. This
simple model generates the possible existence of both the aspirational and “despair” effects of
greater levels of income inequality within an otherwise standard human capital investment
framework. In this section we also review related conceptual models.
We then turn to a detailed description of our empirical analysis and results in Sections IV
and V. We use individual-level data pooled from five national surveys to investigate how income
inequality affects the rate at which low socioeconomic status (SES) youth drop out of high
school, controlling for individual background characteristics and aggregate-level contextual
factors. The data provide robust evidence that higher levels of lower-tail income inequality lead
boys from low-SES households to drop out of high school with greater frequency, controlling for
a rich set of individual- and state-level characteristics. That data separately identify a negative
effect of a higher high school wage premium on high school dropout rates and a positive effect
of lower-tail income inequality on high school dropout rates. These two offsetting effects are

Kearney and Levine, p. 5
consistent with our modified human capital investment model, in which inequality has
competing aspirational and despair effects.
We also report the results from a number of alternative specifications. First, we
investigate whether the observed relationship between income inequality and drop-out rates is
being driven by a number of potential confounding factors, such as other features of the income
distribution (including upper-tail income inequality), aggregate poverty rates, or incarceration
rates, among others. Second, we devote considerable attention to the potential mechanisms that
drive the observed empirical relationship between lower-tail income inequality and the decision
of low-SES youth to drop out of school. The data do not offer support for a number of potential
explanations for the link, including most notably, residential segregation or eroded public school
funding. Although we are ultimately unable to empirically establish a precise mechanism, the
empirical relationship we document is consequential, implying that greater levels of income
inequality can perpetuate lower rates of social mobility in part by leading low-income youth to
engage in more drop-out behavior. We conclude with a discussion of policy implications.
II. BACKGROUND
The cross-sectional correlation between income inequality and intergenerational income
persistence (which indicates a lack of social mobility) is not necessarily a causal relationship. In
this section, we elaborate on these points. Second, we discuss what measures of income
inequality are likely most relevant to rates of upward mobility for low-income adolescents.
Third, we explain how these observations might be relevant to the finding that social mobility
rates do not appear to have fallen over recent decades. Fourth, we describe the cross-sectional
relationship between income inequality and high school dropout rates. These discussions set the

Kearney and Levine, p. 6
stage for us to then move on to a discussion of our proposed model characterizing the
educational investment decision of adolescents.
A. How Should We Interpret the Cross-Sectional Correlation between Inequality and Mobility?
One of the fundamental tenets of empirical economics is that correlation is not causation.
As basic as this point is, it is one of which we often have to remind ourselves. For instance, in
path breaking work on the measurement of mobility in the United States, Chetty, et al. (2014a)
reports that the strongest correlates of high mobility areas are: (1) less residential segregation, (2)
less income inequality, (3) better primary schools, (4) greater social capital, and (5) greater
family stability. As an empirical statement of correlation, these are interesting findings. But, as
the authors themselves emphasize, they are not indicative of causal relationships. They provide
some insight to areas where further exploration should start, although not end, into the
understanding the causal factors behind social mobility.
Unfortunately, in measuring outcomes that reflect economic disadvantage, many things
are correlated, making it nearly impossible to determine what is actually driving those
relationships. These correlations raise a lot of questions and possible explanations. As an
example, a Brookings’ sponsored Social Mobility Series on the Gatsby Curve contained a
number of essays where authors offer other correlational observations as potential explanations
for what is really “causing” low rates of upward mobility, including single parent households, the
failure to adequately invest in early childhood education, the breakdown of civic institutions,
cultural norms, and the like. The bottom line is that the evidence available to date provides
documentation of a negative correlation between inequality and mobility along with a host of
other things, all of which are interesting, but none of which pushes the bar in terms of what can

Kearney and Levine, p. 7
be presumed to be causal. To inform public policy, though, we really need to know about causal
pathways.
Furthermore, the negative correlation between inequality and mobility may simply reflect
something about the composition of the population, as noted in Corak (2013). It may not be that
one causes the other, but rather, both high inequality and low mobility reflect underlying
population characteristics. Mankiw (2013) observes that low social mobility could occur even if
there were equality of opportunity because of the inheritability of talent, intellect, and
interpersonal skills. 3 If the entire population had equal inherited skills, inequality would be low
and mobility would be great because realizing higher or lower economic outcomes would be
largely the result of chance. If, however, a population is comprised of individuals with a large
degree of variation in talents and abilities, then we might expect both high inequality in income
and high persistence in income between parents and children even in a full meritocracy. 4 This
interpretation of the relationship has drastically different policy implications than if the
relationship reflects a causal relationship.
B. What Is the Relevant Measure of Income Inequality for Upward Mobility Consequences?
This paper is motivated to a large degree by the question of seemingly fixed differences
across places. Why are some places consistently high inequality/low mobility and other places
3

Gary Becker and Richard Posner make the same point on their economics blog:
http://www.becker-posner-blog.com/2013/01/meritocracies-and-intergeneration-mobilitybecker.html and http://www.becker-posner-blog.com/2012/12/meritocracy-social-mobilityintergenerational-mobilityposner.html.
4
Mankiw makes this point clearly in a 2013 post on his widely-read blog by offering as an
example the skill of chess players. If we have one group of chess players who are all of roughly
comparable ability, then who wins and loses the matches will be closer to a random draw and
mobility through the rankings will be high. If another group of chess players has some with
greater ability and others who are weaker, then inequality in wins/losses will be higher and
mobility lower. (“Observations on the Great Gatsby Curve,”
http://gregmankiw.blogspot.nl/2013/07/some-observations-on-great-gatsby-curve.html, accessed
April 20, 2014.)

Kearney and Levine, p. 8
consistently low inequality/low mobility? For example, New York and Washington D.C.
consistently have high rates of income inequality (and low rates of economic mobility), while
Minnesota and Utah do not. 5 Taking an international perspective, year after year, the United
States and the United Kingdom – generally low mobility countries --- have among the highest
rates of income inequality among high-income countries, while Finland and Norway – generally
high mobility countries -- tend to have low rates of income inequality.
This way of describing the situation makes it clear that we should be focused on
longstanding differences in inequality, not year-to-year changes. In our conceptual framework
and our empirical analysis, we focus on the permanent or semi-permanent economic and cultural
landscape in the place where an adolescent lives, as opposed to short-term fluctuations. If a state
experiences a temporary decrease in income inequality, it is unlikely, for example, that
neighborhoods will change sufficiently quickly and sufficiently visibly that either economic
opportunities or the perceptions thereof will be altered. We thus explicitly refer to income
inequality as a “fixed” characteristic of a place and our empirical analysis reflects this.
Furthermore, as an empirical fact, there is much more cross-sectional variation in lowertail income inequality across states, as compared to within a state over time. In the income data
we describe below, which represents the 1980, 1990, and 2000 Censuses, we find that the
average standard deviation in the 50/10 ratio across states (averaged over time) is 0.43. Using the
same data, we find that the average standard deviation in the 50/10 over time within a state
(averaged across states) is much lower: 0.16.

5

For instance, using data from the IPUMS Censuses, we have found that the correlation in the
50/10 ratio between the 1980 and 2000 Census years averages .74 across states (Kearney and
Levine, 2014).

Kearney and Levine, p. 9
Beyond the issue of permanent versus transitory, there is an important question about
what is the most relevant inequality metric for economic mobility. We argue that the gap
between the bottom of the income distribution and “middle class” is more relevant for the
decisions of low-SES youth, than is the income gap at the top of the distribution. We are
explicitly interested in upward economic mobility of low-SES children, and for children born
into poverty or low-income families, we expect that their point of reference is more likely to be
the middle of the distribution. If the Great Gatsby Curve captures behavioral effects associated
with growing inequality and the likelihood of moving up the economic ladder for those near the
bottom, we propose that the 50/10 ratio is the more relevant measure of income inequality. As
our results below will show, the data support this supposition.
C. Why Don’t Time Series and Cross-Sectional Patterns of the Inequality/Mobility Relationship
Match?
The descriptive evidence on the relationship between income inequality and mobility
presents something of a paradox. As we have described, there is a relationship in the crosssection (i.e., across space), but there does not seem to be a similar relationship across time. The
overall rate of income inequality in the U.S. has generally been rising since the 1970s. If
inequality causally led to a decrease in mobility, one would expect to see the increase in income
inequality begin to appear in mobility trends at some point. In terms of our earlier discussion,
one might expect continuing increases in income inequality increases over many years to
eventually change the economic and cultural landscape in a way that would lead to an erosion of
social mobility. But, recent evidence from Lee and Solon (2009) using the Panel Study of
Income Dynamics (PSID) and Chetty, et al. (2014b) from linked parent/child tax records shows
no reduction in social mobility in recent decades. Though that evidence is not the final word on

Kearney and Levine, p. 10
the matter and critics have pointed out limitations, the finding that economic mobility does not
appear to have fallen raises the question of whether inequality and mobility are causally linked
after all.
These facts are documented in Figure 2, which report trend data on social mobility from
Chetty, et al. (2014b) and Lee and Solon (2009) along with the trend in two measures of income
inequality in the United States, the 90/50 ratio and the 50/10 ratio (which reflect ratios of
different percentiles of the income distribution). The x-axis in Figure 2 reflects the year in which
income is measured for the 90/50 and 50/10 ratios. For the mobility measure taken from Chetty,
et al. (2014b), year reflects birth cohort. For the mobility measure taken from Lee and Solon
(2009), year reflects the year in which the son's income was recorded. Neither of the two
mobility measures show any obvious trend in economic mobility in recent decades. In terms of
income inequality, the top of the distribution has been pulling away from the middle. As shown
in the figure, the 90/50 ratio has risen almost continuously over the past several decades. But,
lower-tail inequality, as captured by the 50/10 ratio, has been roughly flat in recent decades. If
our supposition is right that lower-tail inequality is more relevant to mobility than is upper tail
inequality, this could help reconcile the apparent puzzle of rising income inequality and flat
economic mobility. The fact that the 50/10 ratio is flat aligns with the flat mobility profile.
D. How Does Income Inequality Relate to High School Dropout Rates?
Though there is a vast economics literature examining potential explanations for the rise
of income inequality over the past four decades, there remains an important need for more
research on its social consequences. This is precisely what we are interested in exploring. In this
paper, we are focused on whether there might be negative effects on educational outcomes for
children born into low-income homes, which would then have implications for upward mobility.

Kearney and Levine, p. 11
We start by looking at the aggregate relationship, just to see what that correlational relationship
looks like.
Aggregate data show that places with higher levels of income inequality have lower high
school completion rates. Figure 3 displays this relationship across states. For reasons described
above, we focus on a long-term average measure of income inequality. We construct the ratio of
household income at the 50th percentile to the 10th percentile, the “50/10 ratio,” in each of the
1980, 1990, and 2000 Censuses, and for each state we use the average across Census years. We
then compare that state-level measure to the state-level “dropout rate,” which is 100 minus the
four-year graduate rate. The correlation in these data is strong: places with higher levels of
income inequality tend to have higher dropout rates. One quarter or more of those who start high
school in Louisiana, Mississippi, Georgia, and the District of Columbia fail to graduate in a four
year period, as compared to under 10 percent in Vermont, Wisconsin, North Dakota, and
Nebraska. Lower-tail inequality is much greater in the former group of states.
Of course, many other things might be driving this relationship – including differences in
the underlying characteristics of individuals living in these locations – so this is only meant to
raise the possibility of a causal relationship; the plotted relationship can only be interpreted as
correlational at this point. Our empirical analysis relies on individual level data, so that we are
able to empirically control for individual level demographic characteristics as well as aggregate
level differences across places. That allows us to pursue an empirical investigation of whether
there is a causal link between aggregate level income inequality and individual level educational
attainment.
III. MOTIVATING FRAMEWORK: MODELING THE DECISION TO STAY IN SCHOOL
A. A Stylized Model of the Decision to Drop Out of School

Kearney and Levine, p. 12
We offer here an extremely stylized model of the decision to remain in school. This model
is a straightforward adaptation of the model we laid out in Kearney and Levine (2014) to
describe the decision of a young, unmarried women to delay childbearing. An individual chooses
to drop out of school in the current period if the following condition is met:
u d + E (V d ) > u e + E (V e )
o
o

(1)

where ud is current period utility if the student drops out and ue is current period utility if s/he
remains enrolled. V is the present discounted sum of future period utility; we assume E(Ve) >
E(Vd).
If ud < ue, it is never optimal to drop out. But if ud > ue , which would be the case if the
student experiences substantial utility costs from remaining in school (e.g. psychic costs), then
that current period utility boost needs to be compared to the potential option value lost. Dropping
out of school negatively affects expected future utility by leading to lower levels of consumption
in the future. For simplicity, we characterize utility in future periods as taking high and low
values, Uhigh and Ulow, respectively. We assume that dropping out reduces the likelihood of
achieving Uhigh. We define Ulow to be the level achieved by a student who does drop out. The
present discounted value of the future utility stream is thus deterministic and captured by Vlow. If
the adolescent remains enrolled, there is some positive probability p that s/he will achieve the
“high” utility position in future periods.
We can therefore write the condition to drop out of school as follows:
high
u d + V low > u e + pV
+ (1 − p )V low
o
o

(2)

This condition indicates that the change in lifetime utility from staying in school comes from two
opposite-signed sources: (1) the loss of current period enjoyment for staying in school and

Kearney and Levine, p. 13
having restricted time for leisure and other activities and (2) a positive probability of achieving
the high- utility state in the future. Rearranging terms, we see that a student will choose to
remain enrolled if and only if:

 pV high + (1 − p )V low  − V low > (u d − u e )


o
o

(3)

Of course, the student does not perfectly observe p, as in Manski (1993). Instead, the
student bases the decision on his perception of p, in particular, on his perception of his
individual-specific p. Let us call this subjective probability of one’s individual likelihood of
success conditional on investment q. We would expect – though it need not be the case – that q
varies positively with actual returns as captured by p. So for example, increases in the actual
return to schooling would lead to a greater perception of returns. But, there are external factors,
call them e, that affect an individual’s perceptions of his own likely returns to staying in school.
These external factors could reflect influences throughout childhood or at any stage in a child’s
life.
For example, students who know few others who went to college may incorrectly assume
that they wouldn’t benefit from college – “it’s not for people like me.” In other words, for a
given level of p, students of different socioeconomic backgrounds may differ in their individual
value of q. In essence, we can think of q as a function of p and e; q = f(p,e). It is not our intention
to empirically distinguish between the separate roles played by p and e. Rather, we want to raise
this conceptual possibility and note that income inequality might have an effect on perceived
returns q, either through an effect on p or e.
Incorporating this discussion, we can rewrite the condition for deciding not to drop out as
follows:

Kearney and Levine, p. 14

qV

high

+ (1 − q )V low > V low + (u d − u e )
o
o

(4)

If an adolescent perceives that s/he has a sizable chance at achieving economic success -- and
thereby capturing Vhigh -- by investing in education, the comparison is more likely to favor the
choice “stay enrolled.” On the other hand, if the student perceives that even if s/he stays enrolled,
his/her person-specific chances of economic success are sufficiently unlikely -- in other words, if
q is very low -- then the comparison is more likely to favor dropping out in the current period.
Rearranging expression [6], we can define a reservation subjective probability qr such that
an individual will stay enrolled in school if and only if:

uo − uo
q≥q =
( high
).
low
V −V
b

d

r

(5)

We propose that one's perception of the likelihood of economic success, q, increases in
socioeconomic status, such that

dq
> 0 . Ikoma and Broer (2015) provide suggestive
d ( SES )

evidence based on tabulations of the nationally representative High School Longitudinal Survey
(HSLS: 09) that is consistent with this proposition. T; they report that the overwhelming majority
of 9th graders aspire to go to college, but by 11th grade, low SES students are substantially less
likely to expect they will enroll in college, even among those students with high test scores.
Their drop-off in aspirations/expectations is substantially greater than it is among comparable
high-SES students with similar test scores.
We additionally propose that one’s perceived probability of success is a function of the
interaction of being low SES and inequality, such that

dq
| ( SES
= low) < 0 .
d (ineq )

That last

proposition says that for an adolescent near the bottom of the income distribution, a greater gap

Kearney and Levine, p. 15
between one’s position and the middle of the distribution might have a negative effect on one’s
subjective q. If the middle class is sufficiently far from one’s own experience, than the student’s
perceived returns to staying in school are low. Our main goal with the empirical analyses of the
current paper is to determine whether there does appear to be an effect of income inequality on
drop-out rates, conditional on rates of disadvantage and other relevant features of the aggregate
environment. A secondary goal is to explore potential mechanisms that would be consistent with
this line of inquiry, but we do not purport to exhaustively test for potential channels.
This framework has important implications for how to conduct our empirical analysis in
terms of the appropriate level of geography. The way we are thinking about the possible effects
of income inequality implies that the appropriate unit is a fairly broad area, such as a state or a
Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA). These would allow for the effects of any type of residential
or institutional segregation that might occur as a result of widened income inequality and affect
perceptions of success. If we were motivated by relative deprivation theories based on more
localized comparisons, we would instead want to define income inequality much more locally.
B. Income Inequality, Socioeconomic Status, and Lifetime Income
The discussion above raises the question of whether low-SES youth from more unequal
places actually do have a lower chance of earning higher levels of income later in life. Note that
our framework does not require that to be the case, since an adolescent’s decision is determined
by q(p,e), not just p, but it is still an interesting and relevant question to pursue. We offer two
pieces of supporting evidence suggesting that this is indeed the case.

Kearney and Levine, p. 16
First, in Kearney and Levine (2014) we examine data from the restricted-use 1979
National Longitudinal Survey of Youth Geocode data. 6 We find that children who grow up in
low-SES households and who live in a state with high lower-tail income inequality are estimated
to have permanent incomes that are over 30 percent lower than similar children in low lower-tail
inequality states (high and low inequality states are distinguished by a one point increase in the
50/10 ratio). If perceptions of economic success are gauged on actual outcomes, then these
findings are consistent with our proposition.
Second, here we estimate “rates of return” to education to see whether the return is lower
for low-SES youth in more unequal places. We are using the term “return” loosely here, as this
analysis is not designed to isolate a causal effect. This is meant to be a suggestive exercise, not a
definitive analysis of rates of return to education. Using data from the NLSY79 again, we track
each respondent’s average hourly wage from their primary job between 1998 and 2012 (all in
2015$), which corresponds to the years when they would have been ages 34-55. We estimate
regression models of the natural log of hourly wages on educational attainment (as measured in
years) and demographic characteristics (race/ethnicity, gender, age), separately by SES status (as
captured by mother’s educational attainment category) and state-level income inequality (low,
medium, and high).
The results, reported in Figure 4, indicate that among individuals living in low inequality
states, the estimated return to an additional year of schooling is roughly constant across SES
6

We distinguish youth respondents by their parents’ educational attainment and define
“permanent income” to be the average of all inflation-adjusted values of family income observed
15 or more years after the original 1979 survey, when youth respondents are in their late 20s or
older. The sample used in that exercise includes all 8,226 respondents who lived with at least one
of their parents at age 14 and who provided any income values in the 1994 survey or beyond. We
assign the level of inequality to each respondent based on the respondents’ 1979 state of
residence.

Kearney and Levine, p. 17
categories, averaging 10.5 to 11 percent. The estimated rate of return is lower, on average, for
youth from all SES categories in high inequality states. However, that reduction in the rate of
return is especially pronounced among low-SES children (those whose mothers dropped out of
high school). Individuals born to low-SES mothers in high inequality states see an 8 percent rate
of return to education, as compared to 10.6 percent for low-SES youth in less unequal states. To
the extent that adolescents are basing their perceived likelihood of achieving economic success
on actual rates, these data are consistent with a diminished perception of success among low-SES
youth in more unequal places.
C. Related conceptual models
Our model is related to a set of models that emphasize the role of relative position in
society in determining individuals’ attitudes and behaviors. An influential theory in social
science posits a role for relative deprivation – as distinct from absolute deprivation – in leading
to acts of social unrest. In the economics literature, Luttmer (2005) conducts an empirical
investigation of this idea and documents that people are less happy when they live around other
people who are richer than themselves. In the field of psychology, Destin, Richman, Varner, and
Mandara (2012) provides evidence that students who perceive themselves to be of lower social
status (within a high school setting) suffer worse emotional distress which has negative
consequences on their academic performance. The authors conclude that “students’ perception of
their location on a relevant social hierarchy is related to their emotional state, academic
behaviors, and academic achievement in such a way that it could reinforce the stability of their
current location on the hierarchy.” Along these lines, the relative position of individuals could
lead to feelings of alienation from society that lead them to want to engage in rebellious types of
behaviors, perhaps including dropping out of school.

Kearney and Levine, p. 18
Genicot and Ray (2014) propose a theoretical model that leads to the same prediction as
our “economic despair” model. Their model proposes that society-wide economic outcomes
affect individual aspirations. Aspirations that are slightly above one’s position lead to increased
human capital investment; but if aspirations get too far from one’s current position, that could
lead to frustration and lower levels of human capital investment.
Watson and McLanahan (2011) present evidence that relative income matters for the
marriage decision of low-income men. They interpret their model within the framework of an
identity construct, based largely on the identity model of Akerlof and Kranton (2000).
Specifically, Watson and McLanahan hypothesize that individuals perceive a threshold income
required for marriage, and that this threshold is influenced by an individual’s local reference
group. One could imagine an extension of this theory that applies to educational attainment.
Perhaps individuals perceive a threshold type of person who completes higher levels of
education; youth at the bottom of the income distribution in more unequal places may be more
likely to view themselves as the low achievers in their reference group.
All of these perspectives describe a potential mechanism linking high inequality to lower
rates of high school completion. They are useful because they offer a conceptual framework for
thinking about the issue, and a useful framework to guide the empirical analysis and
interpretation of results. We are ultimately unable to perform a rigorous econometric
examination of this hypothesis, though, as reliable measures of perceptions and attitudes with
detailed demographic and geographic information are not available to us.
IV. EMPIRICAL STRATEGY
A. Model Specification

Kearney and Levine, p. 19
The goal of our econometric analysis is to determine whether individuals from
disadvantaged backgrounds who live in areas with high rates of income inequality experience
greater high school dropout rates. We estimate individual level regressions that model an
individual’s educational outcome as a function of individual level characteristics (including SES
status), state and year fixed effects, and, crucially, the interaction of SES status and the level of
inequality in the place in which that individual lives. It is that interaction term that gives us the
main coefficient of interest and indicates whether low SES youth in high inequality locations are
relatively more likely to drop out of high school.
The formal econometric model takes the following form:
Outcomeisc =
β 0 + β1 ( I s ⋅ LSis ) + β 2 ( I s ⋅ MSis ) + β3 LSis + β 4 MSis
+ β 5 X is + β 5 Esc + γ s + γ c + ε isc

(6)

where the outcome is some measure of educational attainment (mainly high school dropout, but
also GED, or high school graduate in some specifications), I is our measure of income inequality,
LS and MS are indicators of low and middle SES, respectively. The subscripts i, s, and c index
individuals, states, and birth cohorts, respectively; γs and γc represent state and cohort fixed
effects. Cohort variation comes from the different datasets. The vector X consists of additional
personal demographic characteristics – gender, race/ethnicity, and an indicator for living with a
single parent at age 14. The vector E captures environmental factors including relevant public
policies and labor market conditions in the state and year in which the respondent was age 16. 7

7

These variables include the state unemployment rate at age 16, the state minimum wage, state
education policies (compulsory schooling age and indicators for high school exit exam
requirements), state welfare policies (family cap and maximum AFDC/TANF benefit for a
family of 3), state abortion policies (Medicaid funding, parental notification/consent, and
mandatory delay laws), and an indicator variable for SCHIP implementation and Medicaid
family planning waiver implementation. Information on exit exam requirements by state and
year is taken from Dee and Jacob (2007) and Center on Education Policy (2010). Information on

Kearney and Levine, p. 20
We have specified this model focusing on state-level variation, but we also consider variation at
the MSA level as well.
It is important to note that our measure of income inequality is a long-run average (not
subscripted by c), so we are estimating the impact of persistent differences in inequality, not
transitory differences. This contrasts with a more typical panel data approach exploiting
transitory variation in the explanatory variable of interest. For example, Mayer (2001) uses the
1993 PSID data to exploit over-time variation in state-level income inequality, as measured by
the Gini coefficient, to investigate whether state/year levels of income inequality affect
individual level educational outcomes. In her regression models that include both state and year
fixed effects, there is no evidence of a statistically significant relationship. We do not find this to
be surprising, as it would be quite remarkable for year-to-year fluctuations in income inequality
to translate into changes in institutions, norms, or attitudes such that educational outcomes
responded at such a fine interval of time.
The main shortcoming with this empirical strategy is that any omitted, state-specific factor
that is fixed over time and correlated with long-term measures of income inequality may
generate biased results if it has disproportionate impacts on the educational attainment of low
SES youth. To determine whether potential confounders are playing this role, we estimate a
series of “horserace” regressions of the following form:

Outcomeis =
β 0 + β1 ( I s ⋅ LSis ) + β 2 ( I s ⋅ MSis ) + β3 ( As ⋅ LSis ) + β 4 ( As ⋅ MSis )
+ β5 LSis + β 6 MSis + β 7 X is + β8 Es + γ s + γ c + ε is

(7)

compulsory school laws by state and year are obtained from the National Center for Education
Statistics, Digest of Education Statistics (various years). Detailed source information and notes
about the construction of the other variables in this list are provided in Kearney and Levine
(2012). We have also experimented with interacting all of the policy variables with SES
indicators and found that the results were unaltered by doing so. In addition, we include dummy
variables indicating the dataset that the observation came from.

Kearney and Levine, p. 21
In essence, our approach involves including potential alternative state factors (As) that could
plausibly affect the relative educational attainment of low SES youth and examining whether the
results change when we include them in the same manner in which we have included the
inequality/SES interactions. If the coefficients on the interaction terms of primary interest change
when we add the additional interactions between SES and these alternatives, then it would
suggest the results generated from equation (1) are biased estimates of the causal effect of
inequality. It is impossible to rule out this form of bias unless we try including every possible
alternative, but if what we believe to be important alternatives have no impact, then we can be
more confident in a causal interpretation of our findings.
We consider four categories of these other state factors. The first set of factors addresses
the measurement of income inequality. As noted earlier, we use the 50/10 ratio as our primary
measure of inequality. In our past work on early, non-marital childbearing, we found that the
50/10 ratio was the most empirically relevant measure to determining rates of early, non-marital
childbearing. But, we recognize that there are reasons why upper tail inequality might be
particularly important for educational outcomes. We empirically explore the impact of including
the 90/50 ratio, as well as the 10th and 50th percentiles of the income distribution on their own. 8
The second set of alternative factors we consider are measures of the wage returns to
education. This is important because it enables us to identify the incentive effect of higher
returns (as in a standard Becker model) separately from any offsetting discouragement effect of
the type we propose. Third, we consider a set of alternatives that could be considered mediating
factors to determine the mechanism by which increased inequality alters educational attainment.
8

A possible concern is that inequality ratios are driven by persistent high school graduation rates
in a place, which would induce an endogeneity problem with this specification. To address that
possibility, we reran our regression analyses with 50/10 ratios constructed just among high
school graduates. This analysis yielded similar findings to those reported below.

Kearney and Levine, p. 22
Fourth, we include a set of potential confounding factors that might lead to omitted variable bias
if not explicitly interacted with SES status and included in the model. A final set of regressions
are estimated to determine the extent to which differences in distributions of underlying ability
would alter the interpretation of our findings.
B. Data
To estimate these models, we use five sources of individual-level data. Three of the
sources are obtained from the National Center for Education Statistics (the National Educational
Longitudinal Survey – NELS, High School and Beyond – HSB, and the Educational
Longitudinal Survey – ELS) and the other two are the 1979 and 1997 cohorts of the National
Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY79 and NLSY97). 9 Each of these datasets has the distinct
advantage of including detailed measures of educational attainment, including the ability to
separately identify those who receive a degree through passing a general educational
development (GED) test and those who receive a traditional high school degree. Their
combination also generates a sample of tens of thousands of teens who are moving through (or
just recently completed) their high school years. The NLSY79 originally surveyed 12,686
respondents born between 1957 and 1964 (age 14-22 in 1979). HSB originally surveyed over
30,000 high school sophomores in 1980, of whom around half were invited to participate and

9

For all datasets other than High School and Beyond, geographic identifiers are only available
for those with restricted use data agreements. This means that we are not able to share our data
with other researchers, although we are happy to provide our programs so that those who are able
to obtain their own agreement can follow our steps. Formal state identifiers are not available at
all for High School and Beyond, but researchers have identified ways to provide educated
guesses of state of residence for survey respondents (cf. Grogger, 1996). We are grateful to Jeff
Grogger for providing us with his data indicating state identifiers for these data.

Kearney and Levine, p. 23
13,682 of whom did so in the second follow up four years later.

10

We measure high school

completion in that year. NELS surveyed 14,915 8th graders in 1988 who were also surveyed in
1994, when we can determine whether they completed high school. NLSY97 surveyed 8,984
respondents born between 1980 and 1984 (age 12-18 in 1997). ELS surveyed 15,300 10th graders
in the spring of 2002 who were also surveyed in 2006, when high school completion can be
measured. In combination, a maximum of 65,567 respondents are available. In reality, mainly
because of missing state identifiers, missing information regarding SES (defined below as level
of maternal education), and sample attrition we have available 53,150 teens for our analysis. 11
Limited time variability is available when we combine these datasets, but our analysis relies on
long-term geographic variability, as we described earlier.
A critical feature of these data, as captured in our econometric models, is a measure of
the youth’s socioeconomic status. The measure that is available in each of these datasets is
mother’s level of education. We distinguish students according to whether their mother dropped
out of high school, graduated from high school, or attended college (regardless of their
graduation status). Although maternal education does not perfectly predict economic status, we
take advantage of the fact that it is strongly correlated with SES.
Although the availability of all five of these datasets provides a unique opportunity to
generate a large sample of high school students and follow them through the completion (or not)
of their degree, their combination also presents challenges. In particular, identifying a
consistently selected sample and outcome measure is somewhat complicated. Sample selection is
10

This survey also included over 28,000 seniors in 1980, but we do not use them because many
high school dropouts never make it to be seniors in high school; using these data would introduce
substantial selection bias.
11
Sample attrition reduces the sample size to 61,067. Missing educational attainment reduces it
further to 59,286. Missing maternal education brings the final sample size down to 53,150.

Kearney and Levine, p. 24
an issue because individuals entered the samples at different ages and grades. For instance, the
NELS initially surveyed 8th graders and the ELS and HSB initially surveyed 10th graders.
Survival to 10th grade represents a degree of success that changes the composition of the sample
since more poorly performing students may drop out before they make it to 10th grade. We
discuss issues like these in the attached data appendix; we account for this in our econometric
specification by including data set dummy variables, which we have labeled in the model as
cohort fixed effects since datasets identify cohorts. We focus on three consistent measures of
educational attainment across datasets. In each of these datasets, we are able to determine (a)
whether a student completed high school and received a traditional diploma, (b) whether the
student received a GED, or (c) whether the student never obtained a high school degree via either
route.
Our measures of income inequality are defined over pre-tax, post-transfer household
income using microdata from the 1980, 1990, and 2000 Censuses. These datasets are available
from IPUMS-USA (Ruggles et al., 2010); they capture details of the income distribution over a
comparable period as our microlevel datasets. We take one observation per household, adjust the
data for inflation to denominate dollars in a common year, calculate relevant percentiles of the
income distribution (unweighted), and then define state/year level income inequality ratios (the
50th to the 10th and the 90th to the 50th) based on those data. 12 We exclude those residing in
group quarters, but we impose no other sample restrictions.

12

Total household income in the census is defined as the sum of eight categories: Wages, salary,
commissions, bonuses, or tips from all jobs; Self-employment net income; interest, dividends,
net rental income, royalty income, or income from estates and trusts; Social Security or Railroad
Retirement; Supplemental Security Income (SSI); any public assistance or welfare payments
from the state or local welfare office; retirement, survivor, or disability pensions other than social

Kearney and Levine, p. 25
We then take the long-term average over all years for a state. As we described earlier, we
take this approach because we are trying to capture something about the permanent or semipermanent economic and cultural landscape in the place where an adolescent lives, as opposed to
short-term fluctuations. Simple correlations across states in state-level income ratios between the
three Censuses are high, supporting this approach. For instance the correlation across states in
the 50/10 ratio between 1980 and 1990 and between 1980 and 2000 are 0.81 and 0.74,
respectively. Correlations in the 90/50 ratio are even higher. Moreover, the 50/10 ratio has been
largely stable over time, as simple transformations from published Census Bureau data
indicates. 13
V. EMPIRICAL RESULTS
A. Descriptive Analysis
To highlight the identification strategy that we use, we initially present the results of a
descriptive analysis of educational outcomes for teens by their socioeconomic status and the
level of income inequality that exists in their state. Figure 5 presents the results of this
descriptive analysis. Foreshadowing the results from our subsequent formal econometric
analysis, we present these results just for boys. We classify states into those in the top, bottom
and middle two quartiles of inequality as measured by the 50/10 ratio. 14 The bars represent the

security; any other sources of income received regularly such as Veterans’ (VA) payments,
unemployment compensation, child support, or alimony.
13

See
the
data
available
at
https://www.census.gov/hhes/www/income/data/historical/inequality/table_IE-1A2.pdf (accessed
11/18/2014), which provide the relevant percentiles necessary to construct the income ratios.
14
States fall into the following categories (with the 50/10 ratio in parentheses). Low inequality:
UT (3.40), NV (3.49), VT (3.54), ID (3.59), NH (3.61), NE (3.71), IA (3.72), WI (3.72), AK
(3.75), OR (3.77), WY (3.78), ME (3.80), IN (3.80). Middle inequality: CO (3.81), AZ (3.81),
ND (3.82), HI (3.82), SD (3.84), FL (3.85), MT (3.86), DE (3.87), KS (3.88), MN (3.90), WA

Kearney and Levine, p. 26
percentage of boys who dropped out of high school. Boys are separated into categories according
to their mother’s educational attainment to proxy for the SES, along with the level of inequality
that exists in their state.
The figure groups SES categories so that the pattern in educational outcomes by
inequality status within SES category is readily apparent. We see that around 5 percent of boys
from higher SES families drop out of high school regardless of the level of income inequality in
their state. No obvious pattern is evident among the middle SES boys in different inequality
categories either. Among low-SES boys, however, higher inequality is associated with higher
rates of dropping out of high school. The magnitude of the difference is sizeable. Low-SES boys
in high inequality states are almost 6 percentage points more likely to drop out of high school
than low-SES boys in low inequality states.
B. State-Level Analysis
These findings from our descriptive analysis are affirmed when we estimate the
regression models described in equation 1. In essence, these regressions are analogous to the data
reported in Figure 5 with the exception that the 50/10 ratio is treated continuously rather than in
categories and additional explanatory variables are included. Table 1 presents those results for all
students in the sample and then separately for boys and girls. 15 Columns 1 through 3 are identical
except they focus on our three different measures of educational outcomes (high school dropout
– Column 1; GED – Column 2; and high school graduation – Column 3). The percentage of

(3.92), MD (3.98), VA (4.03), PA (4.03), CT (4.06), MO (4.07), OH (4.08), CA (4.15), OK
(4.19), NC (4.19), NM (4.21), NJ (4.22), MI (4.22), WV (4.25), AR (4.28). High inequality: IL
(4.29), RI (4.38), TX (4.40), TN (4.44), SC (4.45), MA (4.52), KY (4.54), MS (4.59), GA (4.66),
NY (4.77), AL (4.85), LA (5.03), DC (5.66).
15

We have also estimated these models separately by race and ethnicity, but the data were not
sufficiently powerful to yield statistically significant differences across groups.

Kearney and Levine, p. 27
students in each category is displayed just above the regression results to aid in interpretation.
When we focus on dropping out of high school for all students (the top panel of the table), we
see that a one point increase in the 50/10 ratio increases the likelihood of dropping out by 2.3
percentage points for students from low-SES families. This estimate is not quite statistically
significant, with a p-value of 12.3 percent. When we explore differences in estimates by gender,
however, we see that boys, in particular, are more likely to drop out of high school when they
grow up in a low SES household in an area marked by high inequality. Moving from a relatively
low inequality to high inequality state represents a one point increase in the 50/10 ratio. This
means that making such a move for a boy from a low SES family increases the likelihood of
dropping out of high school by age 20 by 4.1 percentage points. The analogous estimate for girls
is considerably smaller, statistically insignificant, and marginally significantly different than the
estimate for boys (p-value = 8.6 percent). Estimates for the other two outcomes, receiving a GED
or graduating from high school, are too imprecise to determine whether the increase in dropping
out for boys came mainly from either of them.
C. MSA-Level Analysis
In the next set of regressions we examine what happens if we run the main analysis at the
level of MSA, instead of state. For some large states, for example, California or Texas, the MSA
may be the more relevant level of geographic boundaries to define economic conditions and
institutions.
Table 2 focuses on the outcome of dropping out high school and repeats the analysis of
the impact of inequality and mobility by MSA rather than state. The models reported here are
analogous to those in Table 1 except that these regressions exclude policy variables set at the
state level. Omitting those variables from the state-level models has virtually no impact on the

Kearney and Levine, p. 28
results. We are also forced to omit the NELS and HSB data from our analysis because we are not
able to identify geography below the state-level in the base year in those data sets. MSA-level
results are similar to state level results. Lower SES teens, and particularly boys, who grow up in
MSAs with greater lower-tail income inequality are considerably more likely to drop out of high
school. The p-value on the gender difference in impacts on dropping out of high school is
0.0004. The general pattern in the data showing that boys’ drop out rates are more likely to be
affected by inequality than girls leads us to focus the remainder of the analysis on boys. We also
focus the remainder of our reported results solely on the outcome of dropping out of high school.
VI. AN EXAMINATION OF POTENTIAL EXPLANATIONS
In the next set of tables, we estimate models of the form of Equation 2 that are designed
to examine the extent to which other state-specific factors may matter and alter our interpretation
of a causal impact of income inequality. In each of these tables, we also include the results of our
base specification from Table 1 in the first column to facilitate comparison.
A. Alternative Measures of the Income Distribution
Table 3 reports the results of estimating the main equation of interest using different
measures of the income distribution. The alternatives we consider are the 90/50 ratio, the 10th
and 50th percentiles of the income distribution, separately, and the share of income going to the
top one percent of households. Data on the share of income going to the top one percent of
households was obtained from an online appendix to Chetty, et al. (2014a). Those data are
available at the level of commuting zones. We aggregated them to the state level. Each of the
alternative measures of the income distribution capture different attributes. The 90/50 ratio
represents income inequality at the top of the income distribution. This is the part of the
distribution that has grown over time. We have argued that the 50/10 ratio is a better measure of

Kearney and Levine, p. 29
inequality for the low SES population because it may more realistically indicate what is available
to them if they were able to move up the ladder, but this is an empirical question. We also
include the 10th and 50th percentiles of the income distribution separately to understand whether
our findings based on their ratio are actually attributable to one of the two components
separately. The income share going to the top one percent addresses the impact of very high end
inequality.
As described earlier, we include the interaction of the 50/10 ratio and SES status along
with interactions between SES status and these other measures. The estimates reported in Table 3
provide support for the notion that the 50/10 ratio is the relevant measure of income inequality
for the outcomes of low-SES boys. Interactions with the other measures are generally statistically
insignificant and have no impact on the estimated effect of the interaction between the 50/10
ratio and low SES. If anything, including the 90/50 ratio strengthens the relationship between the
50/10 ratio among low-SES boys and dropping out of high school.
B. The Role of Wage Inequality
Recall from our earlier discussion that if greater inequality reflects a greater return to
investment in human capital, the Beckerian framework predicts that all else equal, students
should invest more when income inequality is greater. Solon (2004) formalizes this concept in a
model where parents make human capital investments in their children; 16 building on the
theoretical foundation of Becker and Tomes (1979), he shows that parental investment in a
child’s human capital increases when the payoff to that return is higher, that is, when there is

16

We are agnostic as to whether this decision ultimately rests with the adolescent, his parent, or
some combination thereof.

Kearney and Levine, p. 30
more wage inequality. In our framework this would entail a reduction in the likelihood of
dropping out of high school. 17
The specifications reported in Table 4 address this possibility directly by considering a
distinct offsetting role from the incentive effect of wage differentials. In Column 2 we estimate a
regression model that includes separate interaction terms for low SES and (a) lower-tail
inequality and (b) the wage premium for high school graduates relative to high school dropouts.
The high school graduate wage premium is calculated from the same Census data that we used to
estimate measures of inequality except that the sample is restricted to those between ages 21 and
64.
The results of this specification indicate that, even with this additional interaction term in
the model, the point estimate on the interaction term between low-SES status and lower tail
inequality is virtually unchanged from the initial specification. The data indicate a positive effect
of income inequality on the likelihood that a disadvantaged youth drops out of school,
conditional on the high school wage premium. The high school graduate to dropout wage
premium itself is estimated to reduce the likelihood of dropping out for low-SES boys, although
it is insufficiently precise to be statistically significant.

17

Although our analysis focuses on cross-sectional variation, our framework also yields some
potential insights regarding trends in educational attainment over time. Despite the growing
return to education that has been taking place over time, the high school dropout rate has been
roughly constant, until, perhaps, recently (Goldin and Katz, 2010). According to our theoretical
framework, increased educational incentives associated with higher educational wage premiums
may be counteracted with a greater “desperational effect” associated with growing income
inequality, generating an ambiguous prediction regarding educational attainment. As noted
above, though, the 50/10 ratio has been relatively flat over the past few decades, which is
consistent with generally unchanged rates of dropping out of high school in our framework.

Kearney and Levine, p. 31
C. Residential Segregation and Other Potential Mediating Factors
There are a number of pathways through which income inequality could hinder the
educational attainment of disadvantaged students. In the introduction chapter of the edited
volume Whither Opportunity, Duncan and Murnane (2011) discuss the possibility that income
inequality has an effect on neighborhoods, families, labor markets, and the educational system in
ways that affect educational outcomes. 18 In this section we empirically examine factors along
these lines. We begin with measures of residential segregation. To the extent that higher income
inequality is associated with increased residential segregation – as empirically demonstrated by
Watson (2009) – this could be a pathway through which income inequality affects the
educational attainment of disadvantaged youth. Greater residential segregation can affect social
and labor market networks, the presence of high achieving role models, and the establishment of
peer groups and norms.
The influential work of Wilson (1987) emphasizes the role of “social isolation” in driving
rates of urban joblessness and non-marital childbearing. He hypothesizes that the lack of
exposure to mainstream middle class role models plays an important role. Case and Katz (1991)
provide an early example of non-experimental empirical research suggesting significant
neighborhood peer effects for criminal behavior as well as the likelihood that youth are out of
18

Chetty and Hendren (2015) shows that low-income children who move to a “better”
neighborhood, as measured by the outcomes of those children already living there, experience
improved outcomes themselves, with those moving at a younger age experiencing greater gains.
They use methods including sibling differences and family fixed effects to provide statistical
identification and they show that these childhood moves generate greater gains when their new
community is characterized by less concentrated poverty, less income inequality, better schools,
a larger share of two-parent families, and lower crime rates. This part of the analysis, however,
does not attempt to determine which, if any, of these place-based characteristics have a causal
relationship with child outcomes later in life. Nor does it attempt to figure out whether income
inequality, per se, has a negative effect on the outcomes of low-income children, and if so,
through what mechanisms.

Kearney and Levine, p. 32
school and out of work. The widely studied Moving to Opportunity for Fair Housing (MTO)
demonstration – run by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development – was
predicated on the notion that helping low-income families move out of high-poverty
neighborhoods would yield measurable economic self-sufficiency benefits. 19
To investigate neighborhood segregation as a mediating channel, we incorporate into our
empirical model indices of racial segregation, income segregation, and poverty segregation. To
the extent that any of these factors, when interacted with SES, have a statistically significant
effect and/or alter the estimated impact of the SES*50/10 ratio interactions, one could conclude
that they are important mediating factors. We obtain the three segregation measures from the
online data appendix to Chetty et al. (2014a,b). The racial segregation measure is a multi-group
Theil Index calculated at the census-tract level over four groups: white alone, black alone,
Hispanic, and other. The income segregation measure is calculated as a rank-order index by
Census tract using the definition laid out by Reardon (2011). 20 The poverty segregation index
captures the extent to which individuals in the bottom quartile are segregated from those above
the 25th percentile. We have averaged these commuting zone measures up to the state level
(population-weighted) for our state-level analysis. So, for example, a state like Texas (with

19

We describe the findings of that experiment, and how they relate to our findings, in our
discussion section below.
20
The income segregation measure captures the extent to which households of different income
percentiles are evenly distributed among residential locations. For example, if 10 percent of a
Census tract is below the 10th percentile, that indicates no segregation at that level. The overall
statistic essentially calculates this for all 100th centiles and then aggregates up, putting more
weight near the middle of the distribution where there should be more equality. The segregation
index is maximized if and only if there is no variation in income within any neighborhood. The
segregation index is minimized if and only if within each neighborhood, the income distribution
is identical to that in the population. This Reardon (2011) measure has the desirable property that
it is insensitive to rank-preserving changes in the income distribution.

Kearney and Levine, p. 33
highly segregated commuting zones) will be classified as highly income segregated and Utah
will not.
The results reported in Table 5 provide no evidence of this sort of effect. None of the
coefficients on the interactions with these factors in columns (2) through (4) are statistically
significant, and their inclusion has a negligible impact on the SES*inequality interactions. The
lack of support in the data for these factors is noteworthy, but we hasten to note that it should not
be interpreted as definitive evidence against an important role for residential segregation in
affecting the educational outcomes of poor youth. Rather, these regression results imply that the
average level of segregation in the state is not driving the empirical relationship we find between
state level income inequality and individual-level education outcomes.
Another potential mechanism through which income inequality might affect the drop-out
rates of low-SES youth is through reduced public provision of educational inputs. Political
economy considerations of whether higher levels of income inequality would lead to lower levels
of public goods provision (including public school expenditures) is actually ambiguous. More
money in the hands of the rich may reduce transfers of resources to the poor. Alternatively, if the
rich become more fearful about the poor agitating for social change, it may increase transfers.
Furthermore, under the median voter model, with greater inequality, the median falls relative to
the mean, and the preferences of the median voter for more distribution from the rich prevail.
Recent empirical evidence on the relationship between income inequality and public revenue for
school spending finds public school spending increases as the level of local income inequality
rises (Boustan et al. 2013; Corcoran & Evans, 2010; Gordon, 2013). Nonetheless, we run the
relevant regression to investigate public school expenditures as a mediating pathway.

Kearney and Levine, p. 34
Table 6 reports the results from regression that includes the interaction of state-level
50/10 inequality and educational inputs. Educational inputs are measured by per capita
educational expenditures and pupil-teacher ratios. 21 In our data, we see that per capita
educational expenditures and pupil teacher ratios are only weakly correlated with state-level
lower-tail income inequality (0.14 and -0.23, respectively), making it unlikely that these are
omitted variables driving the observed link between income inequality and drop-out behavior.
The regression results confirm that this is not the case. The data do not indicate a direct effect of
these measures on the rate at which low-SES individuals drop out of high school. Nor does the
inclusion of these measures alter the conclusion that greater lower-tail income inequality leads to
higher rates of high school drop-out behavior among low SES individuals.
Table 6 also considers aggregate levels of social capital and family structure as potential
mediating factors. Social capital is a measure introduced by Putnam (2000) that combines voter
turnout rates, the fraction of people who return their census forms, and measures of participation
in community organizations. 22 Family structure is measured by the fraction of children living in
single parent households. Although social capital and the fraction of children living with single
parents are more strongly correlated with our measure of income inequality, including those
variables in the model similarly has little impact. Ultimately, the data fail to provide evidence
that any of these potential factors are the mediating mechanism driving the empirical relationship
we document.

21

We thank Liz Cascio for generously sharing the historical data she compiled on per pupil
expenditures and per pupil teacher ratios.
22
We obtained these data and the fraction of children with a single parent from the online
appendix to Chetty, et al. (2014a).

Kearney and Levine, p. 35
D. Remaining Potential Confounding Factors
In the last set of “horse race” specifications, Table 7 presents the results of including one
additional set of interactions with other state-specific factors that could simply represent
confounding factors. These include the percentage of the state’s population that is minority, the
poverty rate in the state, and the state’s incarceration rate, and the fraction of employment in the
manufacturing sector. 23 The goal here is to determine whether one of these state-specific factors
is a contextual factor related to state-level income inequality and driving the differential high
school dropout rates. The results reported in Table 7 do not indicate that to be the case.
Interactions between each of these factors and socioeconomic status are universally insignificant
and their inclusion in the regression model has no substantive impact on the estimated effect of
the interactions between lower-tail inequality and individual SES.24
E. The Role of Underlying Differences in Ability
23

The incarceration data are compiled by the U.S. Bureau of Justice Statistics, Office of Justice
programs, downloaded from www.ojp.usdoj.gov. Poverty rate data comes from the United States
Census Bureau and were downloaded from
http://www.census.gov/hhes/www/poverty/data/historical/people.html.
We obtained the manufacturing data from the online appendix to Chetty, et al. (2014a).
24
We have also estimated many of the horse-race specifications at the level of MSA and
confirmed that defining the geographic area at this level does not alter the qualitative results. Not
all alternative characteristics considered in the main state level regressions are available at the
MSA level. Appendix Table 1 reports results from including the interaction of SES status with
alternative measures of the income distribution. Appendix Table 2 reports results from including
the interaction of SES status with segregation measures. Appendix Table 3 reports results from
including the interaction with fraction single-parent and the fraction employed in manufacturing.
The results correspond to the results from the state level regressions: the estimated coefficient on
the 50/10 interaction is not qualitatively changed from the addition of the new interaction.
Furthermore, in all regressions but one, the estimated coefficient on the added interaction term is
not statistically different from zero. The one exception is for the interaction of low-SES*racial
segregation measured at the MSA level. In this regression, MSA-level racial segregation appears
to be positively related to drop out rates. Future work should pursue an investigation of
mechanisms and look at different levels of geography. For the purposes of the present paper, the
finding is upheld that there is an empirical relationship between lower-tail inequality and the
likelihood that a low-SES boy drops out of school, and that does not appear to be driven by
confounding factors at the aggregate level.

Kearney and Levine, p. 36
As described earlier, a potential alternative explanation for the link between high
inequality and low mobility is that in locations with greater demographic diversity, there will be
a mechanical correlation that links the two. The more similar the underlying populations, the
lower the inequality (by definition) and the greater the mobility because chance will play a
greater role in determining who succeeds in any given period. In essence, this is an argument
about the underlying distribution of “ability.”
We explore this alternative within the context of educational outcomes using test scores
as a proxy for underlying ability. Specifically, we use data from scores on the Armed Forces
Qualifying Test (AFQT), which was administered to participants in the NLSY79 and NLSY97
surveys. The AFQT is used by the military to determine eligibility and placement. The score is
reported as a standardized percentile ranking. These data have been used by empirical
researchers in the past for similar purposes (e.g., Herrnstein and Murray, 1994; Neal and
Johnson, 1996; Belley and Lochner, 2007). We hasten to note that the AFQT is not a direct
measure of innate ability; on this point, Cascio and Lewis (2006) show that exogenous increases
in educational attainment lead to increases in AFQT scores, especially for minorities. It is most
appropriately considered a cumulative measure of ability, reflecting innate endowments,
environmental influences, and the result of formal and informal human capital investment. Still,
these test scores provide information about cognitive ability at the time the exam was taken.
The purpose of the empirical analysis reported in Table 8 is to determine whether these
differences in the AFQT measure of cognitive ability can explain any share of the greater relative
rate of drop out behavior among low-SES boys in high inequality places. As in past tables, the
first column is included for the purpose of comparison; it reports the results from a model
analogous to our main specification taken from Table 1 for boys, with the estimated point

Kearney and Levine, p. 37
estimate on the interaction of primary interest being 0.042 (standard error 0.016). 25 Since the
AFQT is only available in NLSY79 and NLSY97, the second column presents the same
regression just for those two datasets. The results indicate a somewhat larger point estimate
(0.067), for the effect of inequality on dropping out, but the smaller sample size leads to greater
imprecision as well (standard error 0.029). The third column of this table examines what happens
if we control for AFQT as an explanatory variable in a specification that is otherwise identical to
that in Column 2. We find that doing so does reduce the point estimate by about one-third, to
0.045 from 0.067. This is not statistically different from the estimated effect in column one, but
the standard error is now 0.028 (owing to the smaller sample size coming from having to restrict
the analysis to just two datasets), and so this estimate is no longer statistically significant from
zero.
In Column 4, we treat AFQT as the dependent variable and estimate a model that is
otherwise equivalent to those estimated earlier. The point estimates indicate that low-SES youth
in high inequality areas have lower AFQT scores; that relationship is marginally statistically
significant (p-value = 8.3 percent). This result helps explain why the estimated impact of
inequality for low-SES boys fell when we added AFQT: it appears that low-SES boys who live
in high inequality locations have AFQT scores that are even lower than those for low-SES boys
overall. 26

25

The only minor difference between this specification and that in Table 1 is that we omit all
policy variables since we will subsequently be restricting the sample to just two datasets leaving
us with very limited variation across states over time. As the results indicate, dropping those
variables has virtually no impact on the findings.
26
Multiplying the point estimate of -4.38 from the low-SES interaction term in column (4) with
the point estimate of -0.005 on the AFQT variable from column (3) yields 0.022, suggesting that
the lower AFQT scores of boys in high inequality states would lead to a 0.022 percentage point
relative increase in drop-out rates, which is exactly the difference we see between columns (2)

Kearney and Levine, p. 38
There are two possible interpretations of these results. For readers inclined to interpret the
AFQT as measuring innate ability, one could conclude that the exclusion of the AFQT variable
in previous analyses leads to an upwardly biased estimate of the causal impact of inequality on
dropout rates; still, two-thirds of the effect remains. An alternative interpretation is that part of
the effect of income inequality is captured by decreased educational investment before the actual
drop out event. This corresponds to a leading view of drop out behavior as a “process” rather
than a discrete event: a student begins to demonstrate irregular attendance, then multiple failed
courses, and eventually the obstacles to graduation feel overwhelming and the student drops out
(Rumberger, 2011). In other words, discouraged students stop applying themselves early. This
could show up as a lower AFQT score, consistent with the finding of Cascio and Lewis (2006)
that an exogenous increase in education leads to higher AFQT scores. Their finding would imply
that decreased effort in school and in learning more broadly would result in a lower AFQT score.
Regardless of interpretation, the impact of greater inequality on dropout behavior is substantial,
albeit somewhat smaller if one accepts the interpretation that the AFQT measures innate ability.
VII. SELF-REPORTED REASONS FOR DROPPING OUT OF SCHOOL
In an attempt to explore students’ own stated reasons for why they dropped out of school
– and see if they are consistent with our proposed model– we take advantage of data from the
High School and Beyond (HSB) survey. In 1980, high school sophomores were initially
surveyed and then they were resurveyed in 1982. We focus on those in the 1982 survey who left
school after their sophomore year interview in 1980. The sample for this “drop out survey”
includes 2,421 individuals, or roughly 8 percent of the initial 1980 cohort. These individuals
were asked why they dropped out and given a set of 16 possible reasons; they were allowed to
and (3). This is another way to see that differences in AFQT capture about one-third of the
estimated effect of inequality on the drop-out rates of low-SES boys.

Kearney and Levine, p. 39
mark as many as applied. Though we acknowledge that students’ self-reported reasons for
dropping out of school might not accurately reflect underlying motivations, there is potentially
something to be learned from whether the stated reasons were academic in nature.
A focus on perceptions – as discussed above – implies that the high school drop-out
decision is less likely to be driven by academic difficulties. In other words, if a student perceives
a lower benefit to remaining in school, then he will choose to drop out at a lower threshold of
academic difficulty. We look to the data to see if there is any support for such a notion. The most
direct measure of academic difficulty is “had poor grades/not doing well”. Other reasons that
might reasonably be considered academic include the following: expelled or suspended; did not
get into desired program; school grounds too dangerous and moved too far from school. The
remaining 11 options include stated reasons that are less directly academic: had to support
family, offered job and chose to work, school wasn’t for me/didn’t like it, wanted to travel,
wanted to enter military friends were dropping out, married or marriage plans, pregnant,
illness/disability, couldn’t get along with teachers, and couldn’t get along with students. Looking
at the share of students who report each particular reason, and how this compares across states by
inequality level, we see that 51 percent of dropouts in the least unequal states reported that they
dropped out because of poor academic performance, as compared to only 21 percent of students
who dropped out in the most unequal states. This is the only particular reason (of the 16) that
shows a difference in shares across states by inequality level that is statistically significant.
Regression-adjusted results are similar. Controlling for the same set of individual- and
state-level controls as described in equation (1) above, and controlling for a state fixed effect, the
data indicate that low-SES students in the highest and middle range inequality states are 25-29
percentage points less likely to cite poor grades as a reason for dropping out. This represents a

Kearney and Levine, p. 40
nearly 50 percent reduction in citing poor grades. This reason has by far the largest difference
between low SES students in high and low inequality states. Although not conclusive, these
survey data are broadly consistent with the notion that low-SES boys in more unequal states are
more likely to drop out, not because they are struggling academically, but potentially because
they perceive a lower return from staying in school. In other words, for the same level of
academic performance, low-SES students in more unequal places are more likely to drop out of
school.
VIII. DISCUSSION
In this paper we have proposed a mechanism through which greater levels of income
inequality might lead to lower rates of upward mobility, namely, lower levels of high school
completion among individuals from low-income backgrounds. We empirically test the
proposition and test for the role of confounding factors and potential mechanisms. Our analysis
offers compelling evidence that low-SES youth, boys in particular, are more likely to drop out of
high school if they live in a place where the gap between the bottom and middle of the income
distribution is wider.
The fact that boys appear to respond to greater levels of income inequality by dropping
out of school more often is consistent with a growing body of evidence suggesting that boys
suffer greater educational and labor market consequences from family and economic
disadvantage (cf. Bertrand and Pan, 2013; Autor, Figlio, Karbownik, Roth, and Wasserman,
2015; and Chetty, et al., 2016). However, these patterns do not necessarily mean that low-SES
girls are not affected by the economic disadvantage or conditions around them. They might
simply respond on different margins. For instance, in Kearney and Levine (2014), we use

Kearney and Levine, p. 41
empirical methods analogous to those we used in this paper and find that low-SES girls in more
unequal places are significantly more likely to become young, unmarried mothers.
We interpret the findings as being consistent with – albeit not a conclusive demonstration
of – a model of decision-making where a persistently wide gap between the bottom and middle
of the income distribution has a negative effect on the perceived likelihood of economic success
through human capital investments. This could occur either through impeded opportunity in
actuality or through an effect on perceptions, shaped by a variety of factors experienced
throughout one’s childhood. The finding that higher levels of lower-tail income inequality leads
to greater rates of drop out is robust to including the high school graduate wage premium in the
regression model. In fact, the data indicate that the wage premium itself reduces the dropout rate,
but household income inequality has an offsetting positive effect. In an additional set of models
that examine potential mediating factors – including residential segregation and school financing
– the data reject the hypotheses that any of the identified contextual factors are responsible for
the relationship.
There are important policy implications of this work regarding the types of programs
needed to improve the economic trajectory of children from low-SES backgrounds. Successful
interventions would focus on ways for low socioeconomic youth to increase the likelihood of
achieving economic success. Those interventions could focus on improving the actual return to
investing in human capital for them, as we often discuss. But they also could focus on improving
perceptions. College scholarship programs for low SES high school graduates, for instance, may
make college a better investment for low-income youth and increase the return associated with
graduation from high school. But it could also alter the student’s perception that going to college
is the sort of activity that they can achieve. They can be the “college-going type.” Other such

Kearney and Levine, p. 42
interventions might take the form of mentoring programs that connect youth with successful
adult mentors, school and community programs that focus on establishing high expectations and
providing pathways to graduation. They could also take the form of early-childhood parenting
programs that work with parents to create more nurturing home environments to build selfesteem and engender positive behaviors.
We believe these implications are consistent with the new set of results coming out of the
Moving to Opportunity (MTO) experiment. MTO was a randomized control trial that offered
housing vouchers and mobility counseling to inner-city, low-income families living in public
housing. The results from the first generation of MTO movers provided little evidence that
moving to a low-poverty neighborhood led to noticeable improvements in adult economic
outcomes or teenager’s educational attainment (Kling, Liebman, and Katz, 2007). But, more
recent evidence from Chetty, Hendren, and Katz (2015) indicates that children who moved when
they were very young experienced higher college attendance rates and ultimately received higher
wages. The authors’ interpretation of these findings is that the greater resources in the low
poverty area had more time to take effect on the younger children. Although we do not dispute
that interpretation, our model would additionally suggest that an important reason why the
program was successful for younger children is because it changed their perceptions of what
would be possible for them. Those children who moved at younger ages not only had the
advantage of greater resources for a longer period of time, but they also spent less time with a
highly disadvantaged peer group, which might have altered their perceptions of what was
possible for them.
This interpretation also builds nicely on the contributions of Cunha, Heckman, Lochner,
and Masterov (2006), and Cunha and Heckman (2007), among others, arguing that “skills beget

Kearney and Levine, p. 43
skills.” The theory is that investments in skill at an early age compound and have a larger
eventual effect on economic wellbeing than investments in skill at an older age. Our
conceptualization might be complementary to that view, insofar as “perceptions beget
perceptions.” This is not to say that later life interventions do not have the ability to improve
one’s perceptions, but it may be more difficult to overcome that hurdle.
Our analysis has demonstrated that a greater persistent gap between the bottom of the
income distribution and the middle leads to lower rates of high school completion among
economically disadvantaged youth, boys in particular. These findings have implications for the
potential of disadvantaged youth to achieve upward mobility and the types of policies that are
likely to be successful. Furthermore, they reflect a plausible channel through which higher rates
of income inequality might causally lead to lower rates of social mobility. To improve rates of
upward mobility, we need to give economically disadvantaged youth reasons to believe that they
can achieve economic success.

Kearney and Levine, p. 44
REFERENCES
Akerlof, George A. and Rachel E. Kranton (2000). “Economics and Identity.” Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 115(3): 715-753.
Autor, David, David Figlio, Krzysztof Karbownik, Jeffrey Roth, and Melanie Wasserman
(2015). “Family Disadvantage and the Gender Gap in Behavioral and Educational Outcomes,”
IPR Northwestern working paper 15-16, October.
Becker, Gary S. and Kevin M. Murphy (2007). “The Upside of Income Inequality.” The
American. May/June.
Becker, Gary S., and Nigel Tomes (1979). “An Equilibrium Theory of the Distribution of
Income and Intergenerational Mobility.” Journal of Political Economy. Vol. 87, pp. 1153-89.
Bertrand, Marianne and Jessica Pan, “The Trouble with Boys: Social Influences and the Gender
Gap in Disruptive Behavior,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, January 2013,
5(1), 32-64.
Belley, Philippe, and Lance Lochner (2007). "The Changing Role of Family Income and Ability
in Determining Educational Achievement," Journal of Human Capital, 1(1): 37-89.
Boustan, Leah, Fernando Ferreira, Hernan Winkler, and Eric Zolt (2013). “The Effect of Rising
Income Inequality on Taxation and Public Expenditures: Evidence from US Municipalities and
School Districts, 1970-2000.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 95(4): 1291-1302.
Cascio, Elizabeth U. and Ethan G. Lewis (2006). “Schooling and the Armed Forces Qualifying
Test Evidence from School-Entry Laws.” Journal of Human Resources, 41(2): 294-318.
Case, Anne C. and Lawrence F. Katz (1991). "The Company You Keep: The Effects of Family
and Neighborhood on Disadvantaged Youths," NBER Working Paper No. 3705.
Center on Education Policy (2010). State High School Tests: Exit Exams and Other Assessments.
Washington, DC: Center on Education Policy.
Chetty, Raj and Nathaniel Hendren (2015). “The Impacts of Neighborhoods on Intergenerational
Mobility: Childhood Exposure Effects and County-Level Estimates”, Harvard University mimeo,
May.
Chetty, Raj, Nathaniel Hendren, and Lawrence F. Katz (2015). “The Effects of Exposure to
Better Neighborhoods on Children: New Evidence from the Moving to Opportunity Experiment”
NBER Working Paper No. 21156, May.

Kearney and Levine, p. 45
Chetty, Raj, Nathaniel Hendren, Patrick Kline, and Emmanuel Saez (2014a). “Where is the Land
of Opportunity? The Geography of Intergenerational Mobility in the United States.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 129(4): 1553-1623.
Chetty, Raj, Nathaniel Hendren, Patrick Kline, and Emmanuel Saez (2014b). “Is the United
States Still a Land of Opportunity? Recent Trends in Intergenerational Mobility.” NBER
Working Paper 19844.
Chetty, Raj, Nathaniel Hendren, Frina Lin, Jeremy Majerovitz, Benjamin Scuderi (2016).
“Childhood Environment and Gender Gaps in Adulthood.” NBER Working Paper 21936.
Corak, Miles (2006). “Do Poor Children Become Poor Adults? Lessons from a Cross-Country
Comparison of Generational Earnings Mobility.” Research on Economic Inequality, 13: 143188.
Corak, Miles (2013). "Income Inequality, Equality of Opportunity, and Intergenerational
Mobility." Journal of Economic Perspectives, 27(3): 79-102.
Corcoran, Sean and William N. Evans (2010). “Income Inequality, the Median Voter, and the
Support for Public Education.” Cambridge, MA: NBER working paper 16097.
Council of Economic Advisers (2012). Economic Report of the President. Washington, DC:
Government Printing Office.
Cunha, Flavio, James J. Heckman, Lance Lochner, Dimitriy V. Masterov (2006). "Interpreting
the Evidence on Life Cycle Skill Formation," in Eric Hanuschek and Finis Welch, Handbook of
the Economics of Education, Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Cunha, Flávio, and James J. Heckman (2007), “The Technology of Skill Formation,” American
Economic Review 97(2): 31-47.
Dee, Thomas S. and Jacob, Brian A. (2007). “Do High School Exit Exams Influence
Educational Attainment or Labor Market Performance?” In Adam Gamoran (ed.), StandardsBased Reform and the Poverty Gap: Lessons for No Child Left Behind. Washington, D.C.:
Brookings University Press.
Destin, Mesmin, Scott Richman, Fatima Varner, and Jelani Mandara. (2012). “Feeling”
hierarchy: The pathway from subjective social status to achievement.” Journal of Adolescence
35, 1571-1579.
Duncan, Greg J., and Richard J. Murnane (2011). “Introduction: The American Dream, Then and
Now,” In Greg J. Duncan and Richard J. Murnane (eds.), Whither Opportunity? Rising
Inequality, Schools, and Children’s Life Chances. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.

Kearney and Levine, p. 46
Genicot, Garance, and Debraj Ray (2014). “Aspirations and Inequality.” Cambridge, MA:
National Bureau of Economic Research working paper 19976.
Goldin, Claudia and Larry F. Katz. The Race between Education and Technology. Cambridge,
Harvard University Press. 2010.
Gordon, Nora (2013). “High School Graduation in the Context of Changing Elementary and
Secondary Education Policy and Income Inequality: The Last Half Century,” National Bureau of
Economic Research working paper 19049.
Grogger, Jeffrey T. (1996). "School Expenditures and Post-Schooling Earnings: Evidence from
High School and Beyond." Review of Economics and Statistics 78(4): 628-637.
Heckman, James J. and Paul A. LaFontaine (2010). “The American High School Graduation
Rate: Trends and Levels,” Review of Economics and Statistics 92 (2): 244-262.
Herrnstein, Richard and Charles Murray (1994). The Bell Curve: Intelligence and Class
Structure in American Life. New York: Simon and Schuster.
Ikoma, Sakiko, and Markus Broer (2015). “How Can We Help Students Match College
Aspirations to College Enrollment?” available at: http://educationpolicy.air.org/blog/how-canwe-help-students-match-college-aspirations-college-enrollment (accessed 2/15/2016).
Jensen, Robert (2010). “The (Perceived) Returns to Education and the Demand for Schooling,"
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125(2): 515-548.
Kearney, Melissa S. and Phillip B. Levine (2012). “Investigating Recent Trends in the U.S. Teen
Birth Rate,” National Bureau of Economic Research working paper 17964.
Kearney, Melissa and Phillip Levine (2014). “Income Inequality and Early Non-Marital
Childbearing,” Journal of Human Resources, 49(1): pp. 1-31.
Kling, Jeffrey R., Jeffrey B. Liebman, and Lawrence F. Katz (2007). “Experimental Analysis of
Neighborhood Effects.” Econometrica 75(1): 83-119.
Kling, Jeffrey R., Jens Ludwig, and Lawrence F. Katz (2005). “Neighborhood Effects on Crime
for Female and Male Youth: Evidence from a Randomized Housing Voucher Experiment.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics. 120(1):87-130.
Lee, Chul-In and Gary Solon. (2009). “Trends in Intergenerational Income Mobility,” Review of
Economics and Statistics 91(4), 766-772.
Luttmer, Erzo. F. P. (2005). “Neighbors as Negatives: Relative Earnings and Well-Being.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 120(3): 963-1002.

Kearney and Levine, p. 47
Mankiw, N Gregory (2013). "Defending the One Percent." Journal of Economic Perspectives,
27(3): 21-34.
Manski, Charles F. (1993). “Adolescent Econometricians: How Do Youth Infer the Returns to
Education?” in Charles T. Clotfelter and Michael Rothschild (eds.), Studies of Supply and
Demand in Higher Education. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Mayer, Susan (2001). “How did the Increase in Economic Inequality between 1970 and 1990
Affect Children’s Educational Attainment.” American Journal of Sociology, 107(1):1-32.
Neal, Derek and William R. Johnson (1996). “The Role of Premarket Factors in Black-White
Wage Differences.” Journal of Political Economy 104(5): 869-895.
Putnam, Robert D. (2000). Bowling Alone. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Reardon, Sean F. (2011). “Measures of Income Segregation." CEPA Working Papers. Stanford,
CA: Stanford Center for Education Policy Analysis.
Ruggles, Steven J., Trent Alexander, Katie Genadek, Ronald Goeken, Matthew B. Schroeder,
and Matthew Sobek. (2010) Integrated Public Use Microdata Series: Version 5.0 [Machinereadable database]. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota.
Rumberger, Russell W. (2011). Dropping Out : Why Students Drop Out of High School and what
can be done about it. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Sawhill, Isabel V. (2014). Generations Unbound: Drifting into Sex and Parenting without
Marriage. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution.
Solon, Gary (2004). “A model of intergenerational mobility variation over time and place,” in ed.
Miles Corak, Generational Income Mobility in Europe and North America, Cambridge
University Press: 2004: 38-47.
Stetser, Marie C. and Robert Stillwell (2014). Public High School Four-Year On-Time
Graduation Rates and Event Dropout Rates: School Years 2010–11 and 2011–12. First Look
(NCES 2014-391). U.S. Department of Education. Washington, DC: National Center for
Education Statistics. Retrieved 12/1/15 from http://nces.ed.gov/pubsearch.
Watson, Tara (2009). “Inequality and the Measurement of Residential Segregation by Income.”
Review of Income and Wealth, 55: 820-844.
Watson, Tara, and Sara McLanahan (2011). “Marriage Meets the Joneses: Relative Income,
Identity, and Marital Status.” Journal of Human Resources, 46: 568-586.
Wilkinson, Richard and Kate Pickett (2009). The Spirit Level: Why Greater Equality Makes
Societies Stronger. London: Bloomsbury Press.

Kearney and Levine, p. 48
Wilson, William J (1987). The Truly Disadvantaged: The Inner City, the Underclass and Public
Policy. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Winship, Scott (2015). “The Great Gatsby Curve: All Heat, No Light.” Available at:
http://www.brookings.edu/blogs/social-mobility-memos/posts/2015/05/20-opposition-greatgatsby-curve-winship (accessed 12/1/15).

Table 1: Impact of Long-Term Inequality by State
on Educational Attainment by Age 20, by Socioeconomic Status and Gender
High School Dropout
(1)

GED Receipt
(2)

High School Graduate
(3)

All
Percent in Category

10.1

4.8

85.1

50/10 Ratio*
Mom HS Dropout

0.023
(0.015)

-0.006
(0.010)

-0.017
(0.016)

50/10 Ratio*
Mom HS Graduate

0.018
(0.014)

0.010
(0.008)

-0.028
(0.013)

Boys
Percent in Category

11.2

5.5

83.3

50/10 Ratio*
Mom HS Dropout

0.041
(0.015)

-0.018
(0.015)

-0.022
(0.018)

50/10 Ratio*
Mom HS Graduate

0.025
(0.017)

0.013
(0.009)

-0.037
(0.016)

Girls
Percent in Category

9.1

4.1

86.8

50/10 Ratio*
Mom HS Dropout

0.007
(0.019)

0.005
(0.010)

-0.012
(0.022)

50/10 Ratio*
Mom HS Graduate

0.009
(0.014)

0.006
(0.011)

-0.015
(0.016)

Notes: Reported standard errors (in parenthesis) are adjusted for clustering at the state level. Additional explanatory
variables in each regression include maternal educational attainment, gender (where appropriate) race/ethnicity, an
indicator variable for living with a single parent at age 14, the state unemployment rate at age 16, the state minimum
wage, state education policies (compulsory schooling age and indicators for high school exit exam requirements),
state welfare policies (family cap and maximum AFDC/TANF benefit for a family of 3), state abortion policies
(Medicaid funding, parental notification/consent, and mandatory delay laws), and indicator variables for SCHIP
implementation and a Medicaid family planning waiver program, along with state and cohort fixed effects. The pvalue of a test comparing the equality of coefficients in column (1) by gender in response to a change in the 50/10
ratio*mom HS dropout is 0.086. Sample includes data from the NELS, HSB, ELS, NLSY79, and NLSY97. The
total sample size is 53,150, with 25,816 boys and 27,334 girls.

Table 2: Impact of Long-Term Inequality by MSA
On Likelihood of Dropping Out of High School, by Socioeconomic Status and Gender

Percent in Category
50/10 Ratio*
Mom HS Dropout
50/10 Ratio*
Mom HS Graduate

All
(1)

Boys
(2)

Girls
(3)

12.3
0.036
(0.013)

14.1
0.073
(0.018)

10.6
0.002
(0.016)

0.020

0.028

0.009

(0.011)

(0.016)

(0.012)

22,304
11,042
11,262
Sample size
Notes: Reported standard errors are adjusted for clustering at the MSA level. Additional explanatory variables in
each regression include maternal educational attainment, race/ethnicity, and an indicator variable for living with a
single parent at age 14, along with MSA and cohort fixed effects. The p-value of a test comparing the equality of
coefficients by gender for HS dropout mothers is 0.0004. Sample includes data from the ELS, NLSY79 and
NLSY97.

Table 3: Impact of Alternative Income Distribution Measures on Boys’ Likelihood of
Dropping Out of High School, by Socioeconomic Status
10th Percentile 50th Percentile
of Income
of Income
Income Share
(in $10,000s) (in $10,000s)
top 1%
(3)
(4)
(5)
-0.63
-0.20
0.38

50/10 ratio
(1)

90/50 ratio
(2)
0.67

50/10 Ratio*
Mom HS Dropout

0.041
(0.015)

0.058
(0.025)

0.041
(0.024)

0.041
(0.016)

0.042
(0.018)

50/10 Ratio*
Mom HS Graduate

0.025
(0.017)

0.023
(0.019)

0.024
(0.021)

0.024
(0.017)

0.029
(0.017)

State Characteristic*
Mom HS Dropout

-----

-0.069
(0.072)

0.0002
(0.005)

-0.0001
(0.001)

-0.001
(0.003)

State Characteristic*
Mom HS Graduate

-----

0.004
(0.050)

-0.0001
(0.003)

-0.0003
(0.001)

-0.001
(0.002)

Correlation between 50/10 ratio
and characteristic:

Notes: see notes to Table 1. Interacted state characteristic is listed in column headers.

Table 4: Impact of Educational Wage Premiums on Boys’ Likelihood
of Dropping Out of High School, by Socioeconomic Status

50/10 ratio
(1)
Correlation between 50/10 ratio
and characteristic:

HS Grad to
HS Dropout
Wage Premium
(2)
0.27

College Grad to
HS Grad
Wage Premium
(3)
0.35

50/10 Ratio*
Mom HS Dropout

0.041
(0.015)

0.046
(0.015)

0.037
(0.017)

50/10 Ratio*
Mom HS Graduate

0.025
(0.017)

0.023
(0.018)

0.022
(0.019)

State Characteristic*
Mom HS Dropout

-----

-0.117
(0.076)

0.039
(0.043)

State Characteristic*
Mom HS Graduate

-----

0.029
(0.062)

0.024
(0.043)

Notes: see notes to Table 1. Interacted state characteristic is listed in column headers.

Table 5: Impact of Measures of Segregation on Boys’ Likelihood of
Dropping Out of High School, by Socioeconomic Status
50/10
ratio
(1)

Racial
Segregation
Index
(2)
0.05

Income
Segregation
Index
(3)
0.47

Poverty
Segregation
Index
(4)
0.26

50/10 Ratio*
Mom HS Dropout

0.041
(0.015)

0.040
(0.017)

0.040
(0.016)

0.037
(0.017)

50/10 Ratio*
Mom HS Graduate

0.025
(0.017)

0.025
(0.015)

0.025
(0.017)

0.024
(0.017)

State Characteristic*
Mom HS Dropout

-----

0.0008
(0.0008)

0.050
(0.396)

0.281
(0.496)

State Characteristic*
Mom HS Graduate

-----

-0.0008
(0.0004)

0.0001
(0.204)

0.050
(0.260)

Correlation between 50/10
ratio and characteristic:

Notes: see notes to Table 1. Interacted state characteristic is listed in column headers.

Table 6: Impact of Potential Mediating Factors on Boys’ Likelihood of
Dropping Out of High School, by Socioeconomic Status

50/10 ratio
(1)
Correlation between 50/10
ratio and characteristic:

Per Capita
Educational
Expenditures
(/1,000)
(2)
0.17

Pupil
Teacher Ratio
(/10)
(3)
-0.24

Social
Capital Index
(4)
-0.44

Fraction
Single Parent
(5)
0.64

50/10 Ratio*
Mom HS Dropout

0.041
(0.015)

0.036
(0.015)

0.029
(0.015)

0.045
(0.019)

0.036
(0.019)

50/10 Ratio*
Mom HS Graduate

0.025
(0.017)

0.019
(0.012)

0.020
(0.015)

0.016
(0.019)

0.015
(0.022)

State Characteristic*
Mom HS Dropout

-----

-0.001
(0.003)

-0.003
(0.002)

0.008
(0.008)

0.092
(0.247)

State Characteristic*
Mom HS Graduate

-----

-0.005
(0.002)

0.004
(0.002)

-0.007
(0.005)

0.192
(0.221)

Notes: see notes to Table 1. Interacted state characteristic is listed in column headers.

Table 7: Impact of Potentially Confounding State Characteristics on Boys’ Likelihood of
Dropping Out of High School, by Socioeconomic Status
50/10 ratio
(1)

Percent
Minority
(2)
0.41

Poverty
Rate
(3)
0.63

Incarceration
Rate (/1,000)
(4)
0.44

Fraction
Employed in
Manufacturing
(5)
-0.10

50/10 Ratio*
Mom HS Dropout

0.041
(0.017)

0.053
(0.018)

0.056
(0.026)

0.043
(0.021)

0.043
(0.015)

50/10 Ratio*
Mom HS Graduate

0.024
(0.012)

0.021
(0.017)

0.021
(0.021)

0.008
(0.014)

0.024
(0.017)

State Characteristic*
Mom HS Dropout

-----

-0.0007
(0.0004)

-0.003
(0.004)

-0.047
(0.092)

0.221
(0.148)

State Characteristic*
Mom HS Graduate

-----

0.0001
(0.0003)

0.001
(0.002)

0.066
(0.045)

0.012
(0.105)

Correlation between 50/10 ratio
and characteristic:

Notes: See notes to Table 1. Interacted state characteristic is listed in column headers.

Table 8: Relationship between Socioeconomic Status, Inequality, and AFQT Scores for Boys
All 5 Datasets
(1)

NLSY79 and
NLSY97
(2)

NLSY79 and
NLSY97
(3)

NLSY79 and
NLSY97
(4)

HS Dropout

HS Dropout

HS Dropout

AFQT

11.2

17.7

17.7

50.7

Mom HS Dropout*50/10 Ratio

0.042
(0.016)

0.067
(0.029)

0.045
(0.028)

-4.48
(2.49)

Mom HS Graduate*50/10 Ratio

0.024
(0.018)

0.077
(0.025)

0.057
(0.023)

-4.10
(2.27)

---

---

-0.005
(0.0002)

Sample
Dependent Variable
Mean of Dependent Variable

AFQT

Notes: Reported standard errors in parenthesis are adjusted for clustering at the state level. Estimates in Column 1
differ slightly from previous estimates because no state level policy variables are included. The sample used in
Column 2 is restricted to those observations with available AFQT scores to compare to Column 3. The samples used
for the regressions in Columns 2 through 4 are the NLSY79 and NLSY97 and the sample size is 7,955.

Appendix Table 1: Impact of Alternative Income Distribution Measures on Boys’ Likelihood of
Dropping Out of High School, by Socioeconomic Status (MSA Level)
10th Percentile 50th Percentile
of Income
of Income
Income Share
(in $10,000s) (in $10,000s)
top 1%
(3)
(4)
(5)
-0.65
-0.14
0.39

50/10 ratio
(1)

90/50 ratio
(2)
0.57

50/10 Ratio*
Mom HS Dropout

0.073
(0.018)

0.071
(0.024)

0.068
(0.027)

0.073
(0.019)

0.069
(0.021)

50/10 Ratio*
Mom HS Graduate

0.028
(0.016)

0.018
(0.018)

0.037
(0.021)

0.029
(0.015)

0.025
(0.018)

State Characteristic*
Mom HS Dropout

-----

0.009
(0.056)

-0.002
(0.005)

-0.0002
(0.001)

0.002
(0.002)

State Characteristic*
Mom HS Graduate

-----

0.045
(0.039)

0.002
(0.004)

0.0002
(0.001)

0.002
(0.002)

Correlation between 50/10 ratio
and characteristic:

Notes: Reported standard errors (in parenthesis) are adjusted for clustering at the state level. Additional explanatory
variables in each regression include maternal educational attainment, gender (where appropriate) race/ethnicity, and
an indicator variable for living with a single parent at age 14, along with state and cohort fixed effects. The sample
includes data from the ELS, NLSY79, and NLSY97. The total sample size is 11,013 boys.

Appendix Table 2: Impact of Measures of Segregation on Boys’ Likelihood of
Dropping Out of High School, by Socioeconomic Status (MSA Level)
50/10
ratio
(1)

Racial
Segregation
Index
(2)
0.52

Income
Segregation
Index
(3)
0.31

Poverty
Segregation
Index
(4)
0.36

50/10 Ratio*
Mom HS Dropout

0.073
(0.018)

0.045
(0.022)

0.066
(0.018)

0.065
(0.018)

50/10 Ratio*
Mom HS Graduate

0.028
(0.016)

0.026
(0.020)

0.024
(0.017)

0.024
(0.018)

State Characteristic*
Mom HS Dropout

-----

0.267
(0.116)

0.570
(0.372)

0.640
(0.460)

State Characteristic*
Mom HS Graduate

-----

0.027
(0.084)

0.352
(0.302)

0.341
(0.349)

Correlation between 50/10
ratio and characteristic:

Notes: see notes to Appendix Table 1. Interacted state characteristic is listed in column headers.

Appendix Table 3: Impact of Potential Mediating/Confounding Factors on Boys’ Likelihood of
Dropping Out of High School, by Socioeconomic Status

50/10 ratio
(1)

Fraction
Single Parent
(5)
0.56

Fraction Employed in
Manufacturing
(5)
-0.09

50/10 Ratio*
Mom HS Dropout

0.073
(0.018)

0.059
(0.027)

0.074
(0.018)

50/10 Ratio*
Mom HS Graduate

0.028
(0.016)

0.008
(0.018)

0.029
(0.015)

State Characteristic*
Mom HS Dropout

-----

0.418
(0.409)

-0.115
(0.177)

State Characteristic*
Mom HS Graduate

-----

0.550
(0.268)

-0.112
(0.127)

Correlation between 50/10 ratio and
characteristic:

Notes: see notes to Appendix Table 1. Interacted state characteristic is listed in column headers.

DATA APPENDIX:
MEASURING EDUCATIONAL ATTAINMENT IN NLSY AND NCES DATA

This data appendix provides further details regarding the specific samples used in our
analysis. All calculations performed include the sample restrictions described in the text, where
we indicate that respondents whose educational attainment by age 20 is unknown and those
whose mother’s educational attainment is unknown are not included in the sample.
I. NATIONAL LONGITUDINAL SURVEYS OF YOUTH
A. 1979 Cohort
This data source originally surveyed 12,686 respondents born between 1957 and 1964,
who were between the ages of 14 and 22 on the first survey date in 1979. The sample is not
nationally representative, but sample weights are available to provide national representative
estimates. Retention rates have been very high in these data, reducing the likelihood of attrition
bias, particularly over relatively short periods. Respondents were re-interviewed every year
through 1994 and then every other year after that. Because the NLSY is not a school-based
survey, the universe of respondents is not restricted to those currently enrolled in a certain
grade, as in the NCES data sources described below. On the other hand, some respondents are
older than mandatory schooling ages on the initial survey and report their ultimate educational
attainment and the timing of its completion retrospectively, introducing the possibility of recall
bias.
B. 1997 Cohort
These data include information on 8,984 respondents who were born between 1980 and
1984, making them 12 to 18 on the first survey date. The sample is not nationally
representative, but weights are available to provide nationally representative estimates.

Retention rates have been very high in these data, reducing the likelihood of attrition bias,
particularly over relatively short periods. Respondents have been re-interviewed every other
year since 1997 with the most recent available survey having been completed in 2011. Relative
to the NLSY79, these data have the advantage that virtually all students are still in school at the
time of the initial survey, so we can more reliably track their high school degree status as they
age.
II. NATIONAL CENTER FOR EDUCATIONAL STATISTICS DATA
A. High School and Beyond (HSB)
HSB initially surveyed high school sophomores and seniors in the spring of 1980; we
restrict our attention to the sophomores, most of whom were around 16 years old in that year.
Respondents were re-interviewed every two years through 1986 and then again in 1992. HSB is
a school-based survey; specific schools were selected to participate and the survey was
administered to several students within the school. Over 30,000 sophomores in 1,015 high
schools were surveyed in 1980. Of the original sample, half were selected to participate in the
follow-up surveys and 79 percent responded to the follow-up survey. We restricted our analysis
to those students who also participated in the base year survey.
We measure respondents’ educational attainment in the second follow up, conducted in
the spring and summer of 1984, when the respondents would have been around 20 years old.
The second follow-up survey asks a direct question about whether respondents had graduated
from high school. Respondents could have reported in response that they had graduated, had
left school, were still enrolled in school, or whether they had earned a GED. For those still
enrolled in school in the second follow-up, we code them as not having completed their degree
by age 20 (i.e. as a “drop out”).

B. National Education Longitudinal Survey (NELS)
NELS initially surveyed 8th graders in the spring of 1988, when most of them were 14
years old. They were re-interviewed in 1990, 1992, 1994, and 2000. In total, 14,915
respondents were interviewed initially in 1988 and again in the 1994 round, which represents
the point at which we measure educational outcomes. Survey responses regarding educational
attainment were recorded in each of these survey years and a subsample of these responses were
checked against transcript records indicating their accuracy. The survey excluded 5.4 percent of
selected students in the base year “because of physical or mental disabilities, or because of
limited English language proficiency” (Ingels and Quinn, 1996). This restriction introduces
sample selection bias since these students are more likely to drop out of high school
subsequently.
The sample was “freshened” in subsequent surveys so that representative estimates
could be drawn for the sophomore class in 1990 and the senior class in 1992. We focus on those
respondents surveyed in the base year because using respondents from the refreshed sample
would introduce an upward bias in measures of educational attainment in these data. Those
students who have made it to their sophomore or senior years are a positively selected group of
students, as we discuss below.
C. Education Longitudinal Survey of 2002 (ELS)
This survey included students who were in 10th grade in the spring of 2002. Students
were re-surveyed in 2004 and 2006, so that they are around 20 years old in the latest year of
available data. There were 15,300 students who responded to both the base year survey and the
2006 survey, when educational outcomes were measured.
III. DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS

As Heckman and LaFontaine (2010) make clear, comparing educational attainment
statistics from various micro datasets is a difficult task because of the idiosyncrasies of each. It
is not our goal to track trends using these datasets, as they did, so we do not try to reconcile
these differences. We do report statistics on educational attainment from each of them, though,
for the purposes of detailing those differences and comparing the calculated statistics with
outside sources for verification. In our econometric analysis, we control for these differences by
including “dataset fixed effects.”
Appendix Table 1 indicates the percentage of survey respondents who graduate from
high school, receive a GED, or drop out of high school in each dataset. Sample weights are used
to adjust for the various sampling techniques used in each dataset. Discrepancies across datasets
are extensive, yet they are consistent with past estimates (allowing for modest variation
attributable to the sample restrictions we impose). For instance, Hill and Holzer (2007) examine
data from the two NLSY surveys. We focus on educational attainment by age 20 and they focus
on educational outcomes between 20 and 22. We find that 16.3 and 12.2 percent dropped out of
high school and 5.1 percent and 6.9 percent have a GED in the 1979 and 1997 surveys,
respectively. Their results are comparable: 16.8 percent and 12.8 percent dropped out and 4.3
percent and 5 percent earned a GED in the respective surveys. For HSB, we are able to replicate
reported results (National Center for Educational Statistics, 1984), although our sample
restrictions change the final values reported in this table somewhat. We match previous
estimates because we are coding high school completion status directly for a single survey
question. In the NELS, we estimate that 9.3 percent of students drop out and 5.0 percent of
students obtain a GED by around age 20. Our estimates are comparable to those in Hurst, et al.
(2004), who find that 12 percent of students drop out and 6 percent of students obtained a GED

by 1994 (when most respondents are age 20). In the ELS, we estimate that 7.5 percent of
students drop out of high school and 4.3 percent obtain a GED by around age 20. This compares
to 7.8 percent and 3.9 percent, respectively, reported in Bozick, et al. (2007).
It is difficult to determine the extent to which the differences in estimates across datasets
are attributable to changes in outcomes over time or the differences in the nature of the surveys.
An important difference is the sampling strategies used by the different surveys. The three
NCES surveys are school-based and require students to be still enrolled in school to participate.
This is particularly troublesome with the HSB and ELS surveys, in which youth need to
“survive” to 10th grade to participate. In the NELS, students only need to “survive” to 8th grade,
which is less likely to introduce bias. Nevertheless, these sampling strategies indicate that we
should expect higher dropout rates in the two NLSY survives, which is exactly what we see. It
would also be reasonable that NELS had the next highest dropout rate and that hypothesis is
confirmed in these data as well.
To better document this problem, we use data from the two NLSY surveys to examine
the degree status of students and their highest grade completed at age 20. The results are
presented in Appendix Table 2. In the NLSY79 and NSLY97, 5.1 percent and 6.9 percent of
respondents, respectively, never make it to 10th grade by age 20. Of those who fail to reach that
grade, most drop out. Omitting those students from the sample, as occurs in the HSB and ELS,
imposes an upward bias in educational attainment. Indeed, this is a problem, albeit considerably
smaller, even when starting a sample in 8th grade, as occurs in the NELS. Around half a percent
of students fail to reach that grade in the two NLSY surveys.

Data Appendix Table 1: Educational Attainment Measured
in Alternative Longitudinal Data Sources.
Educational Attainment by Age 20
GED
NLSY79
HSB (1980)
NELS (1988)
NLSY97
ELS (2002)
Source: Authors’ calculations.

High School
Dropout
16.3
7.1
9.3
12.2
7.5

5.1
3.8
5.0
6.9
4.3

High School
Graduate
78.6
89.2
85.7
81.0
88.3

Data Appendix Table 2: Degree Status by Highest Grade Completed at Age 20
Below 8th
8th
9th
10th
11th
12th Grade
Grade
Grade
Grade
Grade
Grade
and Higher
NLSY79
Percent at Level
Degree Status:
HS Dropout
GED
HS Graduate

0.7

1.6

2.8

4.3

5.0

85.6

99.4
0.0
0.6

97.4
1.3
1.3

95.7
3.1
1.3

95.5
4.4
0.1

89.5
4.8
5.8

3.3
5.4
91.4

NLSY97
Percent at Level
0.4
Degree Status:
HS Dropout
93.9
GED
4.6
HS Graduate
1.6
Source: Authors’ calculations.

2.6

3.9

5.1

6.0

82.0

73.7
23.2
3.1

63.6
33.5
2.9

58.1
38.8
3.2

59.5
33.5
7.0

1.0
1.2
97.8

SOURCES:
Bozick, Robert, Erich Lauff and John Wirt (2007). Education Longitudinal Study of 2002
(ELS:2002): A First Look at the Initial Postsecondary Experiences of the High School
Sophomore Class of 2002. Washington, DC: National Center for Education Statistics.
Haskins, Ron. 2008. “Education and Economic Mobility.” In Getting Ahead or Losing Ground:
Economic Mobility in America, edited by Julia B. Isaacs, Isabel V. Sawhill, and Ron Haskins.
Washington, DC: The Brookings Institution and the Economic Mobility Project.
Heckman, James J. and Paul A. LaFontaine (2010). “The American High School Graduation
Rate: Trends and Levels,” Review of Economics and Statistics 92 (2): 244-262.
Hill, Carolyn J. and Harry J. Holzer (2007). “Labor Market Experiences and the Transition
to Adulthood,” in Sheldon Danziger and Cecilia Rouse (eds.) The Price of Independence: The
Economics of Early Adulthood. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Hurst, David, Dana Kelly, and Daniel Princiotta (2004). Educational Attainment of High School
Dropouts 8 Years Later. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education, National Center for
Educational Statistics.
Ingels, Steven J., and Peggy Quinn (1996). Sample Exclusion in NELS:88: Characteristics of
Base Year Ineligible Students; Changes in Eligibility Status after Four Years [National
Education Longitudinal Study of 1988 Second Follow-Up]. Washington, DC: U.S. Department
of Education. National Center for Education Statistics.
National Center for Education Statistics (1984). High School and Beyond, 1980: Sophomore
Cohort Second Follow-up (1984). Volume I. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office.

