                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         HETEROGENEITY IN THE VALUE OF LIFE

                                          Joseph E. Aldy
                                         Seamus J. Smyth

                                       Working Paper 20206
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w20206


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2014




The authors did not receive financial support for this research. The authors have no relevant outside
financial relationships related to this research. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Joseph E. Aldy and Seamus J. Smyth. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Heterogeneity in the Value of Life
Joseph E. Aldy and Seamus J. Smyth
NBER Working Paper No. 20206
June 2014
JEL No. D91,J17,Q51

                                            ABSTRACT

We develop a numerical life-cycle model with choice over consumption and leisure, stochastic mortality
and labor income processes, and calibrated to U.S. data to characterize willingness to pay (WTP)
for mortality risk reduction. Our theoretical framework can explain many empirical findings in this
literature, including an inverted-U life-cycle WTP and an order of magnitude difference in prime-
aged adults WTP. By endogenizing leisure and employing multiple income measures, we reconcile
the literature's large variation in estimated income elasticities. By accounting for gender- and race-
specific stochastic mortality and income processes, we explain the literature's black-white and female-
male differences.


Joseph E. Aldy
Harvard Kennedy School
Taubman 382, Mailbox 57
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
joseph_aldy@hks.harvard.edu

Seamus J. Smyth
Caxton Associates
Seamus.smyth@gmail.com
1    Introduction

From purchasing safe automobiles, to taking vitamins, to exercising at the gym,


individuals make decisions everyday that reveal their willingness to pay (WTP)


to reduce mortality risk. Government agencies implement a variety of measures,


from regulating air pollution, to improving food safety, to vaccination programs,


that reduce mortality risk. What are the economic benets of these mortality


risk reduction eorts, and how do they vary across the U.S. population?


    To address this question, we develop a life cycle model of the consumption


and labor supply choice problem facing an individual. Numerically solving this


problem under uncertainty in life expectancy and wage income, we assess how


much wealth an individual would forego for a marginal reduction in mortality


risk. We calibrate the model to labor market, wealth, and longevity data for the


United States, and then run a series of  simulated laboratory experiments. Each


experiment begins with an identical set of 10,000 age-20 agents who make annual


consumption and leisure decisions in response to persistent and temporary wage


shocks, and agents advance to the next year if they do not face a stochastic


mortality shock, until age 100 when all surviving agents die.    Through these


experiments, we address how the willingness to pay to reduce mortality risk


varies with age, income, wealth, and other individual characteristics correlated


with longevity expectations, including gender and ethnicity.


    Through our simulated lab experiments, we nd the following about the


heterogeneity in the value of life.   The mean willingness to pay to reduce a


marginal reduction in mortality is about one-third larger than the median, and


the 95th percentile WTP is about 12 times the 5th percentile WTP for a cross-


section of age-45 agents.   These results reect the dispersion in incomes that


evolves in each experiemnt and enables us to investigate the income elasticity


for the willingness to pay to reduce mortality risk. We nd that the elasticity




                                        2
of WTP with respect to the permanent component of wages is about 1.7, while


the elasticity of WTP with respect to realized income is about 0.6. This average


elasticity across all working agents masks heterogeneity with respect to age: age-


60 agents have elasticity estimates less than 1/2 and less than 1/4 the estimates


of age-30 agents for these two meaures, respectively. Across most of the income


distribution, the WTP to reduce mortality risk follows an inverted-U shape over


the life cycle, with the agents bearing the most adverse productivity shocks (and


hence lowest incomes) revealing a steadily declining WTP with age.         White


agents' WTP to reduce mortality risk is signicantly higher than black agents'


WTP, with a ratio of about 2 at their life-cycle peaks, and we decompose the


drivers of this white-black WTP gap in terms of dierent labor income processes


and life expectancy. Finally, we show that men have higher WTP than women,


also as a result of higher wages, until about age 70 when longer female life


expectancy dominates the dierences in accumulated wealth driven by wage


processes.


   This analysis makes several contributions to the literature. First, our numer-


ical approach advances the theory and simulation literature focused on valuing


mortality risk reduction.   Unlike earlier papers that only specied consump-


tion as a choice variable in the life cycle problem (Shepard and Zeckhauser


[1984], Rosen [1988], Moore and Viscusi [1990], Johansson [1996], Hall and Jones


[2007]), our approach allows for the individual to choose optimal consumption


and leisure over the life cycle that permits us to better match our model to


observed consumption and leisure patterns and to specify willingness to pay for


risk reduction as a trade-o among consumption, leisure, and risk. In addition,


ours is the rst paper in this literature to explicitly account for uncertainty


in the income process.   Modeling uninsurable idiosyncratic labor income risk


yields consumption and saving behavior consistent with the empirical evidence




                                        3
on precautionary saving among the young and wealth accumulation typically


starting in middle age. This has important results for how willingness to pay


varies both over the life cycle and across the cross-section of the population.


    Second, our numerical simulations explain some of the observed variations


in the value of a statistical life (VSL) estimates in recent empirical work.
                                                                                           1 In

revealed preference and stated preference studies, Aldy and Viscusi [2008], Vis-


cusi and Aldy [2007], Kniesner et al. [2006], Cameron and DeShazo [2013], and


Krupnick [2007] nd that the VSL generally takes an inverted-U shape over the


life cycle.
              2 Costa and Kahn [2004] estimate an income elasticity for the VSL

of about 1.5 and Kniesner et al. [2010] estimate income elasticities greater than


1.0 from hedonic labor market analyses, although meta-analyses by Viscusi and


Aldy [2003], Mrozek and Taylor [2002], and Liu and Liu [1997] produce income


elasticities in the 0.4 and 0.6 range and Cameron and DeShazo [2013] estimate


an income elasticity of about 0.7 based on a stated preference survcey. Viscusi


[2004] and Leeth and Ruser [2003] estimate larger VSLs for whites than for


blacks in the labor market. Viscusi and Hersch [2008] nd that male workers


have larger VSLs than female workers. Our numerical model can provide a the-


oretical underpinning for these results based on the variation in lifetime income,


income shocks, and life expectancy across various demographic groups.


    Third, our focus on heterogeneity across the population serves as a comple-

   1 The   value of a statistical life is simply the aggregation of a population's willingness to
pay for a given risk reduction such that it equals the total amount that population would pay
to reduce one statistical mortality.   For example, if each member of a population of 10,000
is willing to pay $500 to reduce a 1 in 10,000 risk, then the value of a statistical life for
this population is $5 million.    Thus, VSL represents a population-expressed measure that
aggregates individuals' willingnes to pay to reduce mortality risk. We use both terms in this
paper, and in our simulated laboratory experiments, the willingness to pay to reduce mortality
risk by one given agent could be considered identical to the VSL for a population of agents
that experience identical wage and mortality shocks as this specic agent that represents this
population in our experiment.
   2 Some   studies that evaluate the age-VSL relationship do not nd this result. For exam-
ple,Smith et al. [2004]show that the VSL may increase with age.        Blomquist and O'Conor
[2011] nd that VSL follows an inverted-U for adults (aged 30-92 in their sampel), but may
be higher for children.    Early hedonic wage models that simply included the interaction of
age and occupational risk typically found a statistically signicant, negative interaction eect
Viscusi and Aldy [2003].




                                                4
ment to several papers that abstract from the choice under uncertainty char-


acteristic problem and yield national aggregates for the value of a statistical


life. For example, [Hall and Jones, 2007] and Murphy and Topel [2006] provide


population aggregate estimates for VSL and use these to assess the benets


of increasing life expectancy through health care investments.      Our approach


produces a similar life-cycle shape for age-specic mean VSLs as the Murphy


and Topel model, but accounting for gender-specic wage processes produces a


dierent result for gender-specic VSLs than they found in a model that only


accounts for dierences in life expectancy across gender.


    In the next section, we outline the individual's life-cycle model. The third


section discusses the calibration of the model and the numerical implementation.


In the fourth section, we employ the model to assess our base case and provide


results from these simulations showing how the willingness to pay to reduce


mortality risk varies with age, income, ethnicity, and gender. The nal section


concludes the paper, and several appendices provide more information on the


computational methods and wage prole and variance estimation.




2     Life-Cycle Utility Model

Our model captures several important features that play a role in determin-


ing an individual's willingness to pay to reduce mortality risk, and hence the


population-based measure value of a statistical life.   First, the model allows


idiosyncratic, age-specic mortality that can dier across demographic groups.


Second, agents face uninsurable wage shocks whose magnitudes can dier across


dierent types of agents.   Third, agents value both consumption and leisure.


Fourth, agents choose optimally their savings and allocation of time to market


work accounting for both earnings and mortality risk.       This type of life-cycle


model with idiosyncratic risk is common in the macroeconomic literature, for




                                       5
examples see French [2005],Nishiyama and Smetters [2005] and Smyth [2006].


These innovations to the typical life-cycle model used in the health and mortality


risk valuation literature allow us to conduct simulations that closely represent


actual means and distributions for key economic measures over the life cycle,


including labor income, consumption, wealth accumulation, labor participation,


and mortality.




2.1 Agent's Utility Maximization Problem
Agents choose their consumption and leisure to maximize the discounted sum


of future utility:
                                          T
                                          X
                                max E           β t φt u (ct , lt )                             (1)
                                    c,l
                                          t=0

Agents have a constant, time-invariant rate of time preference                     β.   Their prob-


ability of survival to the next period,          φt ,   diers by age.       φt   can dier across


agents by ethnicity and gender. This age-dependent survival probability, which


declines as agents get older, eectively shortens their time horizon and aects


decisions on consumption and leisure as well as their values for mortality risk


reduction.


    Agents face incomplete markets: private markets for insurance against future


wage shocks do not exist, but agents can self-insure through savings. All saving


is risk-less and pays the market rate of return.                  This ability to partially self


insure, as well as conduct life-cycle savings, provides a very important means


of smoothing consumption in the face of idiosyncratic shocks.                       There are two


uses of an agent's resources: consumption and saving for future consumption.


The agent's resources consist of prior savings,                ait ,   interest on those savings,
                                                                       
Rit ait ,   after-tax labor market compensation,           wit 1 − τ SS (1 − lit )       (note that


we denote labor taxes as     τ SS    to represent the social security payroll tax rate),


and social security benets,    bSS
                                 it .     In each one-year period, the agent allocates




                                                6
one unit of time between leisure, lit , and market work. This yields the agent's


budget constraint:




                cit + ai,t+1 = ait (1 + Rt ) + wit 1 − τ SS (1 − lit ) + bSS
                                                           
                                                                          it            (2)




    The base case is a borrowing constraint of zero. A borrowing constraint of


zero ensures that no agents die in debt:
                                               3




                                       at+1   >    amin                                 (3)


                                      amin    =    0                                    (4)




We also consider cases where agents can borrow by relaxing the condition in


equation 4. In these cases the age-dependent borrowing constraint starts fairly


loose and rises to zero as the agent ages. The tightening borrowing constraint


prevents agents from dying in debt with certainty.
                                                            4




2.2 Wage Process
We draw from the macro-consumption literature a wage process that has both


permanent and transitory shocks to characterize the wage risks agents face.


Estimating such a wage process from microeconomic data is consistent with


several important empirical features of the U.S. economy, including wages, asset


holdings, and consumption [Samwick and Carroll, 1997, Gourinchas and Parker,


2002, Storesletten et al., 2004].


    This wage process includes a permanent component of wages and a transitory

   3 If   agents can borrow, some agents who die young will owe money. Setting a borrowing
constraint of zero ensures that this case never happens and is an easy solution. A borrowing
constraint of zero also helps in mimicking the observed distributions of consumption, income
and wealth. In cases where we relax the borrowing constraint we ignore any agents who die
in debt as their number is fairly small and oset by those who die holding assets.
   4 If   agents were allowed to borrow at older ages they would have incentives to borrow,
consume what they borrowed, and die in debt with certainty.      Making agents pay back all
debts before retirement ensures that this does not occur.




                                              7
component, which are subject to i.i.d. shocks, that determine agents' realized


wages. The permanent component,             Pit ,   is characterized by:


                                                           
                                                      Mt
                                  Pit = Pi,t−1                  ηit                               (5)
                                                     Mt−1

Mt is the economy-wide mean wage in period t and Mt−1 is the previous period's
                                   Mt
mean wage.         Their ratio,
                                  Mt−1 , gives the deterministic element of wages over

the life cycle. The permanent shock,           ηit ,   persists into future periods through


Pit   depending on the previous permanent component of wages,                     Pit−1 .

      The actual wage received by an agent is:




                                          wit = Pit εit                                           (6)




This is composed of the permanent component,                     Pit ,   and a purely transitory


shock,   εit ,   representing a shock without persistence. The eects of               εit ,   except


as they persist through dierential asset holdings, disappear after one period.


      All agents retire at 65. Although they can choose to retire (by working zero


hours) before age 65, they cannot receive Social Security benets,                      bSS
                                                                                         it ,   until


they reach 65. The Social Security benets the agent receives are based on a


progressive non-linear transformation of the nal permanent wage similar to the


translation between wages and benets in the actual system.
                                                                              5

   5 Social   security wages are based on nal permanent wage in our model rather than some
form of AIME (Average Indexed Monthly Earnings). Basing benets on an AIME-type for-
mula would add an additional state variable to the agent's problem and increase the com-
putational complexity of our exercise while providing little additional value in understanding
the heterogeneity in the value of life.




                                                8
2.3 Recursive Representation
Given the economic environment outlined above, we can represent the individ-


ual's problem recursively:




      Vt (Ait , Pit , εit ) = max u (cit , lit ) + βφt E [Vt+1 (Ai,t+1 , Pi,t+1 , εi,t+1 )]   (7)
                                 c,l



subject to




              cit + ai,t+1 = ait (1 + Rt ) + wit 1 − τ SS (1 − lit ) + bSS
                                                         
                                                                        it                    (8)




This recursive representation illustrates how solving the problem simplies to


solving a sequence of many one-period maximization problems. The state vector


includes three variables: two continuous (the level of the permanent component


of wages and the agent's asset holdings) and one discrete (the transitory shock


to income). Appendix A presents details on our numerical methods for solving


the individual's problem.




2.4 Dening the Value of a Statistical Life
Using the above representation of an agent's problem, we dene a discrete time


analogue to the more commonly used continuous time denition of mortality


risk reduction valuation. Consider, at period               t,   a small increase in the proba-


bility of surviving to the next period            ∂φt .   The probability of survival is now


φt + ∂φt   instead of   φt .   All future survival probabilities remain unchanged so the


function   E [Vt+1 (Ai,t+1 , Pi,t+1 , εi,t+1 )]   also remains unchanged.         Since agents


change their savings behavior in response to the change in survival probabilities


in that one period, the assets carried forward will be dierent and the evalu-


ated expectation will also dier. This allows us to compare two distinct value


functions representing agents' utility maximization problem over consumption



                                                  9
and leisure.   Vt (Ait , Pit , εit )   is the baseline value function and      Vt∗ (Ait , Pit , εit )

reects the case of the 1-period increase in agents' survival probabilities. The


change in the mortality risk the agents face represents the only dierence in


parameters.


   To evaluate the value of the mortality risk reduction we consider how much


agents would pay for this increase in their survival probability.                 Consider the


change in wealth,     ∂Ait ,   such that




                       Vt (Ait + ∂Ait , Pit , εit ) = Vt∗ (Ait , Pit , εit )                       (9)




This increment     ∂Ait   is the amount of additional wealth that makes the person


indierent between living longer in expectation and living the same length of


time as before with that additional wealth. The value of a statistical life typ-


ically refers to the aggregate willingness to pay of a sub-population to reduce


the mortality risk borne by this sub-population equivalent to one statistical


fatality. We construct a VSL from this wealth-risk trade-o by assuming a sub-

                                           1
population of individuals of size
                                          ∂φt identical to agent i and aggregating the        ∂Ait

over this sub-population. This yields a VSL of:



                                                     ∂Ait
                                          V SLit =                                                (10)
                                                     ∂φt

Note that since our population is heterogeneous in all of                 Ait , Pit   and   εit   the


VSLs are also heterogeneous across the population. We report VSLs throughout


this paper to facilitate comparison with the literature.


   This corresponds to the denition of the VSL in simple one-period mod-


els and most revealed preference studies [Viscusi and Aldy, 2003, Johannesson


et al., 1997]. For example, hedonic wage models in which the wage is regressed


on occupational job mortality risk and other controls yield VSL estimates by




                                                10
dierentiating the estimated wage equation with respect to annual job mortal-


ity risk.   The VSL is the change in the wage with respect to the change in


risk and is given by the estimated coecient for job mortality risk (for linear


specications and the coecient scaled by the wage for log-linear specications)


aggregated over a population.      This denition corresponds to our one-period


change in wealth divided by the one-period increment in the survival probabil-


ity expressed above.




3     Model Calibration

The parametrization of our model draws on a variety of sources.                We employ


some parameters from the literature estimated through simulated method of


moments and other life-cycle based microeconometric procedures. We estimate


the parameters characterizing the wage process with data from the Panel Study


of Income Dynamics (PSID) and we employ survival probability estimates from


the 2002 U.S. Life Tables.




3.1 Agent's Utility
Based on previous research by, among others, French [2005],           ?   and Nishiyama


and Smetters [2005] we assume that consumption and leisure are non-separable.


The period utility function is:


                                                    1−γ
                                                (clv )
                               u (c, l) = k +                                        (11)
                                                  1−γ

When   v > 1,   consumption and work are complements. At lower levels of leisure


the marginal utility of consumption increases.           Agents who work a lot also


consume a lot.    γ   is the coecient of relative risk aversion over the combined


utility from consumption and leisure. We assume           γ=2   and   v = 2.   A value of




                                         11
2 for   γ   is quite commonly used in the literature. A value of 2 for              v   implies that

                                              1
most working agents spend about
                                              3 of their time allotment on market work.

These parameters align closely with those estimated for this utility function


by French [2005], who nds that this non-separable specication better ts the


empirical data than an additively-separable alternative.


   We include a constant           k   in our utility function, which has no eects on


decisions regarding savings, consumption, and leisure.                  Excluding a constant,


however, yields negative values of utility for all positive values of consumption


and leisure with a coecient of risk aversion in excess of 1. This implies that


the standard normalization that dead agents receive zero utility would result


in agents preferring death to being alive. Other recent papers have employed


such a constant, motivated by a minimum level of utility from consumption and


leisure that makes an individual prefer life to death. For example,                         ?   dene a


z = u(c, l) which is aggregate of consumption and leisure.               They further dene          z0

as the minimum level of utility for which the agent prefers life to death. Utility

                      z 1−γ −z01−γ                                              z 1−γ       z01−γ
is then     u (z) =       1−γ      and extracting the   z0   yields   u (z) =   1−γ     −   1−γ . The
            z 1−γ
term    − 1−γ
           0
                    is positive when   γ > 1,   as we assume and is commonly assumed.


Our     k   corresponds to    ?'s − 1−γ .
                                   z01−γ
                                            Hall and Jones (2007) also assume a constant


in their model, and they elaborate in detail the need to do so in order to generate


WTP to reduce mortality risk values with a standard utility function like what


we employ here.


   We choose          k   to match the peak VSL estimated in empirical studies. Aldy


and Viscusi [2008] have recently estimated workers' life cycle VSL patterns based


on labor market hedonic wage analyses over 1993-2000. They estimate a peak


VSL of approximately $8 million and we calibrate                k   to match that peak. Note


that this calibration only implies that the peak estimated in our simulations


will be about $8 million on average and has no bearing on the life-cycle VSL




                                                12
pattern. The results that follow are robust to dierent values of     k.   Changing


k   acts as a shifter to VSL, moving it up or down, but has little eect on either


distributions or patterns of VSL.




3.2 Life-Cycle Pattern and Variance of Wages
We estimate the mean life-cycle pattern of hourly labor compensation using


worker data compiled in the PSID over the 1968-1993 period.        For the entire


population of workers, we nd that labor incomes increase rapidly for workers


in their 20s and peak and then decline for workers in their 50s. We have also


estimated this deterministic life-cycle wage pattern for various sub-populations


by race and gender. We draw from the work of Samwick and Carroll to estimate


the permanent and transitory shocks to labor income.        Table 2 contains the


estimates of the variances for the total sample and various subgroups of interest.


Appendix B provides more details on the construction of the life-cycle wage


prole and the permanent and transitory variances.




3.3 Survival Probabilities
We use in our model survival probabilities from the 2002 U.S. Life Tables con-


structed by the National Center for Health Statistics [Arias, 2004].       The Life


Tables provide us with the age-conditional probability of surviving to the next


year for the whole population, by male and female populations, and by black


and white populations. Agents are born into our economic environment at age


20 and can live to be at most 100 at which age they die with certainty. Since


less than 1 percent of agents survive to 100, truncating life at that age has no


signicant eects on the results.    Also note that the U.S. Life Tables do not


report age-specic survival probabilities for those older than 100.




                                        13
3.4 Social Security Benets Function
Our approximation to Social Security replaces income based on an agent's nal


wage. It replaces a minimum of approximately $7,000 and increases for agents


with higher wages until reaching the maximum of about $16,000.         Consistent


with the progressive nature of the statutory benets structure, the replacement


rate increases fastest near the bottom of the wage distribution and then levels


o as wages increase. These features of Social Security are also important in


driving the distributional dynamics of wealth.     As shown by Hubbard et al.


[1995], Social Security and other government insurance programs drive those


with low lifetime earnings to save little. This increases the dispersion of wealth


in the economy.    In addition, as numerous authors have pointed out, Social


Security is a powerful risk-sharing tool.




3.5 Simulated Laboratory Experiments
For each case, we simulate the model with 10,000 agents.       Agents in a given


population start with the same initial labor market compensation at age 20,


experience identical deterministic wage proles, face the same survival proba-


bility prole over the life cycle, and have wage shocks drawn from the same


distribution. We introduce the change in the probability of survival for that one


period and assess the change in wealth for the alternative value function with


the initial probability of survival for each agent necessary to make agents indif-


ferent between the two proles. This generates the age 20 VSLs for the agents.


We then move the agents forward to age 21, subject to an age-specic mortality


probability, and replicate the experiment. This proceeds on until age 100 when


all agents die. These simulations yield age-specic VSLs for the agents in our


model runs. Table 3 presents the experiments that we implemented.




                                       14
4      Willingness to Pay to Reduce Mortality Risk

In contrast to the deterministic simulation models used previously in this liter-


ature, our model with uncertainty in the income process allows us to investigate


the distribution in VSLs.
                                 6 Figure 1 shows the life-cycle VSL proles for the

mean, median, and 5th and 95th percentiles of the 10,000 sample of agents cal-


ibrated to the total population.
                                        7 This gure depicts two stark ndings. First,

the inverted-U shape is common to most agents across the distribution.                         The


inverted-U takes an even more pronounced shape for those at the upper end of


the distribution.       For agents who experience a series of very negative shocks,


however, the pattern of their VSL can exhibit a quite dierent pattern as it falls


over their life cycle, evident by those at the 5th percentile of the distribution.


Second, those agents who experience a sequence of positive permanent labor


market shocks have much, much higher VSLs.                   The mean VSL is nearly 33%


higher at its peak than the median for this population, reecting the eect of


the high VSLs on the mean. The VSLs for those at the 95th percentile are an


order of magnitude larger than the VSLs for those at the 5th percentile.                        As


the rst analysis to account for uncertainty in the labor income process, we


show substantial heterogeneity in the value individuals place on mortality risk


reduction simply as a function of the labor compensation outcomes over their


life cycle.
              8

     Figure 2 explicitly illustrates this heterogeneity in the VSL at one point in


the life cycle, age 40. The distribution of agents' values is very skewed. Although


most agents' mortality risk reduction valuation yields a VSL ranging between


$2 million and $6 million, the long right tail shows the existence of much higher

    6 Note   that Hall and Jones (2007) do not include endogenous labor supply or consider wage
shocks in their analysis. Murphy and Topel (2006) do not account for labor income shocks in
their composite good Z that aggregates consumption and leisure in their model.
    7 Percentiles are over cross-sections at each age.
    8 Our results are broadly consistent with the empirical    results of the spread of estimated
values of statistical life in Kniesner et al. [2010] using quantile regression of labor market data.




                                                15
values.     This was the same eect that resulted in the divergence between the


mean and the median: the relatively small number of high VSL agents pulls


the mean above the median.              The mean VSL of about $8 million at age 40


masks the variation over the population. We also nd that the variance of VSL


over the life-cycle also follows an inverted-U shape, with higher cross-sectional


variances for those agents in their 50s than any other age group. The variance


in VSLs declines rapidly starting in the mid-60s because agents are forced into


retirement at age 65 and are no longer subject to permanent and transitory


wage shocks.        Since only the top of the income distribution has substantial


amounts of wealth to run down, VSLs decline much more for those at the top


of the income distribution than for those at the bottom, resulting in the smaller


variance starting at 65.
                              9




4.1 Heterogeneity by Age
Figure 3 shows the mean age-specic VSL prole for the agents in this base case.


The mean VSL for these agents is about $3 million at age 20, it increases until


its peak of $8 million in the mid-forties, and steadily declines over the rest of the


life cycle. The inverted-U shape of the VSL reects the ndings in Shepard and


Zeckhauser [1984] for their Robinson Crusoe case in which an agent cannot


borrow against future income.             The inability to insure against idiosyncratic


income risk and the non-negative borrowing constraint in our model constrains


agents in much the same way as the borrowing constraint in their Robinson


Crusoe case.        Our result is driven, however, much more by the inability to


insure against income shocks than it is by the borrowing constraint  we have


also undertaken simulations with looser borrowing constraints and we still nd


this inverted-U shape because risk-averse agents are not inclined to borrow

   9 This   eect is due in large part to the presence of Social Security. Poor agents have little
incentive to save since Social Security benets replace a large fraction of their consumption.




                                                16
substantially from future income under the possibility of future adverse income


shocks. Our VSL shape mimics the life cycle pattern of consumption, an analytic


result of Johansson's [2002] theoretical model. Our inverted-U shape is generally


similar to that of Murphy and Topel (2006), although we nd a peak a little


later in the life-cycle.


   In Figure 3, we have plotted life-cycle hedonic wage VSL estimates from Aldy


and Viscusi [2008].    Controlling for both age and cohort eects in panel data


of workers, they use a minimum distance estimator to exibly allow for age


variation in the wage-occupational mortality risk tradeo (VSL). Recall that


we calibrated the additive constant,   k,   in the utility function to the maximum


VSL in Aldy and Viscusi [2008], but all other model inputs come from dierent


sources. While we expect our simulations, on average, to match their peak VSL,


there is nothing in our calibration that forces our model to match their life-cycle


pattern.


   Our model achieves results strikingly similar to their estimates, in terms of


both the shape of the VSL prole and VSL levels. The two curves track almost


exactly from ages 25 to 55. At low ages our model underpredicts VSL by about


$0.5 million, and at older ages our model slightly overpredicts relative to the


revealed preference results. Our results also appear similar to the empirical VSL


estimates over the life cycle in Kniesner et al. [2006].




4.2 Heterogeneity by Income
This dramatic dispersion in the willingness to pay to reduce mortality risk 


within and across age cohorts  reects the dispersion in incomes as workers'


diverge in their productivities in our simulated experiments. Individuals should


be willing to pay more for a given mortality risk reduction as their incomes


increase. Viscusi and Aldy [2003] estimate an income elasticity for the value of




                                        17
statistical life on the order of 0.5-0.6 in a meta-analysis of hedonic wage studies,


while Mrozek and Taylor [2002] estimate an elasticity of 0.46 and Liu and Liu


[1997] estimate an elasticity of 0.53. In contrast, Kaplow [2005] argues that the


income elasticity should exceed 1.0 based on theoretical grounds and empirical


estimates of the coecient of relative risk aversion exceeding 1.0. Murphy and


Topel (2006) suggest that the income elasticity should be at least 1.3 given


the parameters assumed in their model. Consistent with this, Costa and Kahn


[2004] estimate an income elasticity of about 1.5 for a series of U.S labor market


cross-sections over 1950-1990.   With our model we can explicitly address the


question of how the value of life varies with income.


   We have estimated income elasticities in separate regressions of the natu-


ral logarithm of VSL on the natural logarithm of the permanent component of


wages and the natural logarithm of realized income. The two measures dier


because agents will choose to adjust their labor-leisure time allocation as labor


compensation changes: a percentage increase in realized income will typically


exceed the percentage increase in the permanent component of wage because


of the complementarity between labor and consumption assumed in our model.


This is consistent with the common empirical nding of an upward sloping labor


supply function. Since accumulated wealth also plays a role in determining the


willingness to pay for mortality reductions, we also control for it in some re-


gressions. The simulated data from our model runs generate more than 400,000


observations for the all working agents sample and at least 9,200 observations


for the age-specic working agents samples.


   Table 4 presents our estimates of the elasticity of VSL with respect to both


the permanent component of wages and the realized labor income of agents.


All estimates generate statistically signicant positive elasticities for VSL with


respect to either realized income or permanent wages. When using income, the




                                        18
elasticity of VSL is 0.55 but when using productivity this jumps to 1.71. The


productivity measure also does a much better job predicting the value an agent


places on these mortality risk reductions with an           R2 of 0.935 as opposed to 0.674.

The regressions with productivity are thus doing a better job of approximating


the true function that relates our state variables to VSL.
                                                                         10

    Columns (C), (D), (E) and (F) add a variety of controls, including level of


assets and a cubic in age. Including these controls has only a modest impact


on the two VSL-income elasticity measures. The dierences between the two


measures are statistically signicant and are large in economic terms.


    Table 5 shows substantial variation in the elasticities by age. Young workers


have much higher income elasticities: an age-30 worker has an estimated VSL-


income elasticity for the permanent component of wages of 2.01, and this declines


to 1.56 for an age-45 worker and still further to 0.81 for an age-60 worker.


Likewise, an age-30 worker has a VSL-income elasticity for realized income of


0.82, nearly twice the age-45 estimate of 0.56 and nearly ve times the age-60


estimate of 0.15. For young agents the VSL varies much more with changes in


either permanent wages or income than for old agents. Since they have many


more years of possibly higher consumption (and/or leisure) from their higher


income, they should be willing to pay more to maintain this. Young agents also


have the ability to stretch each additional dollar out over more years.                        Since


marginal utility of both consumption and leisure declines with more of either,


the same amount of extra consumption spread out over a longer time period


raises expected utility more.           The larger increase in expected utility for an

  10 Theoretically,   VSL is a four dimensional function of age, assets, the permanent level of
productivity and the transitory shock, VSLit      =VSLit (age, ait , Pit , εit ).   This function can
generally be non-linear. In running the regression we are estimating it as a linear function of
these state variables. Errors in the linear regression are thus not random error but deviations of
the true underlying function from the linear approximation. Adding more controls thus allows
us to better approximate the function. The age-specic regressions we perform later are then
separately estimating the series of functions VSLi     =VSLi (ai , Pi , εi ),   and age is necessarily
dropped.




                                                19
additional dollar of either permanent wages or realized income drives the larger


response of WTP to reduce mortality risk for younger agents.
                                                                          11

    The substantial dierence between the elasticities with respect to income


and permanent wages mirrors the signicant variation in estimated VSL-income


elasticities in the revealed preference literature. The elasticity with respect to


realized income is closer in spirit to the empirical work that employs cross-


sectional data to estimate a VSL-income elasticity while the productivity-based


VSL elasticity is more akin to estimates that vary across time or over cohorts.


Since the cross-sectional studies generally do not take into account leisure in


their analysis, they can understate how much a larger wage makes agents willing


to pay for extra years of life. The permanent component of wages captures that


agents have some stock of future earnings potential that they can take in either


consumption or leisure.         Since agents value both, an extra dollar of earnings


potential is very valuable to the agents.            It is important to recognize that a


model that does not account for both leisure choice and income shocks (that


can generate VSL heterogeneity) would not be able to illustrate this eect.
                                                                                          12

    These dierences in the VSL elasticity measures for the realized income and


the permanent component of wages provides some numerical and theoretical


context for the existing literature.          Costa and Kahn [2004] found an income


elasticity with a series of U.S. cross-sections over 40 years of 1.5, only slightly


less than our 1.67 estimate for the permanent component of wages VSL elasticity

  11 Assets   have the opposite pattern.   An extra dollar of assets has a large impact on the
VSL for old agents than young ones. Since older agents don't have future labor income which
is aected by changes in their permanent component of wages, their main dierence is their
asset holdings. Higher asset holdings support a higher future level of consumption making a
given mortality change that increase the chances of living to enjoy that consumption more
valuable.
  12 Evans    and Smith [2010] derive a richer model of individual choice over income and risk
than the model in Kaplow [2005], and they nd how exogenous income shocks aect labor
supply decisions and hence the income elasticity of the value of a statistical life. While they
do not present estimates of how the income elasticity varies with shocks, they present indirect
evidence of how shocks aect labor supply and the coecient of relative risk aversion in
an empirical assessment using the Health and Retirement Study.       Our results are generally
consistent with the implications of their framework.




                                               20
(Table 4, column F). Likewise, Kaplow [2005] and                ?   suggest that the income


elasticity should exceed unity. Across cohorts, we should expect such an elastic


response of VSL to income changes. A variety of meta-analyses of labor market


VSL estimates  summarized, replicated, and extended upon by Viscusi and


Aldy [2003]  tend to nd much lower VSL income elasticities on the order of


0.5 to 0.6. Most of the studies included in these meta-analyses are based on labor


market survey data over a relatively short period of time from the mid-1970s


through late-1980s.       The variation in income in these studies' samples likely


reects dierences within cohorts  such as from sample composition eects by


focusing on specic occupations, specic countries, etc.  and less dierences


across cohorts. The smaller estimated income elasticities by integrating these


VSL results in a meta-analysis would appear to square with our estimate of a


0.55 VSL-realized income elasticity.


    To illustrate how the elasticity with respect to permanent wages corresponds


more closely to how the VSL changes with wages rising over time we undertook


the following experiment. We vary the initial wage of agents entering the econ-


omy. An increase in the entering wage persists permanently and increases the


permanent component of wages for every agent in the economy.                        Given this


secular increase in permanent incomes, VSLs across the population should also


rise and we can consider the elasticity of this with respect to the increase in


permanent income.


    This approach yields an estimate of the VSL-income elasticity of 1.56.
                                                                                        13 This

is comparable to our estimate of the elasticity with respect to the permanent


component of wages presented in Table 5. This elasticity of VSL in response to


a secular increase in wages for our model economy supports our interpretation

 13 Formally   the procedure is very similar to estimating the cross-sectional elasticities above.
We consider increasing the initial wage by 10%, 20%, 50%, 75%, 125% and 200%. We then
take the log of the population average of VSL. We then run the regression of this on the log
of the initial component of permanent wages. The above estimate is the coecient on initial
permanent wages.




                                               21
above of a dierence between measuring an elasticity with respect to wages and


realized labor income.




4.3 Heterogeneity by Ethnicity
In the U.S. economy, white and black workers dier in terms of their labor


market returns and expected longevity.       We assess the extent to which these


dierences can impact black and white willingness to pay for risk reduction.


   To decompose the eects of dierences in income proles and longevity by


race, we present four mean life-cycle VSL patterns in Figure 4.      Two of the


patterns are black and white life-cycle VSL proles.     The other two reect a


modication of a black population characteristic to its white population rep-


resentation.     In one prole, we have modied the black population calibrated


model so that it is has the white population's deterministic wage prole and la-


bor market income variances while maintaining black population survival prob-


abilities. In the other prole, we have modied the black population calibrated


model so that it maintains the black population's deterministic wage prole


and labor market income variances while having the white population survival


probabilities.


   The modest dierence in the initial (age 20) VSLs between blacks and whites


reects the longer longevity and higher expected future incomes for whites.


White VSLs peak at over $9 million in their late forties, nearly double the peak


for blacks at a similar age, comparable to the Viscusi [2003] ndings. Figure


4 clearly shows that the vast majority of the dierence in VSL between blacks


and whites results from their dierences in wages. Improving the survival rates


of black agents to the levels of white agents only yields a small increase in the


mean VSL, closing less than ten percent of the gap between peaks. The very


modest eect of changing survival probabilities at early stages of life reects




                                        22
the eect of discounting. A 20-year old worker expecting to live to 73 (black


life expectancy conditional on reaching 20) or 78 (white life expectancy) would


not value these dierences much since they would occur more than 50 years in


the future. The gure does show that moving from black survival probabilities


to white survival probabilities does increase in absolute and percentage terms


the VSL for those at older ages because they have fewer years over which to


discount before enjoying the longer life expectancy. Improving the black wage


prole to match the white wage prole closes over ninety percent of the gap


between the VSLs.


   The dierence in wages between blacks and whites appears to drive the


dierences in VSL that have been observed in the empirical literature. Research


by Viscusi [2003] based on hedonic wage models shows that black workers have a


value of statistical life equal to about one-half that of white workers. Thus, our


analysis suggests that this white-black gap could be explained by dierences


in labor income and life expectancy, as opposed to unobserved dierences in


attitudes toward risk.




4.4 Heterogeneity by Gender
Men and women dier in both their labor market compensation (mean and


variances) and their life expectancy.   Based on the 2002 Life Tables, women


should expect to live 5.5 years longer than men. This should increase the VSL


of women relative to men. Countering this eect, however, is the higher labor


market compensation men experience.      We assess the life-cycle VSLs for men


and women to discern which of these two eects dominate.


   In our simulations, female VSLs peak in their late forties, about ve years


later than the male VSL peak, reecting the eects of dierences in life ex-


pectancy. At their peaks, men have VSLs of about $8 million, more than 33%




                                        23
greater than women's VSLs of about $6 million at their peak. Averaged over


the working years of 20-65, the ratio of female-to-male VSLs in our simulations


comes to about 0.87, which is modestly larger than the female-to-male VSL ra-


tio of 0.75 in the labor market hedonic analysis by Viscusi and Hersch [2008].To


decompose the eects of dierences in income proles and longevity by gender,


we present four mean life-cycle VSL patterns in Figure 5. Two of the patterns


are male and female life-cycle VSL proles. The other two reect a modication


of a female population characteristic to its male population representation. In


one prole, we have modied the female population calibrated model so that it


is has the male population's survival probabilities while maintaining the female


deterministic wage prole and labor market income variances. In the other pro-


le, we have modied the female population calibrated model so that it has the


male population's deterministic wage prole and labor market income variances


while maintaining the female survival probabilities.


   The gure illustrates that the vast majority of the dierences in VSL between


males and females, as in the black-white comparison, derives from diering wage


processes.   Giving females the shorter lives of males results in only a modest


reduction in their VSL. Since wages for females increase at a slower rate than


those of males, their VSL also rises less steeply and has a longer plateau than


the male VSL. Giving females the wages of males, however makes a substantial


dierence. With their longer life expectancies, their VSL now surpasses that of


males at all ages. The mortality dierence makes little dierence in the shape


with VSLs as males' and females' VSLs have almost the exact same shape once


they have the same pattern of wages.


   Our results dier from work by Murphy and Topel (2006), which shows fe-


male VSLs exceeding male VSLs in their simulation model. This reects their


assumption that males and females only dier according to survival probabili-




                                       24
ties. Thus, their analysis is eectively similar to a comparison of the life-cycle


VSL patterns in Figure 5 for male wages and male life expectancy to male wages


and female life expectancy, or a comparison for female wages and female life ex-


pectancy and female wages and male life expectancy. Since we do not assume


the same income prole for men and women in these experiments, we nd a


dierent male-female VSL relationship.




5    Conclusion

We have developed a numerical life-cycle model that is novel to the mortality


risk reduction literature by accounting for choice over consumption and leisure


and stochastic wage and mortality processes. Our calibrated model matches sev-


eral important regularities in the U.S. economy, including life cycle consumption


patterns, precautionary saving among young adults, wealth accumulation start-


ing in middle age, and labor market compensation and participation outcomes.


The realism of the model and the accounting for uncertainty allows us to ex-


plore important questions on the value of mortality risk reductions that existing


theoretical and simulation models cannot address, and our simulated laboratory


experiments serve as a bridge between the theoretical and empirical literatures.


    We nd that the value agents' place on reductions in mortality risk (or


their population-equivalent VSL) varies substantially with income and assets.


Accounting for empirically estimated life cycle wage patterns and idiosyncratic


labor market compensation shocks yields a wide range of VSL estimates both


over the life cycle and across the population. The mean, median, 95th percentile,


and variances of the VSL follow an inverted-U shape over the life cycle, peaking


in agents' mid-40s  at about the same point in the life cycle as the peak in


consumption. Agents who experience very negative labor market shocks have


a VSL that declines over their life cycle, as evident by the 5th percentile of




                                       25
the distribution. The mean VSL substantially exceeds the median as the VSL


distribution is non-normal with an extremely fat, long upper end tail. The peak


VSLs for agents at the 95th percentile are an order of magnitude larger than


the peak VSLs for those at the 5th percentile of the distribution. The inverted-


U shape is driven by the idiosyncratic labor market shocks that we assume,


consistent with real-world practice, are uninsurable (except through savings-


based self insurance).   Accounting for these labor market shocks, extending


beyond the current VSL literature, allows us to characterize the entire age-


specic VSL distribution and not just a single, deterministic series of values.


   The elasticity of the VSL with respect to income diers substantially be-


tween the wage and realized income. Estimating the elasticity with respect to


realized income ignores the substantial value that agents place on leisure. We


nd that the VSL-income elasticity for all working agents based on the perma-


nent component of the wage is on the order of 1.5, three times greater than the


estimate for realized income.   We believe that this dierence, only evident in


such a model with leisure choice and a stochastic labor market compensation


process over the life cycle, explains the dierence in VSL-income elasticities in


the revealed preference literature: the permanent wage results are consistent


with cohort-based income elasticities and the realized income results are consis-


tent with cross-sectional results. We also show that the VSL-income elasticity


declines signicantly with age for both income measures.


   We have also assessed how the VSL varies over the life cycle by race and


gender.   We nd that dierences in the life cycle wage process and mortality


prole drive the substantial dierences in VSLs between blacks and whites and


males and females. Assuming no preference heterogeneity across demographic


groups, we show that virtually all of the black-white gap in recent revealed


preference research can be explained by labor market compensation. Although




                                       26
the longer female life expectancy should increase female VSLs relative to males'


VSLs, the higher labor market compensation for men more than osets this


eect.


   Our results may have several implications for future research.        First, the


dispersed and skewed distribution of agents' VSLs indicates that empirical esti-


mates based on assumptions of normality might be biased. Second, these results


suggest the possibility of explaining some other observed risk anomalies based


on the agents' position in wage and asset distributions.      Third, our estimates


of an elasticity in response to changes in wages substantially in excess of one


implies that as an economy becomes richer more resources might be devoted to


health care and other measures to reduce mortality risk.


   The substantial heterogeneity in the VSL over the life cycle and across the


population could have several implications for the application of VSL estimates


to mortality risk reduction policy proposals. First, the life cycle variation in the


value of statistical life in this study does not support current EPA practice of a


constant VSL irrespective of age or the past FDA practice of a constant value


of a statistical life-year irrespective of age.   The inverted-U life cycle pattern


we nd implies that EPA practice overestimates the benets of mortality risk


reduction for the elderly and underestimates the benets of risk reduction for


prime-aged adults and FDA practice overestimates the benets of mortality risk


reduction for young adults. Second, the VSL-income elasticity results can inform


assessments of long-term mortality risk reduction policies, such as reducing UV-


B exposure through the phase-out of chlorouorocarbons. Such policies would


reduce mortality risk for future generations that would be expected to have


higher lifetime incomes and would be willing to pay more for risk reduction.


Third, the heterogeneity across the population suggests that a one-size ts all


VSL would not appropriately reect how much individuals would be willing to




                                         27
pay for risk reduction if they had such an opportunity to do so in a competitive


market.   For proposed policies that may aect the mortality risk prole for


a specic demographic group, population-specic VSLs may be appropriate.


Given the negative response to the so-called senior discount used by EPA in its


2002 evaluation of the Clear Skies Initiative, this may raise political and ethical


concerns (see discussion in Aldy and Viscus [2007]).      Such concerns may be


entirely legitimate for those contexts in which at least some of the dierences in


lifetime incomes and wage proles, and hence estimated VSLs, reect gender- or


ethnic-specic discrimination in labor markets (see discussion in Viscusi [2010]).




                                        28
References

J.E. Aldy and W.K. Viscus. Age dierences in the value of statistical life: Re-


  vealed preference evidence. Review of Environmental Economics and Policy,


  1(2):241260, 2007.



J.E. Aldy and W.K. Viscusi. Adjusting the value of statistical life for age and


  cohort eects. Review of Economics and Statistics, 90(3):573581, 2008.



E. Arias. United states life tables, 2002. National Vital Statistics Report, 53(6),


  2004.



M. Dickie Blomquist, G.C. and R.M. O'Conor. Willingness to pay for improving


  fatality risks and asthma symptoms: Values for children and adults of all ages.


  Resource and Energy Economics, 33(2):410425, 2011.


T.A. Cameron and J.R. DeShazo. Demand for health risk reductions. Journal


  of Environmental Economics and Management, 65:87109, 2013.


Dora Costa and M. E. Kahn. Changes in the value of life, 1940-1980. Journal


  of Risk and Uncertainty, 29(2):159180, 2004.


M.F. Evans and V.K. Smith. Measuring how risk tradeos adjust with income.


  Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 40(1):3355, 2010.


Eric French.   The eects of health, wealth and wages on labor supply and


  retirement behavior. Review of Economic Studies, 72(2):395427, 2005.



Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas and Jonathan Parker. Consumption over the lifecycle.


  Econometrica, 70(1):4789, 2002.


Robert E. Hall and Charles I. Jones. The value of life and the rise in health


  spending. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(1):3972, 2007.




                                        29
R. Glenn Hubbard, Jonathan Skinner, and Stephen P. Zeldes. Precautionary


  saving and social insurance. Journal of Political Economy, 103(2):360399,


  1995.



M. Johannesson, P. O. Johansson, and K. G. Lofgren. On the value of changes


  in life expectancy. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, (15):221239, 1997.



P. O. Johansson. On the value of changes in life expectancy. Journal of Health


  Economics, (15):105113, 1996.


P. O. Johansson. On the denition and age-dependency of the value of a statis-


  tical life. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 25(3):251263, 2002.



L. Kaplow.     The value of a statistical life and the coecient of relative risk


  aversion. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 31(1):2334, 2005.



T. J. Kniesner, W. K. Viscusi, and J. P. Ziliak. Life-cycle consumption and the


  age adjusted value of life. Contributions to Economic Analysis and Policy, 5


  (1), 2006.



T. J. Kniesner, W. K. Viscusi, and J. P. Ziliak. Policy relevant heterogeneity in


  the value of statistical life: New evidence from panel data quantile regressions.


  Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 40(1):1531, 2010.


A. Krupnick.     Mortality-risk valuation and age:   Stated preference evidence.


  Review of Environmental Economics and Policy, 1(2):261282, 2007.


J. D. Leeth and J. Ruser. Compensating wage dierentials for fatal and nonfatal


  injury risk by gender and race. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 27(3):257


  277, 2003.



J. Hammitt Liu, J.-T. and J.-L. Liu.     Estimating hedonic wage function and


  value of life in a developing country. Economic Letters, 57:353358, 1997.




                                        30
J. C. Mesa. An object-oriented class library for nonlinear optimization. Sandia


  Technical Report, (SAND94-8225), 3 1994.


M. J. Moore and W. K. Viscusi. Models for estinating discount rates for long


  term health risks using labor market data. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty,


  (3):381401, 1990.



J.R. Mrozek and L.O. Taylor.      What determines the value of life?   a meta-


  analysis. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 21(2):253270, 2002.



K. M. Murphy and R. H. Topel. The value of health and longevity. Journal of


  Political Economy, 114(5):871904, 2006.


Shinichi Nishiyama and Kent Smetters. Consumption taxes, risk sharing and


  economic eciency. Journal of Political Economy, 113(5):10881115, 2005.



Sherwin Rosen. The value of changes in life expectancy. Journal of Risk and


  Uncertainty, 1:285304, 1988.


Andrew Samwick and Christopher Carroll. The nature of precautionary wealth.


  Journal of Monetary Economics, (40):4172, 1997.


Philip J. Schneider and David H. Eberly. Geometric Tools For Computer Graph-


  ics.   The Morgan Kaufmann Series in Computer Graphics and Geometric


  Modeling. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, 2003.



D. S. Shepard and R. J. Zeckhauser. Suvival versus consumption. Management


  Science, 30(4):423439, 1984.


V. K. Smith, M. F. Evans, H. Kim, and D. H. Taylor.      Do the 'near' elderly


  value mortality risks dierently. Review of Economics and Statistics, 86(1):


  423429, 2004.




                                       31
Seamus J. Smyth.      A balancing act:      Optimal non-linear taxation in olg


  economies. Harvard University Working Paper, 5 2006.



Kjetil Storesletten, Chris Telmer, and Amir Yaron. Consumption and risk shar-


  ing over the life cycle. Journal of Monetary Economics, 51:609633, 2004.



W. K. Viscusi. Racial dierences in the value of statistical life. Journal of Risk


  and Uncertainty, 27(3):239256, 2003.


W. K. Viscusi. The value of life: Estimates with risks by occupation and indus-


  try. Economic Inquiry, 42(1):2948, 2004.



W. K. Viscusi and J. E. Aldy. The value of a statistical life: A critical review


  of market estimates throughout the world. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty,


  27(2):576, 2003.



W. K. Viscusi and J. E. Aldy. Labor market estimates of the senior discount of


  the value of statistical life. Journal of Environmental Economics and Man-


  agement, 53(3):377392, 2007.


W.K. Viscusi. Policy challenges of the heterogeneity of the value of statistical


  life. Foundations and Trends in Microeconomics, 6(2):99172, 2010.



W.K. Viscusi and J. Hersch. The mortality cost to smokers. Journal of Health


  Economics, 27:943958, 2008.




                                       32
Tables

Table 1: Summary of Parameter Values, Sources and Main
Economic Interpretation
 Parameter   Value     Source                                  Parameter Function

 β           0.965     Gourinchas and Parker [2002],           Rate of time preference
                       French [2005]

 γ           2.0       Gourinchas and Parker [2002],           Risk aversion
                       French [2005]

 v           2.0       French [2005], Nishiyama and            Trade-o between
                       Smetters [2005]                         leisure and consumption

 φi          varies    Arias [2004]                            Survival probability

 R           5%        Business cycle literature               Interest Rate

 k           8.0       Match VSL peak from Aldy and            Preference for living
                       Viscusi [2008]                          over dying

 Income      varies    Author's estimation                     Earnings pattern over
 process                                                       life cycle




Table 2: Permanent and Transitory Variances of Wage Shocks
                                              2                    2
                                Permanent (ση )    Transitory (σε )

              Full Sample             .0070             .026

                   Males              .0067             .028

                   Females            .0071             .021

                   Whites             .0067             .027

                   Blacks             .0062             .026




                                         33
Table 3: Simulated Laboratory Experiments
              Case                Wage Process               Mortality Risk Prole

              Base              full sample PSID            all population life table

              Black            black sample PSID          black population life table

              White            white sample PSID          white population life table

        Black-White            black sample PSID          white population life table

        White-Black            white sample PSID          black population life table

           Female             female sample PSID          female population life table

              Male             male sample PSID            male population life table

       Female-Male            female sample PSID           male population life table

       Male-Female             male sample PSID           female population life table




Table 4: Elasticity of VSL
                              (A)            (B)           (C)           (D)            (E)            (F)

                            .554                           .523                         .552
      w̄(1 − l)
                          (.0006)                        (.0006)                      (.0006)
                                           1.709                        1.656                          1.672
         w̄
                                          (.0007)                      (.0007)                        (.0006)
                                                           .106          .041          .1708            .100
          a
                                                         (.0004)       (.0002)        (.0008)         (.0003)
                                                                                        age            age
  Other controls
                                                                                       cubic          cubic



         R2                   0.674        0.935         0.7142         0.941          0.756          0.9619
Regressions are run on simulated data. There are 408,002 observations as regressions are run

for all working age (under 65) agents. The coecients in the rst two rows of the table

report the elasticities of VSL with respect to realized income and the permanent component

of income respectively.   a   is the asset holdings of an agent. Some cases control for age using a

cubic. All coecients are signicant in these cases. All regressions also contain a constant

which is not reported.




                                                   34
Table 5: Elasticity of VSL at Dierent Ages
                                                All Working                Age 30        Age 45       Age 60

                                                     1.672                  2.011        1.562         .814
        Elasticity of VSL w/r
                                                    (.0003)                (0.001)       (.002)       (.003)
 Permanent Component of Wages

                                                     0.552                  .819          .555         .147
  Elasticity of VSL w/r Realized
                                                    (.0006)                (0.005)       (.004)       (.002)
                 Income

                Controls                    Wealth, Age Cubic              Wealth        Wealth       Wealth
Regressions are run on simulated data.     Each coecient reported in this table represents

the results for a separate regression. Income and productivity are not included in the same

regressions. For the cases with all agents there are 408,006 observations. For other cases the

number of observations ranges from 9,200 observations to 9,997 observations. Standard errors

are in parentheses below the reported elasticities. The   R2   for the All Working are presented

in Table 4 while those for the permanent component of wages range from          0.993 − 0.998   and

those for income from   0.775 − .967.




                                              35
Figures

Figure 1: Mean, Median, 5th and 95th Percentiles of VSL Over Life
Cycle




Figure 2: Distribution of VSL at Age Forty




                                36
  Figure 3: VSL Over Life Cycle




Figure 4: Breakdown of Sources of Dierences in VSL between Blacks
and Whites




                                37
  Figure 5: Breakdown of Sources of Dierences in VSL between
Males and Females




                             38
A         Solving the Life-Cycle Problem

Solving the individual's life-cycle problem requires numerical methods.                       The


problem includes three state variables (1) the amount of assets (2) the perma-


nent component of wages and (3) the transitory shock to wages. The particular


form of our problem makes it impractical to make some common dimensionality


reducing state reductions
                                  14 . Lacking these simplications, we solve the more

complicated problem with many state variables.


    We represent the represented the agent's problem recursively as:




    Vt (Ait , Pit , εit ) = max u (cit , lit ) + βφt E [Vt+1 (Ai,t+1 , Pi,t+1 , εi,t+1 )]     (12)
                            c,l



subject to:




                cit + ai,t+1 = ait (1 + Rt ) + wit (1 − τSS ) (1 − lit )                      (13)




    For each value of the discrete state, the transitory wage shock, there is a


grid over assets and wages.          Solutions generally use 3 transitory shocks.             The


grid over assets and wages has 20 points for both assets and wages.                         Adding


more grid points does not signicantly change any of the decisions or aggregate


quantities of the model. Since the decision rules feature high levels of curvature


at low levels of assets and wages and much lower curvature at higher levels we


use a non-equally spaced grid. The density of the grid increases at lower levels


of both wages and assets to better account for the rapid changes in the value


function.


    Shape-preserving splines approximate the value function between grid points.

  14 An   example is the common normalization of using the homothecity of the value function
                                  A+P
to reduce the state variable to       , the ratio of assets plus permanent income to permanent
                                   P
income. Since we have both a permanent and transitory shock combined with an endogenous
labor supply decision we lose this convenient normalization.




                                               39
The value function inherits the monotonicity underlying the utility function.


Agents always prefer more assets and higher wages. This implies that approxi-


mation methods which preserve this are preferred. We employ two-dimensional


Akima shape-preserving splines, which are relatively fast and ecient [Schnei-


der and Eberly, 2003]. Importantly these splines provide information not only


about the function but also its derivative. This is necessary to use the much


faster Newton's method based optimization algorithms described below.


    To solve the individual's problem at each of these grid points we use the


OPT++ library of Mesa [1994].      This package solves general non-linear pro-


gramming problems with arbitrary constraints.


    Starting in the last period the solution is simple, do not work and consume


everything. We then know the the value function      V80   (corresponding to age-100


agents) at our grid points. The splines described above approximate the value


function over the entire area. Given   V80 ,   we then solve for   V79   taking   V80   as


given and construct splines again. From this the algorithm iterates back to the


beginning of an agent's economic life at age 0 (age-20 agents).


    When solving for the optimum in the value function we also get decision


rules for consumption and leisure. Since these are again on the grid the same


spline procedure approximates them.




B     Life-Cycle Wage Estimation

We estimate the life-cycle pattern of labor market compensation from Panel


Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) data over 1968-1993. We limit the sample


to heads of household between 20 and 65 years of age working at least 1,000


hours per year.   We also exclude heads of household with top-coded income.


This results in a sample of 107,381 observations for 11,040 households. Labor


market compensation measures are converted to constant year 2000 dollars using




                                       40
the CPI-Urban deator. We then convert labor market incomes to hourly rates


and take the natural logarithm of these values.


   We estimate the deterministic life cycle component of labor market compen-


sation by specifying the log of wages as a quintic function of age. This quintic


version yields very similar life cycle labor market compensation proles as more


exible specications, such as those with age-specic dummy variables, but this


more parsimonious parametric form allows for more ecient numerical simula-


tion. Wages increase steeply for young agents between 20 and 30. Wages peak


at around age fty and decline thereafter.    We have also estimated such age


quintic specications by gender and by race to complement the results for the


total population and facilitate our analysis of the heterogeneity of the value of


life across demographic characteristics.


   To characterize the variance in labor market compensation as the eect of


both permanent and transitory shocks, we employ the variance decomposition


method developed by Samwick and Carroll [1997]. For our sample, we rst re-


move the predictable component of labor market compensation. We regress the


log of the hourly wage on demographic characteristics, age, education, industry,


occupation, interactions of these terms, and year dummy variables. We normal-


ize a worker's wage by constructing the ratio of the actual wage to the predicted


wage from this regression. For each worker in a given year we dierence labor


market incomes by subtracting previous years' incomes from the current year's


income:




                     ∆ytd   = yt+d − yt       ∀d = 1, . . . , D             (14)




   Having removed the predictable component of labor market income, the


square of these dierences should represent the variance in labor market income




                                       41
over time. Samwick and Carroll [1997] show how this can be decomposed into


permanent and transitory shocks to income by OLS regression on a worker-by-


worker basis of these dierences on the time length associated with the dier-


ence,   d,   and the constant 2:




                                     2
                                   ∆ytd   = dση2 + 2σε2                     (15)




   The coecient estimates yield the permanent and transitory income shocks.


Following Samwick and Carroll, we exclude observations with     d   of 1 or 2 to


ensure that our results do not suer from serial correlation.




                                            42
