                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           BANKS ARE WHERE THE LIQUIDITY IS

                                             Oliver Hart
                                            Luigi Zingales

                                        Working Paper 20207
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20207


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2014




We would like to thank Arnoud Boot, Christian Leuz, Alp Simsek, Vania Stavrakeva, Robert
Vishny, and participants in seminars at MIT, the University of Chicago, Cass Business School, LSE
(finance), Boston College, and the University of Amsterdam for useful comments, and Kirill Borusyak
for research assistance. Oliver Hart gratefully acknowledges financial support from the U.S. National
Science Foundation through the National Bureau of Economic Research. Luigi Zingales gratefully
acknowledges financial support from the Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP) and the
Initiative on Global Markets at the University of Chicago. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Oliver Hart and Luigi Zingales. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Banks Are Where The Liquidity Is
Oliver Hart and Luigi Zingales
NBER Working Paper No. 20207
June 2014
JEL No. E41,E51,G21

                                              ABSTRACT

What is so special about banks that their demise often triggers government intervention? In this paper
we develop a simple model where, even ignoring interconnectedness issues, the failure of a bank causes
a larger welfare loss than the failure of other institutions. The reason is that agents in need of liquidity
tend to concentrate their holdings in banks. Thus, a shock to banks disproportionately affects the agents
who need liquidity the most, reducing aggregate demand and the level of economic activity. In the
context of our model, the optimal fiscal response to such a shock is to help people, not banks, and
the size of this response should be larger if a bank, rather than a similarly-sized nonfinancial firm,
fails.


Oliver Hart
Department of Economics
Littauer Center 220
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
ohart@harvard.edu

Luigi Zingales
Booth School of Business
The University of Chicago
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
luigi.zingales@ChicagoBooth.edu
During the 2007-2008 financial crisis industrial firms, including major ones like General Motors, were

allowed to go bankrupt. By contrast, financial firms, with the notable exception of Lehman, were bailed

out. One possible reason for this differential treatment can be found in the political clout of these two

industries. Financial firms were and are major donors of recent administrations. Many of the recent

Treasury Secretaries and White House Chiefs of Staff had close ties to the financial industry. The greater

attention shown by the government toward the financial industry, thus, might be purely a matter of

politics. While not denying this possibility, in this paper we explore an alternative interpretation: that

government intervention is justified by an intrinsic difference in the welfare consequences when a bank,

rather than an equally-sized industrial firm, fails.

        An often-mentioned rational for this difference is the degree of interconnectedness of financial

institutions. But while there is no doubt that large financial institutions tend to be highly interconnected,

large industrial firms like General Motors and Ford are very interconnected too. To quote Ford’s CEO

Alan Mulally: “The domestic auto industry is highly interdependent. A collapse of one of our competitors

would not only affect Ford and our transformation plan, but would have a devastating ripple effect across

the economy.” 1

        Another popular interpretation among financial economists for the difference between large

manufacturing firms and banks focuses on the ability of depositors to run (e.g., Diamond and Dybvig,

1983), raising the possibility of inefficient liquidation. Yet, suppliers and customers of GM can run too, a

concern that led the U.S. Government to intervene in 2008 to guarantee GM warranties. So what makes

banks different?

        In this paper, we focus on a different dimension: banks are special because they are where people

in need of liquidity keep their wealth. In a world where the return from human capital is not fully

pledgeable, there is a natural demand for safe (or relatively safe) assets to support trading. Banks arise to

satisfy this need. As a result, we will show that agents who need liquidity for transaction purposes will


1Alan Mulally’s testimony to the United States Senate Committee on Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs,
November 18, 2008.

                                                                                                                2
hold their wealth disproportionately in the form of bank deposits (or similar financial securities—see

below).

          In a world where the return from human capital is not fully pledgeable, the failure of any firm

implies two losses: a direct loss of wealth, and an indirect loss in liquidity resulting from the reduction in

pledgeable assets. This dual effect is present both for a bank and for an industrial firm. Yet, the impact of

a loss of pledgeable assets is different depending on the liquidity needs of the holders of those assets. A

bank failure disproportionately hits agents who are liquidity constrained (more so than if an industrial

firm was to fail), causing a larger drop in the demand for labor services that was supported by that

liquidity, and a larger fall in GDP. (Similarly, a loss borne by debt-holders affects GDP

disproportionately more than an equally-sized loss borne by equity investors.)

          Building on Hart and Zingales (2013), we consider a simple general equilibrium economy where

security markets are complete, but consumers cannot pledge future income or wealth, including labor

income. There are two groups of agents and the lack of a simultaneous double coincidence of wants

between the two groups generates the need for a relatively safe asset for transaction purposes. In this

context we show that agents with liquidity needs (in our model, those who buy before they sell) will

choose to hold a disproportionate amount of (Arrow) securities that pay off in the low states of the world.

          We also show that these Arrow securities can be manufactured by tranching investment payoffs

in order of seniority. If we build Arrow securities in this way, the agents in need of liquidity will hold

disproportionately more of the most senior tranches, which are relatively safe. Unlike the classic

literature (e. g., Baumol (1952) and Tobin (1956)) that focuses on the transactional demand for money,

our model derives a transactional demand for safe assets. It is a way to formalize the source of the

shortage of safe assets proclaimed by Caballero (2006). The fundamental friction is the same as that

stressed by Caballero et al. (2008): as a result of limited pledgeability, the world’s ability to generate

wealth has outpaced its ability to generate safe stores of value and to credibly transfer that wealth. As we

show in Section 6 this “shortage” persists even in the presence of government debt.



                                                                                                              3
        Given the demand for safe assets, we consider the macroeconomic effects of imposing a loss on

the different tranches underlying investor returns. There is a built-in correlation between extremely

negative aggregate outcomes and losses borne by the most senior tranches. To eliminate this effect, we

consider only losses resulting from an idiosyncratic fraud in a specific tranche: we call this a “Madoff”

shock. If we did not, the effect we observe would be even larger.

        We show that, when a shock hits senior tranches, the macroeconomic effect of this shock is more

severe and so is the welfare loss associated with it. Losses borne by senior tranche holders deprive the

agents who need liquidity of collateral. In so doing, they reduce the effective demand of these agents for

the services of other agents, decreasing the amount of income these other agents can make. Unable to sell

their labor services on favorable terms, the other agents will curtail their own demand for services, further

reducing the overall level of economic activity. This effect is more limited or even completely absent

when a junior tranches face a loss, because junior tranches are held disproportionately by agents with low

liquidity needs.

        The very senior tranches held by liquidity-constrained agents look similar to bank deposits.

Indeed, banks can be considered as mutual funds that on the asset side invest in financial claims and on

the liability side have a disproportionate share of very senior claims (deposits). According to this view,

banks are nothing but a cost-effective way to manufacture safe assets needed for transaction purposes.

This simple theory of banking is able to explain why banks need to have deposits that do not fluctuate in

value. Depositors are the agents with the highest need for liquidity and thus they demand insurance

against possible falls in the value of their investments, even if they are risk neutral. In our model this

insurance is provided by the agents less in need of liquidity.

        This very simple theory of banking is able to explain not only why the default of a bank is worse

than the default of a similarly-sized industrial company, but also why these effects are not unique to

banks: they are common to all the most senior securities. This might also explain why governments are so

reluctant to impose losses on bonds, especially secured bonds. The reason is the same: they are held

disproportionately by people in need of liquidity. Finally, the theory can explain why the size of the fiscal

                                                                                                             4
response to a shock is larger if a bank, rather than a similarly-sized nonfinancial firm, fails. Yet, our

model would suggest that the government intervention should be targeted to help people with liquidity

needs, not banks per se.

        As we will show, our results can also explain why the bursting of the internet bubble had

relatively mild macroeconomic effects, while the (milder) loss in subprime mortgages had a devastating

impact. The former shock was concentrated on equity instruments held by people with no compelling

liquidity needs, while the latter shock impacted relatively senior claims held by people with compelling

liquidity needs (see also Mian and Sufi, 2014).

        Note that we would not have obtained the same results had we assumed that the demand for safe

assets came from agents’ risk aversion. In a complete markets model, agents with different risk aversion

will trade so as to equalize their marginal rates of substitution. Thus, on the margin the welfare loss is the

same regardless of which group of agents is hit by the shock. By contrast, in our model the welfare effects

depend upon who is hit.

        A risk-aversion based model would also be unable to explain why riskless debt has a yield lower

than that predicted by a risk-return tradeoff (Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2012)). To explain

riskless debt’s lower yield, several papers have postulated a special demand for riskless securities (e.g.,

Hanson et al. (2014), Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2012) and Stein (2012)). In this paper we

derive this demand from first principles, in so doing providing foundations for the monetary policy results

obtained by Stein (2012) and the differences between traditional and shadow banks emphasized by

Hanson et al. (2014).

        The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 presents the framework. Section 3

characterizes the non-pledgeable equilibrium for the case where there is insufficient liquidity in each state

of the world to sustain the first-best level of trade. (One of the sub-cases is relegated to an Appendix.)

Section 4 shows how this demand can be satisfied by securities’ tranches and how the most senior

tranches will be disproportionately held by those who are liquidity constrained. Section 5 extends the

analysis to the case where there is sufficient liquidity in the best state of the world to sustain the first-best

                                                                                                                5
level of trade. Section 6 considers the role of fiscal policy. Section 7 explains how our very senior funds

can be interpreted as banks. Finally, Section 8 concludes.



2. The Framework

        There are many agents. Ex ante each agent is equally likely to be a type that buys before it sells or

a type that sells before it buys; agents learn their type at the beginning of period 1. We call the first type

financial planners and the second type secretaries. (Aide-memoire: financial planners buy first and

secretaries buy second.) Financial planners want to consume secretarial services in period 2 and

secretaries want to consume financial planning services in period 3. Financial planners and secretaries can

also consume wheat in period 4 and there is no discounting. Each financial planner and secretary has an

endowment of wheat in period 1 equal to e . Wheat can be invested in projects; these projects yield wheat

in period 4. We will assume that e>0. The timeline is as in Figure 1.

         1 ---------------------------------------------2------------------------3----------------------------------4

Agents learn whether              State of world     Trade of                 Trade of                      Output
they are financial planners        realized          secretarial              financial planning            from projects
or secretaries                                       services                 services                    / wheat
Wheat invested                                                                                             consumed
Securities traded


                                                     Figure 1



        We write agents’ utilities as:

                                                                               1 f 2
                                  Financial Planners: U f = w f + s f −          (l )
                                                                               2

                                                                           1 s 2
                                       Secretaries: U s = ws + f s −         (l )
                                                                           2

where s f is the quantity of secretarial services consumed by a financial planner; l f is the labor supplied

by a financial planner; f   s
                                is the quantity of financial planning services consumed by a secretary; l s is



                                                                                                                        6
the labor supplied by a secretary; and wi is the quantity of wheat consumed by individual i = f , s in

period 4. We assume constant returns to scale: one unit of secretarial labor yields one unit of secretarial

services and one unit of financial planning labor yields one unit of financial planning services.

        In other words financial planners (resp., secretaries) are indifferent between wheat and secretarial

(resp., financial planning services) and have a quadratic disutility of labor.

        Agents are risk neutral. The markets for secretarial and financial planning services are perfectly

competitive. It is crucial for our analysis that there is no simultaneous double coincidence of wants: a

secretary does not want to consume financial planning services in period 2 from the financial planner who

is buying his secretarial services.

       There is a risky technology that transfers endowment between periods 1 and 4. There are n

(aggregate) states of the world. With probability   π i >0, one unit of period 1 wheat is transformed into Ri

units of period 4 wheat (i=1, …n). Without loss of generality we label the states so that

0 < R1 < R2 < .... < Rn . Agents learn about the state of the world between periods 1 and 2. All agents are

risk neutral. We also assume that there is free entry of firms possessing the technology described and that

these firms face constant returns to scale (the firms’ technologies are perfectly correlated).

        This framework is similar to Hart and Zingales (2013), except in three respects. One (minor) is

that there are n states instead of just 2. The second (more important) is that we do not assume that an

agent can insure against becoming a financial planner rather than a secretary before period 1; a

justification is that period 1 endowment cannot be pledged in advance (ex post an agent can hide it).

Third, and most important, in this model there is no riskless storage. As we show in Hart and Zingales

(2013), the presence of multiple investment choices creates a distortion between private and social

incentives. Since this distortion has already been analyzed in our other paper, we want to eliminate it here.

        In spite of these differences, some of the basic results are the same. For example, in the absence

of any pledgeability problem the economy has a unique Arrow-Debreu (or sequential Arrow) equilibrium.

In this equilibrium, there is a separation between consumption and production. Since the model is

                                                                                                              7
symmetric, the prices of financial planning and secretarial services, the wage rates of financial planners

and secretaries, and the price of wheat will be the same, and we can normalize them to be 1 in each state

of the world. At these prices each financial planner and secretary supplies and consumes one unit of

services, incurs a labor cost of 1/2, and receives a consumer surplus of ½. Agents also receive expected

             n
surplus e   ∑ π R from investing their endowment, and so the utility of each agent is
             i
                 i   i                                                                                     .



Finally, since the rate of return in the economy is    =             , the equilibrium price of an Arrow



security, which pays off one unit of wheat in state i , is       .



3. Non-pledgeable Equilibrium for the case where 2eRn < 1

Consider now the case where future labor income cannot be pledged (i.e., workers can hide their income

from lenders). Suppose, however, that project returns can be pledged (the firms carrying out the projects

might be public companies, say). That is, firms can invest period 1 wheat in the risky project and issue

securities collateralized by the project returns (project returns cannot be stolen by firms’ managers).

These securities will be purchased in period 1 by financial planners and secretaries and used as a means of

payment for services in periods 2 and 3. Since we do not wish to introduce further frictions it is natural to

assume that the state of the world is verifiable and that firms issue a full set of Arrow securities backed by

their projects (where security i, i=1,…,n, pays off a unit of wheat if and only if state i occurs).

        Let us review the timing. Agents learn their type at the beginning of period 1. Arrow security

markets open, and firms invest. The state of the world, state i say, is learned at the end of period 1. At this

point Arrow security i has value 1 (in terms of period 4 wheat) and all other Arrow securities have value

zero. In period 2 financial planners use their holdings of Arrow security i to buy secretarial services. In

period 3 secretaries use their holdings of security i acquired in period 1, plus what they have accumulated



                                                                                                               8
from financial planners in return for supplying secretarial services in period 2, to buy financial planning

services. In period 4 investments pay off and wheat is consumed.

        In this section we suppose that 2eRn < 1 ; we consider the case                in Section 5. To

compute the non-pledgeable equilibrium, normalize so that the prices of wheat in period 1, wheat in

period 4, Arrow security i in period 2, and Arrow security i in period 3, are all one (if state i occurs).

Consider a financial planner’s utility maximization problem. In equilibrium the price of secretarial

services in period 2 cannot exceed 1 since otherwise financial planners would strictly prefer to use their

securities to purchase period 4 wheat rather than secretarial services, and so the secretary market would

not clear. Thus, we can assume for the purpose of calculating utility that financial planners use all their

Arrow securities to buy secretarial services. (By a parallel argument the price of financial planning

services in period 3 cannot exceed 1 and so for purposes of calculating utility we can assume that

secretaries spend all their Arrow securities on financial planning services.) Next consider a financial

planner’s labor supply decision in period 3. Ignore the subscript on the state. Then a financial planner will

                                                     1 f 2
choose his labor supply l f to maximize p f l f −      (l ) , i.e., set l f = p f , where p f is the price of
                                                     2

financial planner services. Note that it is too late for the financial planner to buy more secretarial

services and so his marginal return from work is p f (he will use the proceeds to buy wheat in period 4). A

financial planner’s labor yields revenue ( p f ) 2 , which he redeems for wheat in period 4; in addition he

                           1 f 2                                        1
incurs an effort cost of     ( p ) , and so his net utility from work is ( p f ) 2 .
                           2                                            2
                                                                                                          f
        It follows that in period 1 a financial planner chooses his holdings of Arrow securities ( xi , i=1,

…n) to solve:

                                                  xif 1 f            
                                       Max ∑ π i  s + ( pi      )
                                                                  2
(*)
                                           i      pi 2               




                                                                                                                9
                                                           n
                                                s.t.       ∑q x
                                                           i
                                                                   i i
                                                                         f
                                                                             ≤ e,

        f    s
where pi , pi are the prices of financial planning and secretarial services, respectively, in state i and qi is

the period 1 price of the ith Arrow security. Note that firm profits are zero in equilibrium given constant

returns to scale, and so we do not need to keep track of any dividends received by consumers. Note also

that xi ≥ 0, since a short seller cannot credibly commit to pay ex post.
       f



        A similar calculation applies to secretaries. The difference is that a secretary in period 2 chooses

                                   ps s 1 s 2
her labor supply l s to maximize     f
                                       l − (l ) , where p s is the price of secretarial services. The
                                   p      2

                                                                             ps
reason is that a secretary’s marginal return from work is                       , since she will use her income to buy
                                                                             pf

                                                                                                  2
                                                                        1  ps 
financial planning services. Thus a secretary’s net utility from work is  f  . Hence in period 1 a
                                                                        2 p 

                                                                   s
secretary chooses her holdings of Arrow securities ( xi , j=1, …n) to solve:

                                               x s 1  p s 2 
(**)                               Max ∑ π i  if +  if  
                                       i      pi 2  pi  

subject to

                                                               n

                                                           ∑q xi
                                                                    i i
                                                                       s
                                                                             ≤ e,


where xi ≥ 0 for the same reason stated above.
        s



        As noted, profit maximization and constant return to scale imply zero profit:

                                            n
(3.1)                                      ∑q R
                                            i
                                                 i     i   =1 .


Since all the wheat is invested, the supply of the ith Arrow security is 2eRi . Hence, the securities market

clearing conditions are

                                                                                                                         10
(3.2)                                       xif + xis =
                                                      2eRi , for i=1, …n.

        It is easy to see that in equilibrium xi > 0 for all i: if xi = 0 , the price of the secretarial
                                                f                    f



services in state i would be zero and the return to a financial planner of purchasing an Arrow security in

that state would be infinite. Also, since we have assumed that 2eRn < 1 , even in the best state the supply

of liquidity is not enough to support the Arrow-Debreu level of trade and so prices of financial planning

and secretarial services will be strictly below 1. It follows that financial planners and secretaries will

spend all their available wealth on each other’s services in periods 2 and 3. Given the supply functions for

financial planning and secretarial services obtained earlier, we can write the market clearing conditions

for financial planning and secretarial services in state i as

                                            xif   pis
(3.3)                                           =     ,
                                            pis pif

                                            xif + xis
(3.4)                                             f
                                                      = pif , for i=1, …n.
                                               pi

(*), (**), (3.1) - (3.4) characterize a non-pledgeable equilibrium.

        Although xi > 0 for all i, it is less clear that xi > 0 for all i. In the text we will concentrate on
                   f                                       s



                                                                                            1        1
the case where xi > 0 for all i : we show that a sufficient condition for this is
                 s
                                                                                    ∑ π j R j2 < 2 R12 . In the
                                                                                     j



appendix we establish that our results generalize to the case where xi = 0 for some i.
                                                                      s



                                 1                                   1
Proposition 1: Let S =   ∑ π j R 2j , and suppose that S < 2 R12 . Then there is a unique non-pledgeable
                          j


equilibrium characterized by

                                                                πi
                                                       qi =      1
                                                                         ,
                                                                 2
                                                              R S
                                                                i


                                                                     1
                                                      xif = eRi2 S ,

                                                                                                                  11
                                                                                               1
                                                       x =2eRi − eR S > 0 ,
                                                           i
                                                            s
                                                                                              i
                                                                                               2



                                                                                                   1
                                                                  pi = (2eRi ) ,
                                                                    f                              2



                                                                            1         1        3       1
                                                                pis = 2 4 Ri 2 e 4 S 2 ,

for all i.

Proof: Suppose xi > 0 . Then, the first order conditions for (*) and (**) are:
                 s




                                                  πi
(3.5)                                                      = k1 ,
                                                 qi pis

                                                  πi
(3.6)                                                       = k2 ,
                                                 qi pif

for all i, for some k1 , k2 .

             From (3.2) –(3.4),

                                                       1                                               1            1
(3.7)                               pi = (2eRi )
                                     f                 2
                                                                and p = ( xi ) (2eRi )
                                                                            i
                                                                             s                 f       2            4
                                                                                                                        ,

and so

                                                                                 πi
(3.8)                                                                            1                     1
                                                                                                           = k1 ,
                                                                        f        2                     4
                                                                 qi ( xi ) (2eRi )

                                                                        πi
(3.9)                                                                                     1
                                                                                               = k2 .
                                                                                          2
                                                                   qi (2eRi )

In turn, this implies

                                             1        1
                                             k2
(3.10)                               ( xi ) = (2eRi ) 4 .
                                         f   2
                                             k1

             From (3.1) and (3.9)




                                                                                                                            12
(3.11)                                                                 .



         Substituting (3.11) into (3.9), we have


(3.12)                                                     .




         From (3.10)- (3.11) and the budget constraint     ∑q xj
                                                                           j
                                                                                   f
                                                                                   j   = e , we have


(3.13)                                                                         ,



and so we can write

                                                                   1
(3.14)                                              xif = eRi2 S ,

                                                               1                   1   3   1
(3.15)                                              p = 2 ( Ri ) e S .
                                                      i
                                                       s       4                   2   4   2




We have established the formulae in Proposition 1. The only remaining thing to check is that xi > 0 , i.e.,
                                                                                               s




xif < 2eRi . This will be true as long as

                                               1
(3.16)                                      eRi 2 S < 2eRi for all i,

              1
i.e., S < 2 R12 .

         It is clear that the above is a non-pledgeable equilibrium. The argument in the appendix

establishes uniqueness.

                                                                                                        Q.E.D.

                                                                                         f
         Proposition 1 tells us that a financial planner’s demand for Arrow securities xi is strictly

                                                                                                         1
increasing in i. It is also easy to see that a secretary’s demand for Arrow securities,=
                                                                                       xis 2eRi − eRi2 S , is


                                                                                                             13
                                          1
strictly increasing in i (given 2R > S ). Both of these results are intuitive. (They are akin to co-
                                         1
                                          2



insurance results when parties are risk-averse.) In better states the supply of Arrow securities is greater,

their price lower, and parties will hold more of them.

              The next proposition tells us that a financial planner’s demand for Arrow securities exceeds a

secretary’s demand in the lowest state i=1 and the reverse is the case in the highest state i=n. Also the

demands cross only once.

              Proposition 2: x1 > x1 , xn < xn , and there exists an i* such that xi ≥ xi for i ≤ i* and xi < xi
                               f   s     f   s                                      f    s                 f    s




for i > i* .

Proof: Consider

                                                       1
(3.15)                         xif −=
                                    xis 2e[ Ri2 S − Ri ] .

                                                  1         1                                  1      1
This is positive for i=1 since      ∑π R      j
                                                  2
                                                  j   > R and negative for i=n since
                                                           1
                                                            2
                                                                                       ∑π Rj
                                                                                               2
                                                                                               j   < R Also if
                                                                                                      2
                                                                                                      n.
                                     j                                                 j


                           1             1                           1       1
xi* − x ≤ 0 , i.e., R ≥ ∑ π j R , then for i > i R > ∑ π j R and so xif − xis < 0 .
  f       s
         i*
                           2
                          i*
                                         2
                                         j
                                                                *    2
                                                                    i*
                                                                             2
                                                                             j
                                j                                        j


                                                                                                                 Q.E.D.

              Proposition 2 is also intuitive. Liquidity is more important for financial planners than for

secretaries, and it is relatively more this way in low states of the world.



4. Tranching of Securities

So far we have shown that financial planners want relatively more Arrow securities in the low states and

secretaries in the high states. Given the number of states of the world, it is worthwhile to consider whether

this demand can be satisfied by “simpler” securities. In this section we will prove that both types of

agents’ demand for securities can be satisfied by tranching the payoff of an investment in the existing

technology on the basis of seniority, similar to the tranching of collateralized debt obligations that was so


                                                                                                                     14
popular before the 2008 financial crisis. (For a different explanation of tranching, based on asymmetric

information, see DeMarzo (2005).) We will also analyze the welfare effects of losses incurred by

securities with different levels of seniority.



4.1 Tranches as a viable substitute for Arrow securities

Let’s start by proving that both the financial planners’ and the secretaries’ demand for Arrow securities

can be satisfied by tranches on the economy’s return stream ( R1 , R2 ,...Rn ). A tranche corresponds to a

debt level of a certain seniority. If the tranches are d1 , d 2 , d3 ,.., d k in descending order of seniority, then

in state i the first tranche receives Min( d1 , R ), the second tranche Min( d 2 , R − Min( d1 , R ) ), the third

tranche Min( d3 , R − Min(d1 , R ) − Min(d 2 , R − Min( d1 , R )) ), and so on.

Proposition 3: The demand for n Arrow securities by financial planners ( xi ∀i ) and secretaries ( xi
                                                                                      f                                s




∀i ) can be satisfied by n tranches 1,d 2 ,d 3 ,K ,d n of the risky project return R1 , R2 ,...Rn .
                                    d

         Proof: The proof will be by construction. Let d1 = R1 , d=
                                                                  2 R2 − R1 , d=
                                                                               3 R3 − R2 , …,

d=
 n Rn − Rn −1 be tranches in descending order of seniority. Then the return vectors of the n tranches

d1 , d 2 , d3 ,.., d n across different states of the world are given by

                                              d1 = [ R1 , R1 , ……. R1 ],

                                     d2 =[ 0, R2 - R1 , R2 - R1 ……. R2 - R1 ],

                                     d3 =[ 0, 0 , R3 − R2 , R3 − R2 ……. R3 − R2 ],

and

                                              dn = [ 0, 0 , 0, 0 ……. Rn − Rn −1 ].




                                                                                                                       15
                                                                                                   f
        A financial planner’s portfolio yields the return vector ( x1f , x2f ......xnf ) . Since xi is

                                                                   x1f                       x f − x1f
monotonically increasing in i , if the financial planner buys          of the first tranche, 2         of the
                                                                   R1                        R2 − R1

                  x3f − x2f                            x f − xnf−1
second tranche,             of the third tranche up to n           of the last tranche we can replicate the
                  R3 − R2                             Rn − Rn −1

same payoff the financial planners would have obtained with the Arrow securities. That is,

                  x1f     x f − x1f     x f − x2f            x f − xnf−1
                      d1 + 2        d2 + 3        d3 + .... + n          dn =
                  R1       R2 − R1      R3 − R2              Rn − Rn −1

     = x1f (1, 0, 0,...0) + x2f (0,1, 0,...0) + x3f (0, 0,1, 0,...0) + ... + xnf (0, 0, 0,...1) .

The same logic applies to secretaries.

                                                                                                            Q.E.D.

        The possibility of creating Arrow securities by tranching is closely related to Ross (1976). In

fact, if short selling were possible, Arrow securities would simply be a non-degenerate linear

transformation of the tranches. In our model, however, short selling is not feasible, since the short seller

cannot credibly commit to pay.

        While there are many ways to manufacture the Arrow securities needed, tranching is particularly

attractive because it does not require parties to verify the state of the world, only the total return. It also

corresponds to a structure that we observe a great deal, from bank deposits to the infamous Collateralized

Debt Obligations (CDOs). Consistent with the model, CDOs became popular as riskless assets at a time

of a shortage of treasuries (Gorton and Ordonez, 2013).



4.2 Distribution of ownership of the various tranches

        Having established that tranches are a convenient way to achieve the same payoff as that obtained

by Arrow securities, we ask next how the various tranches will be allocated across investors. Proposition




                                                                                                                  16
4 says that financial planners will invest more in senior tranches and secretaries will invest more in junior

tranches.

         Proposition 4: The amount invested by a financial planner in tranche k

                                                              xkf − xkf−1
                                                              Rk − Rk −1

                                           f
is strictly decreasing in k=1, …n (where x0 = R0 =0). The amount invested by a secretary in tranche k

                                                              xks − xks −1
                                                              Rk − Rk −1

                                          s
is strictly increasing in k=1, …n (where x0 =0).



Proof: Using Proposition 1 we can write

                                                          1       1
                                    xkf − xkf−1 e( Rk2 − Rk2−1 ) S
(4.1)                                          =                   ,
                                    Rk − Rk −1     Rk − Rk −1

                                            1
which is strictly decreasing in k since R 2 is a strictly concave function. Also from (3.1),

                                    xkf − xkf−1 xks − xks −1
(4.2)                                          +             =
                                                             2e ,
                                    Rk − Rk −1 Rk − Rk −1

         xks − xks −1
and so                must be strictly increasing in k.
         Rk − Rk −1

                                                                                                        Q.E.D.

4.3 Welfare effects of losses in different tranches

         Now we want to study the differential macroeconomic and welfare effects of losses in different

tranches. There is an obvious reason why a loss suffered by a very senior tranche has worse welfare

consequences: since the tranche is senior, it is impaired only when the loss in the underlying investment is

so severe as to go through all the other layers. Hence, a loss in a very senior tranche is an indicator of a

very negative realization of the state of the world.

                                                                                                               17
        To eliminate this effect, we assume that each tranche is managed by a single, separate fund and

that one of these funds faces an unexpected loss due to an accounting fraud (a “Madoff” shock), i.e., a

totally idiosyncratic event. A limited number of large funds could, of course, have some market power.

To avoid this complication we assume that an entry threat forces them to behave in a competitive way2.

         It is now legitimate to ask which fund’s losses will have the worst impact on the economy.

        To repeat, then, we assume that there is one fund managing each tranche. Suppose that the

economy has arrived at the beginning of period 2, and it is known that state i has occurred. At this point

the fund managing tranche k experiences an unanticipated shock: a small (infinitesimal) unexpected

change in its wealth equal to d ε . (We are assuming that state i is such that tranche k is worth a strictly

positive amount, i.e., k ≤ i .) This wealth shock is distributed among financial planners and secretaries

                                                                                         xkf − xkf−1
according to their relative holdings of tranche k. Recall that a financial planner holds             units and
                                                                                         Rk − Rk −1

              xks − xks −1
a secretary                units. These sum to 2e, and so the wealth changes in the realized state i will satisfy
              Rk − Rk −1

                                                        xkf − xkf−1 d ε
(4.3)                                         dxif =                    ,
                                                        Rk − Rk −1 2e

                                                        xks − xks −1 d ε
(4.4)                                         dxis =                     .
                                                        Rk − Rk −1 2e

        If we define

                                                       xkf − xkf−1 1
(4.5)                                         λk =                   ,
                                                       Rk − Rk −1 2e

we can rewrite this more compactly as

(4.6)                                dxif = λk d ε ,               dxis = (1 − λk )d ε .




2Our results generalize to the case of small funds. One difference occurs if the Madoff shock is
anticipated; see Section 6.3 below.

                                                                                                               18
         As in Hart and Zingales (2013), we use the sum of utilities of financial planners and secretaries as

our measure of welfare. This is reasonable since ex ante each agent is equally likely to be a financial

planner or a secretary.

         From (*) and (**), the sum of utilities in state i is

                                            xf 1                      xis 1  pis  
                                                                                    2

                                       Wi =  i s + ( pif     )
                                                                  2
(4.7)                                                                 + f +  f  .
                                             pi 2                    pi 2  pi  
                                                                                      

                                 f    s
Using (3.3)-(3.4) to solve for pi , pi , we can write (4.7) as

                                    f 2
                                        1
                                                                                                 
                                                                  xis                 xif
                                           + ( xi + xi ) +                                      .
                                 ( xi )      1 f                              1
(4.8)                 Wi =                             s
                                                                            +
                            f            1
                                             2                            1
                                                                              2               1 

                            ( xi + xi ) 4                 ( xif + xis ) 2     ( xif + xis ) 2 
                                        s




Note that in the absence of the shock xi + xi =
                                        f    s
                                               2eRi .

         Differentiating (4.8) with respect to ε and using (4.6), we obtain, at ε =0,

                      dWi
(4.9)                     =
                      dε

                             1               1
                                                                                                                        
 ( 2eRi ) 4 2 ( xi   )           λk − ( xif ) 2
           1              −                                    3             1                           1
             1 f                                   1                                          1
                                                     ( 2eRi ) 4 1 1 ( 2eRi ) 2 (1 − λk ) − xis ( 2eRi ) 2 1
                                                             −                                         −
                                                                                                                       1
                              2

                                                                                                           + ( 2eRi ) 2 
                                                   4                                          2                      −
                                                                + +
                         ( 2eRi ) 2
                                        1
                                                                  2 2               ( 2eRi )                4           
                                                                                                                      

    1 f − 12           −
                         1
                           1        1
                                             −
                                               5
                                                 1 1                −
                                                                      1
                                                                        1           −
                                                                                      3
                                                                                        1       −
                                                                                                  1
=     ( xi ) λk (2eRi ) 4 − ( xif ) 2 (2eRi ) 4 + + (1 − λk )(2eRi ) 2 − xis (2eRi ) 2 + (2eRi ) 2 .
    2                      4                     2 2                    4               4

The coefficient of λk in (4.9) is

                                                      1 f − 12        −
                                                                        1
                                                                          1     −
                                                                                  1
(4.10)                                                  ( xi ) (2eRi ) − (2eRi ) 2 ,
                                                                        4
                                                      2                   2

and this is easily seen to be strictly positive, since

                                                                             1
(4.11)                                                xif < 2eRi < (2eRi ) 2 ,



                                                                                                                             19
given that 2eRi < 1 . Hence, we have established that the effect on welfare of a small shock to tranche k is

greater if λk is large. But we know from Proposition 4 that λk is decreasing in k. Therefore, we have

established that the welfare loss from a small negative shock to a tranche will be greater the more senior

the tranche is.

           The intuition is simple. Each dollar lost has two effects: a direct effect on welfare (equal to a

dollar since agents have linear utility) plus an indirect effect on welfare produced by the reduced level of

trade (which generates a positive surplus), caused by a reduced level of liquidity. The financial planners

are the agents more in need of liquidity. Thus, a loss that falls disproportionately on the shoulders of the

financial planners will have disproportionately large welfare consequences. As Proposition 4 shows the

people who need liquidity the most (in our model the financial planners) invest more of their wealth in

senior funds. In fact, the more so, the more senior they are. Thus, a loss in the more senior funds will fall

disproportionately on the shoulders of the financial planners and thus will have a disproportionately large

effect on the level of economic activity and a disproportionately large loss in aggregate welfare.



Remark: The above argument also implies that a shock to an industrial firm is (weakly) less serious than

an equally-sized shock to a financial intermediary. Suppose that an industrial firm loses d ε . Then this

has the effect that       falls by d ε . But this loss of income “at the top” in state i will affect only the most

junior tranche that is solvent in that state, and as we have seen this has a relatively small impact on

welfare.

                                            dWi                                 dWi
           It is natural to ask how large       is. One’s first thought is that     >1, i.e., the effect of a
                                            dε                                  dε

wealth shock will be multiplied, given liquidity constraints. However, this does not have to be the case. In

                                 dWi
fact, it is even possible that       <0! The reason is that a positive wealth shock that affects mainly
                                 dε

Secretaries ( λk close to zero) will drive up the price of financial planning services (see (3.4)) and


                                                                                                                20
 therefore reduce the supply and increase the price of secretarial services (see (3.3)). This can make the

 financial planners so much worse off that the sum of the financial planner and the secretary utilities falls.

          However, this cannot happen for very senior tranches, in particular, k=1. For k=1,

                               1
    x1f   xif                                                                       dWi
λk
=       ≥     since x j = eR j 2 S is concave in R j . Therefore, a lower bound for
                      f
                                                                                        is given by
   2eR1 2eRi                                                                        dε

                                xif                     xf
 (4.9) with λk replaced by          . Substituting λk = i into (4.9) yields
                               2eRi                    2eRi

                                               1


 (4.12)
                                     1  (x )
                                         i
                                           f   2
                                              1 1
                                             + +
                                                    1
                                                        −
                                                          1 xif
                                                                  ,
                                     4 2eR 54 2 2 2eR 12 4 2eR 23
                                       ( i)       ( i)     ( i)
                                                   1
 which exceeds 1 since xi < 2eRi < (2eRi ) implies that
                           f                       2



                                               1

                                     1 ( xi )
                                           f   2
                                                1 xif
 (4.13)                                       −        ≥ 0.
                                     4 2eR 54 4 2eR 32
                                      ( i)       ( i)
          The conclusion is that a negative shock to the most senior tranche causes a welfare loss that is

 greater than the shock itself.

          We may summarize the main point of this section as follows: If consumers obtain their Arrow

 securities by holding different tranches on the economy’s total return, then a shock to an intermediary

 managing a senior tranche has greater welfare consequences than a shock to an intermediary managing a

 junior tranche.

          This results seems consistent with the different impact that the subprime crisis had on the

 economy vis-à-vis the bursting of the internet bubble. Brunnermeier (2009) estimates that during the

 2007-8 financial crisis the loss from subprime mortgages was only $0.5trillion, a fraction of the $7.1

 trillion lost during the dot-com crash. 3 In spite of this difference, the dot-com crash had very mild effects



 3The market cap of the Dow Jones Wilshire 5000 at the end of Q1 in 2000 was approximately $16 trillion. Between
 2000 Q1 and 2003 Q1 the index lost 43% of its valuation, i.e. $7.1 trillion of wealth was lost.

                                                                                                             21
on the economy, while the subprime crisis had devastating ones. Our interpretation is that the former

losses were born by people with low liquidity needs.



5. Non-pledgeable Equilibrium when 2eRn > 1 and Rn is “large”

We now consider how the analysis changes when in state n there is enough liquidity, so that

p=
 n
  f
    p=
     s
     n 1 and the level of trade is efficient. This case is actually much simpler and will permit

a study of fiscal policy in Section 6. To simplify matters we continue to assume that 2eRi < 1 for

all i < n .

                                                       1
                                   n −1
                                          π i ( eRi ) 4
Proposition 5. Suppose eRn − 1 ≥   ∑
                                   i =1
                                                   3
                                                            and 2eRi < 1 for all i < n . Then there is a unique non-
                                            πn 2   4



pledgeable equilibrium characterized by

                                                                       π i qn
                                                           qi =                   3
                                                                                      ,
                                                                   π n ( 2eRi )   4




                                                           xif = 2eRi

                                                           xis = 0 ,

                                                                            1
                                                           pif = (2eRi ) 2

                                                                             3
                                                           p = (2eRi )                     for all i < n ;
                                                               s             4
                                                              i


and for i = n ,

                                                                       1
                                              qn =     n −1
                                                                   π i Ri
                                                       ∑                     3
                                                                                 + Rn
                                                       i =1
                                                              π n ( 2eRi )   4




                                                                                                                  22
                                                                                         1
                                                                    n −1
                                                                           π i ( eRi ) 4
                                              =
                                              xneRn − ∑
                                                f
                                                                                     3
                                                                    i =1
                                                                              π n 24

                                                                                         1
                                                                    n −1
                                                                           π i ( eRi ) 4
                                              xns eRn + ∑
                                              =                                      3
                                                                    i =1
                                                                             π n 24

                                                        p=
                                                         n
                                                          f
                                                            p=
                                                             s
                                                             n 1.



Proof: Note that xi > 0 for all i and so the first order condition for (*) is
                   f




                                    πi
(5.1)                                       = k1                                         for all i.
                                   qi pis

On the other hand, the first order condition for (**) is

                                    πi
(5.2)                                       ≤ k2                                         for all i,
                                   qi pif

with equality if xi > 0 . We also know that in state i < n , prices will be strictly less than 1 and so (3.3)-
                   s



(3.4) describe the equilibrium in the goods market. Hence, by (3.2),

                                                                     1
(5.3)                                         pif = (2eRi ) 2

                                                                1                1
(5.4)                                         pis = ( xif   )   2    (2eRi ) 4 ,

for i < n .

         We now show that the above implies xi = 0 for all i < n . Suppose not: x j > 0 for some j<n.
                                              s                                                       s



Then, (5.1)-(5.2) at i=n imply:

                                                        k2
(5.5)                                                      ≥1,
                                                        k1

since p=
       n
        f
          p=
           s
           n 1 . On the other hand, (5.1)-(5.2) at i=j imply:


                                                                                                             23
                                                                                                      1


(5.6)
                                                       k2
                                                       =
                                                                    p
                                                                    =
                                                                       s
                                                                       j            (x )  f
                                                                                          j
                                                                                                      2
                                                                                                              .
                                                                                                          1

                                                                                   ( 2eR )
                                                                       f
                                                       k1           p  j                                  4
                                                                                                  j



Hence,

                                                                1                             1
(5.7)                                                 ( x ) ≥ ( 2eR )
                                                            f
                                                            j
                                                                2
                                                                                      j
                                                                                              4   ,

                                                                               1
which is impossible since, from (3.2), x ≤ 2eR j < 2eR j
                                           f
                                           j                (              )   2   , given that 2eR j < 1 .


         Therefore, xi = 0 for all i < n , and, since secretaries have the wealth to buy some securities,
                      s




xns > 0 . It follows that

(5.8)                                          xif = 2eRi                                 for all i < n ,

and so we can rewrite (5.4) as

                                                                3
                                               p = (2eRi )                                                        for all i < n .
                                                 s              4
(5.9)                                           i



Combining (5.1) with (5.9), and using pn = 1 , yields
                                       s



                                                                           π i qn
(5.10)                                                 qi =                               3
                                                                                                  .
                                                                π n ( 2eRi )              4



Finally, we can substitute (5.10) into (3.1) to obtain

                                                                                       1
(5.11)                                                 qn =                                                          .
                                                                    n −1
                                                                                   π i Ri
                                                                    ∑                                 3
                                                                                                              + Rn
                                                                    i =1
                                                                           π n ( 2eRi ) 4

(5.3), (5.9), (5.10), (5.11), and (5.8) (plus the satisfaction of financial planner and secretary budget

constraints) describe a non-pledgeable equilibrium where prices are 1 in the highest state.

         There is a further feasibility condition: xn ≥ 1 , i.e., a financial planner must be able to afford at
                                                     f



least one unit of Arrow security n in order to be able to purchase one unit of secretarial services at price 1

in state n.( If this were not the case, pi < 1 and pi = 1 .)
                                          s          f



                                                                                                                                    24
Using (5.8), we require

                                           n −1
(5.12)                                     ∑ q 2eR + q
                                            i =1
                                                   i   i           n   ≤e,


which, from (5.10) and (5.11), can be simplified to

                                                                                  1
                                                           n −1
                                                                  π i ( eRi ) 4
(5.13)                                     eRn − 1 ≥ ∑                        3
                                                                                      .
                                                           i =1
                                                                       πn 2   4



                                                                                          Q.E.D.

Remark. Note that (5.13) implies eRn > 1 and so 2eRn > 2 . In other words Rn must be “large”.

         It is easy to extend the tranching result of Section 4 to this case. A financial planner’s holding of

                    xkf − xkf−1
tranche k, given by             , is constant and equal to 2e for k=1, …n-1 from (5.8); while for k=n, since
                    Rk − Rk −1

xns > 0 , xnf < 2eRn and so

                                            xnf − xnf−1
(5.14)                                                  < 2e .
                                            Rn − Rn −1

In other words, a financial planner holds equal amounts of all tranches except the most junior one and

strictly less of that.

         It is also easy to extend the welfare results of Section 4 to show that a negative shock to a senior

tranche will create a larger welfare loss than an equivalent shock to the most junior tranche. We will not

provide the details here, but instead carry out a similar calculation when we discuss fiscal policy in the

next section.



6. Fiscal Policy

So far we have not considered how the government might respond to the liquidity problems that we have

highlighted. In this section we analyze fiscal policy along the lines of Hart and Zingales (2013).

Specifically, we assume that there is a milling technology in period 4 that allows financial planners and

                                                                                                             25
secretaries to convert wheat into flour, and that they enjoy consuming flour as well as wheat. The

government can impose a per unit sales tax on flour – something that the private sector cannot do – and

can issue bonds in period 2, after the state of the world is realized, backed by this sales tax. As in Hart and

Zingales (2013), we suppose that the government bonds (b units of them) are handed directly to financial

planners (nothing in our analysis relies on the idea that the identity of an agent is nonverifiable).

         The details of the milling technology and preferences for flour versus wheat can be found in Hart

and Zingales (2013). For our purposes it is enough to rely on the following result from that paper: the

government can increase the liquidity of a financial planner in period 2 in state i from xi to xi + b , but
                                                                                           f     f



this imposes a loss on the economy in period 4 of b + ∆ (b) , where the first term reflects the bond

repayment and ∆ (b) is the deadweight loss of the sales tax required to raise b .

         Here ∆ (b) satisfies

(6.1)            ∆(0) =
                      0,          ∆ '(0) =
                                         0,          ∆″(b) > 0 for all b ≥ 0 .

In other words, the marginal deadweight loss is zero when the tax rate is zero but is strictly positive and

increasing when the tax rate is positive.

         We will be particularly interested in how the government should respond to a Madoff shock.

However, given that there is a shortage of liquidity in the economy, the government will want to respond

even in the absence of such a shock. Thus, we will analyze the optimal fiscal policy with and without a

shock.

         Analyzing fiscal policy in the model of Section 3 turn out to be hard, and so we will focus on the

model of Section 5 where 2eRn > 1 and Rn is “large”. We will suppose that the government chooses fiscal

policy in state i in period 2 to maximize the sum of financial planner and secretary utilities. We will also

assume that the government cannot commit to its fiscal policy in advance: the government will choose bi

                                                                                    f    s
in state i to maximize the sum of financial planner and secretary utilities after xi , xi are determined.

6.1 Equilibrium in the Absence of a Shock


                                                                                                            26
           Let’s consider the case there is no shock and take the non-intervention equilibrium in Proposition

5 as a starting point. Clearly, there is no need for intervention in state n since the efficient level of trade is

realized there. Consider i<n. If the government issues bi units of bonds to a financial planner (each bond

pays one unit of wheat in period 4 in state i), then since xi = 2eRi , xi = 0 , the new equilibrium in the
                                                             f           s



goods market is given by

                                              2eRi + bi   pis
(6.2)                                                   =     ,
                                                 pis      pif

                                              2eRi + bi
(6.3)                                              f
                                                        = pif , for i=1, …n-1.
                                                pi

That is,

                                       1                                         3
(6.4)             =
                  pif    ( 2eRi + bi ) 2 ,           =
                                                     pis           ( 2eRi + bi ) 4           .

           From (*) and (**), the sum of financial planner and secretary utilities in state i is

                                        xf +b 1                   1  pis 
                                                                             2
                                                                                         
                                     =  i s i + ( pif    )
                                                              2
(6.5)                      Wi                                     +  f  − bi − ∆(bi ) 
                                        pi    2                  2  pi              

                                                     1
                                                         1               1              1
                                                                                                        
                                     = ( 2eRi + bi ) 4 + ( 2eRi + bi ) + ( 2eRi + bi ) 2 − bi − ∆(bi )  .
                                                        2               2                              

The government will choose bi to maximize Wi . Since Wi is strictly concave in bi , the following

first order condition is necessary and sufficient:

                                             3                   1
                            1                  1 1
                              ( 2eRi + bi ) 4 + + ( 2eRi + bi ) 2 − 1 =
                                           −                   −
(6.6)                                                                 ∆ '(bi ) .
                            4                  2 4

Note that the left-hand side of (6.6) is strictly positive when bi = 0 and zero when 2eRi + bi =
                                                                                               1,

and so the optimal bi will satisfy 0 < bi < 1 − 2eRi .

           Now suppose that agents anticipate that the government will choose bi in each state i<n

to satisfy (6.6). Will they change their ex-ante behavior ? We argue that they will not: in the
                                                                                                               27
rational expectations equilibrium xif = 2eRi , xis = 0 . To see this set the new price in state i to be

as in (6.4).

        Also let

                                                 π i qn
(6.7)                            qi =                          3
                                                                   ,
                                        π n ( 2eRi + bi )      4



                                                          1
(6.8)                            qn =                                             .
                                        n −1
                                                      π i Ri
                                        ∑                              3
                                                                           + Rn
                                         i =1
                                                π n ( 2eRi + bi )      4



Then, it is easy to see that (5.1) is satisfied, while (5.2) holds with strict inequality for i<n. So

xis = 0 for state i<n. Hence, if we set xif = 2eRi , (3.2) is satisfied for i<n. Finally, the feasibility

condition (5.13) becomes

                                                           n −1
                                                                           π i ( eRi )
(6.9)                                           eRn − 1 ≥ ∑                              3
                                                                                             ,
                                                           i =1
                                                                   π n (2eRi + bi )      4



which is implied by (5.13).

        Thus, we have constructed a new equilibrium with government intervention where

financial planners continued to hold all the Arrow securities in state i=1, …n-1, and the

government optimizes accordingly. Note that since xif = 2eRi for all i=1, …n-1, and xnf < 2eRn ,

the tranching results of Section 4 and 5 continue to hold.



6.2 Unanticipated Madoff Shock




                                                                                                        28
         Let us now consider how the government will respond to an unanticipated Madoff

shock 4. Note that in state i<n only senior tranches are in the money (tranches ≤ i ), and since

financial planners hold all these tranches ( xis = 0 for all i<n), it does not matter which tranche is

hit by the Madoff shock. Thus, if we are concerned with how government intervention depends

on the seniority of the tranche hit, the interesting case is when we are in state n.

         In state n a small Madoff shock will have no effect if xnf > 1 . So let’s assume that the

financial planners are just on the margin in terms of liquidity: xnf = 1. Note that

xnf + xns= 2eRn > 1 , so that for small shocks there will be enough liquidity in the market for

financial planner services to sustain pnf = 1.

         Suppose that there is a small (negative) shock d ε to the aggregate amount of liquidity,

which is divided among financial planners and secretaries as in (4.6). Before the shock the

government had a zero fiscal policy in state n ( bn = 0 ), but after the shock it will intervene. As

we have just argued, pnf = 1 after the shock, and so the equilibrium in the secretary market is

given by

                                             xnf + bn
(6.10)                                                = pns ,
                                                pns

i.e.,

                                                                1
(6.11)                                      =
                                            pns   ( xnf + bn ) 2 .
Welfare in state n after the shock is therefore given by




4 We continue to assume that the government maximizes the sum of financial planner and secretary utilities even
though this welfare criterion may not be so compelling in the case of an unanticipated shock.

                                                                                                                  29
                                    xf +b 1                         xns 1  pns 
                                                                                   2
                                                                                              
                                  =  n s n + ( pnf         )
                                                                2
(6.12)                   Wn                                         + f +  f  − bn − ∆(bn ) 
                                     pn    2                       pn 2  pn               

                                                 1
                                                                                         
                                  = ( xnf + bn ) 2 + + xns + ( xnf + bn ) − bn − ∆(bn )  .
                                                     1       1
                                                    2       2                           

Wn is strictly concave in bn and so the following first order condition is necessary and sufficient:

                                                           1

                                              (
                                            1 f
                                                xn + bn ) 2 − =
                                                             1
                                                         −
(6.13)                                                         ∆ '(bn ) .
                                            2                2

                                             dbn
         We can use (6.13) to compute            . Differentiating (6.13) with respect to ε , and
                                             dε

applying (4.6), yields

                                          −               
                                           3
(6.14)                   −
                             4
                               (
                             1 f
                                 xn + bn ) 2  λk + n
                                             
                                                   db
                                                   dε
                                                           =
                                                           
                                                                      db
                                                             ∆ ''(bn ) n ,
                                                                      dε

                                                                3

                                                 (          )
                                               1 f            −
                                              −    x   + b      2 λ
                                   dbn         4
                                                    n     n        k
(6.15)                                 =                                 .
                                   dε                                  3
                                         ∆ ''(bn ) + ( xn + bn ) 2
                                                      1 f            −

                                                      4

Calculating this at ε = 0 , where bn = 0 and xnf = 1 , we have

                                                                1
                                                            − λk
                                            dbn                 4
(6.16)                                                   =             .
                                            dε    ε =0     ∆ ''(0) +
                                                                     1
                                                                     4

         It follows from (6.16) that the optimal fiscal response in state n to an unanticipated

Madoff shock (i.e., a negative d ε ) is: a) positive; b) will be bigger if the shock hits a senior

tranche (where λk = 2e ) than if hits the most junior tranche (where λk < 2e) .

         Note that the optimal fiscal response consists of bailing out people not banks. To the

extent that people with liquidity needs can be identified, it is cheaper to bail them out directly



                                                                                                     30
rather than indirectly through banks, since bailing out banks will typically also transfer resources

to agents who do not have pressing liquidity needs.

6.3 Anticipated Madoff Shock

        A natural question to ask is, what happens if a Madoff-shock is anticipated? Suppose, in

particular, that agents realize that each fund may be hit by a Madoff shock with some probability. Can

they do anything to protect themselves?

        In our economy the possibilities for ex ante insurance are very limited: financial planners cannot

obtain insurance from secretaries directly since such contracts can be breached ex post. However, funds

can get insurance from each other: a fund could enter into an arrangement with another fund that if it is hit

by a Madoff shock and the other one is not, then the unlucky fund will receive a transfer from the lucky

fund. This is enforceable since we have assumed that fund managers cannot steal money. (Quite what this

assumption means if one of the funds is run by a Madoff is another matter!!)

        Analyzing the demand for fund insurance is quite complex, not least because, in general, even

senior funds will have both financial planners and secretaries as investors and these agents have different

preferences: thus it is not clear what the “objective function” of the fund is. One case where one can make

progress is in the model of Section 5 since in this case only financial planners invest in senior funds.

There one can show that a Madoff shock in a senior fund will reduce not only the utility of the financial

planners who invest in the fund, but also the utility of those who do not invest in the fund, the

secretaries 5. Given this externality, if insurance is costly, a fund acting on behalf of its depositors, the

financial planners, may choose insufficient, or no, insurance. Under these conditions, our result that a

Madoff shock will be more severe if it hits a senior fund, and that the government response should be

larger in this case, will continue to hold even when the shock is anticipated.

7. Very Senior Funds and Banks



5This is only true if the fund is large. Thus this part of the argument does not generalize to the
case of small funds; see footnote 2 above.

                                                                                                                31
So far, we have considered only abstract securities. Yet, the most senior tranches held by the

financial planners can be interpreted as bank deposits. On the asset side banks invest in financial

claims and on the liability side they have a disproportionate share of very senior claims

(deposits). Thus, banks are a cost-effective way to manufacture the Arrow securities needed by

financial planners and secretaries. In particular, bank deposits play the role of the most senior

security held by the agents with the highest liquidity needs (financial planners).

       In real-world banks there is an additional feature (not contained in our model) that gives

deposits a highly senior status: their callability on demand. If we consider callability on demand

as a form of super seniority, money market funds tend to have this feature too, especially if they

are (implicitly) guaranteed by the equity of the sponsoring organization (Kacperczyk and

Schnabl (2013)) and possibly by the government.

       According to this view, what makes banks special is not the nature of their investments

(i.e., information-sensitive bank loans, as in Sharpe (1990) and Rajan (1992)) or their

interconnectedness (as in Allen and Gale (2000)) , but the people who deposit in them. Banks are

special because their deposits are held by people with the highest liquidity needs. As a result,

losses among depositors have extremely negative macroeconomic consequences because they

deprive of liquidity the agents who need liquidity the most to support their purchases. A loss in

their liquidity buffer will lead these agents to curtail their demand for goods and services,

reducing the income (and the ability to pay) of other agents in the economy. This effect may

reduce the level of economic activity and the aggregate welfare by a multiple of the loss borne.

       The amplified effect of a loss imposed on senior claims is not unique to banks, but is

shared by money market funds, since they provide an almost perfect substitute for deposits for

agents who need liquidity. As a result, losses borne by money market fund investors would have



                                                                                                    32
similarly disruptive effects on the economy. Consistent with this interpretation, in 2008 money

market funds were bailed out in a way similar to banks, even though their lending was not

“special” and they were not highly interconnected.

        The same logic that applies to banks and money market mutual funds applies to a lesser

extent to bonds in general, in particular secured and highly rated bonds. These bonds are also

held in higher proportion by people who need liquidity the most. Hence, losses born by

bondholders can have some of the same macroeconomic consequences (albeit less severe) as

losses borne by depositors. This result might explain why governments are so reluctant to let

bondholders suffer a loss.

        This simple theory of banking is also able to explain why banks (and money market mutual

funds) need to have deposits that do not fluctuate in value. Depositors are the agents with the highest need

for liquidity and thus they demand insurance against possible falls in the value of their investments, even

if they are risk neutral. This insurance is provided by the agents less in need of liquidity (in our model the

secretaries). Finally, this insurance component can explain why the yield of deposits and of very short-

term U.S. treasury bills is lower than the curve of risk and return would predict (Krishnamurthy and

Vissing-Jorgensen, 2012).



8. Conclusions

This paper explains why – in a complete market framework with pledgeability constraints -- there is a

demand for relatively safe assets for transaction purposes. It also explains why agents in need of liquidity

invest disproportionately in this asset and why losses imposed on this type of asset have a

disproportionate impact on the economy.

        The characteristic of this relatively safe asset is that it is very senior, just like deposits in a

modern bank. Our argument is that the essence of banks is that bank deposits are held disproportionately

by people in need of liquidity. In other words, banks are where the liquidity is.

                                                                                                              33
34
                                    References


Allen, Franklin and Douglas Gale, 2000, “Financial Contagion”, The Journal of Political
        Economy, Volume 108, Issue 1 (Feb., 2000), 1-33.

Baumol, W, 1956, “The Transactions Demand for Cash: An Inventory Theoretic Approach”,
     Quarterly Journal of Economics, November Vol. 66, p.545-556

Brunnermeier, Markus K. “Deciphering the Liquidity and Credit Crunch 2007-2008, Journal of
      Economic Perspectives, Volume 23, Number 1, p.77-100, (2009)

Ricardo J. Caballero, “On the Macroeconomics of Asset Shortages” in The Role of Money:
       Money and Monetary Policy in the Twenty-First Century. The Fourth European Central
       Banking Conference 9-10 November 2006, Andreas Beyer and Lucrezia Reichlin,
       editors. Pages 272-283.

Caballero, Ricardo J., Emmanuel Farhi, and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas. 2008. "An Equilibrium
       Model of "Global Imbalances" and Low Interest Rates." American Economic Review,
       98(1): 358-93.

DeMarzo, Peter M., 2005, “The pooling and tranching of securities: A model of informed
     Intermediation”, Review of Financial Studies 18, 1-35.

Diamond, Douglas W. and Philip Dybvig, 1983, “Bank runs, deposit insurance and
      Liquidity”, Journal of Political Economy 91, 401-419.

Gorton Gary and Guillermo Ordonez, 2013, “The Supply and Demand for Safe Assets”, NBER
       working paper.

Hanson, Samuel G., Andrei Shleifer, Jeremy C. Stein, and Robert W. Vishny, 2014, “Banks as
      Patient Fixed Income Investors,” Fed working paper.

Hart, O., and L. Zingales. 2013. “Liquidity and Inefficient Investments”, NBER working paper.

Kacperczyk, Marcin and Philipp Schnabl, 2013, “How Safe are Money Market Funds?”
      The Quarterly Journal of Economics.

Krishnamurthy, Arvind and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, 2012, “The Aggregate Demand for
       Treasury Debt.” Journal of Political Economy, 120, 233-267.

Mian, Atif and Amir Sufi, 2014, House of Debt, University Of Chicago Press

Rajan, Raghuram, 1992, “Insiders and Outsiders: The Choice between Informed and Arm’s-
       Length Debt”, Journal of Finance 47, 1367-1400.



                                                                                             35
Ross, Stephen, “Options and Efficiency”, The Quarterly Journal of Economics (1976) 90 (1): 75-
89

Sharpe, Steven A., 1990, “Asymmetric Information, Bank Lending and Implicit Contracts: A
       Stylized Model of Customer Relationships”, Journal of Finance 45, 1069-1087

Stein, Jeremy. 2012, “Monetary Policy as Financial-Stability Regulation”, Quarterly Journal of
        Economics 127, no. 1: 57-95.

Tobin, James, 1956, “The Interest Elasticity of the Transactions Demand for Cash”, Review of
Economics and Statistics, August vol 38, n.3, p 241-247.




                                                                                             36
                                              Appendix

In the text we considered the case where xi > 0 for all i. In this appendix we show that the analysis
                                           s



generalizes to the case where xi = 0 for some i.
                                s


         We show first that secretaries will be at the corner solution in the low states. We know from the
first order condition for (*) and (**) that
                                               πi
(A.1)                                                = k1               for all i,
                                              qi pis

                                               πi
(A.2)                                                    ≤ k2 for all i, with equality for some i.
                                              qi pif
Suppose that
                                                              πm
(A.3)                                                               < k2 .
                                                             qm pmf
       s
Then, xm =0 and so from (3.2)-(3.4),

(A.4)                                                        xmf = 2eRm ,
                                                                                   1
(A.5)                                                        pmf = (2eRm ) 2
                                                                                   3
(A.6)                                                        p = (2eRm ) .
                                                              s
                                                              m
                                                                                   4


Substituting into (A.1) yields
                                                                              πm
(A.7)                                                        qm =                      3
                                                                                            .
                                                                                       4
                                                                    k1 (2eRm )
         Consider j<m. If we can show that
                                               πj              πm
(A.8)                                                f
                                                         <                ,
                                              qj p   j       qm pmf

then it will follow from (A.2) that xm =0. But we know that, since R j < Rm ,
                                     s


                                                                                                1       1
(A.9)                                                        x jf ≤ 2eR j < 2eRm2 R j2
and so
                                                                    1              1        1       1
(A.10)                                                    (x ) f
                                                               j
                                                                    2   < (2e) R R .
                                                                                   2
                                                                                           i
                                                                                            4       4
                                                                                                    j



                                                                                                            37
         This implies, using (3.2)-(3.4), that
                                                                     1                1                    3       1       1
(A.11)                          =p ( x ) (2eR j ) < (2e) R R .
                                                 s
                                                 j
                                                                f
                                                                j
                                                                     2                4                    4       4
                                                                                                                   m
                                                                                                                           2
                                                                                                                           j

On the other hand, from (3.4) and (3.2),
                                                                                          1
(A.12)                                                          p = (2eR j ) .
                                                                    f
                                                                    j
                                                                                          2


         Combining (A.5), (A.12), (A.6), and (A.1) yields
                                                      1

                                   p f Rm  2 pms π m q j
                                    =        < =
                                       R 
                                     m
(A.13)                                                      ,
                                   p f
                                     j j      p sj π j qm
                                                               s
which in turn implies (A8). Thus, we have established that if xm =0, then x sj =0 for j<m. In other words,
                                                                                   s                  s
there exists r such that secretaries are at a corner solution in the low states: xi =0 for i=1, …r, xi >0 for

i=r+1, ..., n.
         A non-pledgeable equilibrium can therefore be characterized as follows (using (3.1)-(3.4) and (*),
(**)):
For some r, for i=1, …, r

(A.14)                                      xif = 2eRi , xis =0
                                                                            1                                  3
(A.15)                                      pif = (2eRi ) 2 , pis = (2eRi ) 4
                                                 πi                             πi
(A.16)                      =qi                             3
                                                                    ≥                     1
                                                                                              , with strict inequality for i<r;
                                                            4                             2
                                         k1 (2eRi )                      k2 (2eRi )
and for i=r+1, …n,
                                                                            1                          1                       1
(A.17)                                      pi = (2eRi ) , p = ( xi
                                                 f                          2
                                                                                 i
                                                                                  s            f
                                                                                                   )   2   (2eRi )             4




                                                                            π                                      π
(A.18)                      =qi                            =       1
                                                                     i
                                                                            1
                                                                                    i
                                                                                         1
                                                                                           ,
                                                          k1 ( xi ) (2eRi )
                                                                 f 2        4
                                                                              k2 (2eRi ) 2


                                                                        2                                                                2
                                                 k           1
                                                                                                                                    k2           1
(A.19)                                      xi =  2  (2eRi ) 2 , =
                                                 f
                                                                   xis 2eRi −                                                           (2 eRi ) 2
                                                                                                                                                     >0,
                                                  k1                                                                              1
                                                                                                                                     k

(A.20)                                     ∑q R
                                             i
                                                      i    i        =1                         ∑q xi
                                                                                                               i i
                                                                                                                       f
                                                                                                                           =e.

Note that the first part of (A.19) follows from (A.18).

                                                                                                                                                           38
         We can use (A.16) and (A.18) to write (A.20) as
                                     r
                                             πi                         n
                                                                                           πi
(A.21)                              ∑i
                                                      R +
                                                     3 i             ∑
                                                                     i = r +1
                                                                                                 1
                                                                                                     Ri =
                                                                                                        1
                                         k1 (2eRi ) 4                           k2 (2eRi )       2




                                                                                                                 2
                                              πi                                                πi            k2            1

                                                                                                               ( 2eRi   )
                                     r                                          n
(A.22)                              ∑                    3
                                                           2eRi +               ∑                        1
                                                                                                                              2   =
                                                                                                                                  e.
                                     i
                                         k1 ( 2eRi   )   4                  i = r +1
                                                                                       k2 ( 2eRi     )   2    k1 

               k2
Defining h =      , we can further rewrite (A.21) and (A.22) as
               k1

                                                                  1
                                    1  r πi     1   n
                                                            πi
(A.23)                                   ∑ 3 Ri + i∑
                                                 4
                                                                  R2  =1
                                    k1  i         = r +1
                                                                1 i 

                                        (2e) 4
                                                          h(2e) 2
                                                                     


                                    1 r                         1
                                                                                            
                                        ∑ π i ( 2eRi            ) + ∑ π h =
                                                                            n
(A.24)                                                           4          e.         i
                                    k1  i                               i = r +1           
We also know from (A.16) and (A.18) that


                                                             1                                  1
(A.25)                                        (2eRr ) 4 ≤ h < (2eRr +1 ) 4 .
(A.23)- (A.25) characterize a non-pledgeable equilibrium.
         We now show that if there is a solution to (A.23)- (A.25), it is unique. Start at a solution to
(A.23)- (A.25) and graph (A.23) and (A.24) in a figure. It is easy to see that the locus of ( k1 ,h) satisfying

(A.23) is downward-sloping and the locus of ( k1 ,h) satisfying (A.24) is upward-sloping. Moreover, the

first curve asymptotes to the horizontal axis as k1 → ∞ and to a vertical line at k1 > 0 as h → ∞ ; while

the second curve satisfies k1 → kˆ1 > 0 as h → 0 and k1 → ∞ as h → ∞ . It follows that the curves have a

unique intersection.
         Now increase r. It is straightforward to show that the downward-sloping curve moves in, while
the upward-sloping curves moves to the right. Hence, h falls. But this means that if (A.25) is satisfied at
the first level of r, it cannot be satisfied at the second.
         Hence, there can be at most one equilibrium. But a non-pledgeable equilibrium exists by standard
fixed point arguments. So there is exactly one equilibrium.



                                                                                                                                  39
        It remains to establish Propositions 2-4. The key properties that these propositions depend on are
       f    s                               f
that xi , xi are increasing in i and that xi is concave in Ri . But it is easy to check that (A.14), (A.19),

                                                           xif
and (A.25) imply these properties; and furthermore that        is constant from i=1, ..,r, and strictly
                                                           Ri
decreasing for i= r+1, …, n. (In Proposition 4 the word “strictly” must be removed. However, it is still
the case that a financial planner’s investment in the most senior tranche is strictly greater than his
investment in the most junior tranche, and vice versa for secretaries.)




                                                                                                           40
