NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INTERNATIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL AGREEMENTS AMONG HETEROGENEOUS
COUNTRIES WITH SOCIAL PREFERENCES
Charles D. Kolstad
Working Paper 20204
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20204

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2014

Comments from Werner Güth, Kaj Thomsson and Philipp Wichardt and discussions with Gary Charness
and Michael Finus have been appreciated. The views expressed herein are those of the author and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Charles D. Kolstad. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

International Environmental Agreements among Heterogeneous Countries with Social Preferences
Charles D. Kolstad
NBER Working Paper No. 20204
June 2014
JEL No. H40,H41,Q5
ABSTRACT
Achieving efficiency for many global environmental problems requires voluntary cooperation among
sovereign countries due to the public good nature of pollution abatement. The theory of international
environmental agreements (IEAs) in economics seeks to understand how cooperation among countries
on pollution abatement can be facilitated. However, why cooperation occurs when noncooperation
appears to be individually rational has been an issue in economics for at least a half century. The
problemis that theory suggests fairly low (even zero) levels of contribution to a public good and high
levelsof free riding. Experiments and empirical evidence with individuals suggests higher levels
of cooperation. This is a major reason for the emergence in the 1990’s and more recently of the
literatureon socialpreferences (also known as other-regarding preferences or prosociality) where
participants accountfor their own well-being as well as that of others. This paper bridges the literature
on cooperationamong countries with the literature on cooperation among individuals. In particular,
we introducesocial preferences into a model of international environmental agreements. Focusingon
Charness-Rabinsocial preferences, we find these preferences enlarge the set of conditions where
cooperation is individuallyrational though such preferences also reduce the equilibrium size of a IEA
for providing abatement. Although stable coalitions are smaller, more abatement may be provided
by individual countries outsideof a coalition structure. In contrast to much of the literature, we treat
the size of agents as heterogeneous. Size of a country does not affect the incentives for forming a
coalition but it does affect the aggregatelevel of abatement, suggesting that coalitions of large countries
are more efficient than coalitions ofsmall countries.

Charles D. Kolstad
Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research
366 Galvez Street (Room 226)
Stanford, CA 94305-6015
and NBER
ckolstad@stanford.edu

I.

INTRODUCTION
In the 1990’s, a theoretical literature began to develop on the formation of coalitions to

facilitate cooperation to solve externality problems (Barrett, 1994; Carraro and Siniscalco,
1993). Such coalitions are termed international environmental agreements (IEAs), much in the
tradition of Olson’s (1971) examination of groups to foster collective action. With some
exceptions, that theoretical work has been pessimistic on the extent to which free-riding
incentives can be overcome. This is discouraging for those hoping to solve major international
environmental problems (such as climate change), solutions to which by their very nature
demand cooperation.
The major reason that the standard static game theoretic model of an IEA suggests little
gain from voluntary coalitions is that coalitions are held together purely by self-interest and
self-interest usually drives participants to leave the coalition to join the fringe. One way the
theoretical literature has dealt with this “problem” is to posit a repeated game structure with
credible punishments for defection and non-cooperation. Drawing on the renegotiation-proof
equilibria literature (Farrell and Maskin, 1989), Barrett (1999) and Asheim et al (2009) have
demonstrated that in these conditions, more cooperation can be sustained than in the static
case.
A parallel literature, largely disconnected from the IEA context, has focused on the
behavior of individuals (not countries) in providing public goods. The literature on cooperation
among individuals suggests that perhaps theory is too pessimistic on the extent of cooperation.
Much of this literature involves laboratory experiments and calls into question the theoretical
results that free riding is common and cooperation is difficult to sustain in the standard public
goods problem (eg, Kim and Walker, 1984).
Partially in response to this disparity between empirics and theory, the notion of otherregarding or social preferences began to emerge in the early 1990’s (though the terminology
varies considerably), with Andreoni (1990) as one of the early contributors. The primary thrust
of the social preference literature (eg, Fehr and Schmidt, 1999; Bolton and Ockenfels, 2000;
Kolstad: May 2014

Page 1

Charness and Rabin, 2002) is that agents care about fairness as well as private payoffs and
efficiency. Much of this literature is experimental, which some criticize as ad hoc and lacking an
axiomatic foundation.
This paper provides a rigorous extension of the standard static IEA model to include
social preferences, as developed in the public goods literature, reflecting a concern for selfinterest, equity and efficiency.1 Rather than offer our own theory of social preferences, we
start with a particularly common form of social preferences, due to Charness and Rabin (2002).
We then develop (1) a theory of voluntary contributions to public goods for the linear public
goods game and (2) a theory of voluntary coalitions to provide public goods. Unlike many other
papers, we allow heterogeneity with respect to country size, which yields significantly richer
results.
A number of results with empirical consequence emerge from this paper. We find that
theoretically, and in the standard linear public goods game, social preferences do enhance
abatement and expand cooperation. Furthermore, participant size is not relevant to the
decision to contribute, though it is relevant to the aggregate provision of abatement (larger
countries contribute more). Although this is intuitive, the mechanism for expansion of
cooperation is new.
II.

BACKGROUND
In addition to the literature on international environmental agreements, a separate but

important literature exists on voluntary contributions to public goods by individuals. Both are
reviewed in the next two sections. It is important to recognize that the voluntary contributions
literature focuses on individual consumers, each with a set of preferences. The literature on
international environmental agreements focuses on decisions by countries, with each country
treated as a welfare-maximizing entity. At a theoretical level, these two literatures are largely
1

Lange and Vogt (2003) appears to be the first paper to introduce social preferences into IEAs, assuming
homogeneous countries and using the preferences of Bolton and Ockenfels (2000), which focus on equity and selfinterest. See also Lange (2006) and Dannenberg et al (2014).

Kolstad: May 2014

Page 2

interchangeable. However, experimental results applicable to voluntary contributions to public
goods do not necessarily directly translate to public goods contributions by countries.
A. Private Provision of Public Goods
Inducing individual contributions to a public good in a noncooperative setting is a classic
problem in public economics. Bergstrom et al (1986) provide the standard treatment of this
problem, developing a simple model involving individual provision of a private good, x i, a public
good, gi, and aggregate provision of the public good, G (=Σgi). Each identical agent (i) has simple
preferences and an endowment of wealth, wi, to be divided between xi and gi. The individual
chooses xi and gi to maximize utility, subject to a budget constraint:
u(xi,G) s.t. xi + gi = wi

(1)

The first argument of u embodies the opportunity cost to the individual of providing the public
good and the second term reflects the benefit of the aggregate provision. The authors show
that in most cases there is a nonzero equilibrium provision of the public good. A second
interesting result involves identical preferences but different wealth levels. In this case, there is
a cutoff level of wealth. People who are poorer than the cutoff provide none of the public good
whereas people above the cutoff provide a nonzero amount.
Andreoni (1988) uses this model to determine how contributions increase as the size of
the economy (N —the number of individuals) increases. He shows that as N increases towards
infinity, average individual contributions approach zero (though not the average among the
contributors) and the size of the contributing group approaches zero. However, aggregate
contributions approach a limit which is finite and nonzero. He points out that this result is at
variance with casual empiricism that individuals do contribute to public goods, despite the
economy being very large. For instance, according to Andreoni, half of all US households claim
charitable donations on their tax returns (in the US, charitable donations are generally
deductible from taxable income).

Kolstad: May 2014

Page 3

A significant body of experimental work has accumulated on this issue as well. Early
experimental work on public good provision established that subjects tend to provide public
goods at higher rates than predicted by the theory described above (Smith, 1980). Kim and
Walker (1984) set up a laboratory experiment to test the “free rider hypothesis,” which had
been the subject of a number of papers in the 1970s (in the context of the prisoner’s dilemma).
The hypothesis simply is that individuals will prefer to free-ride rather than make contributions
to the public good. The authors distinguish between “strong” free riders and other free riders.
Strong free riders are closer to the theoretical behavior of contributing little to the public good.
The authors show that although free-riding exists, they are not able to conclude that the freeriding is as strong as theory suggests. Isaac and Walker (1988) provide additional experimental
evidence, exploring the role of an important variable, the marginal per capita return (MPCR).
The MPCR is defined as the ratio of the marginal benefit to an individual of privately providing a
public good to the marginal cost to the individual of that provision. Put differently, for every
dollar a person spends on privately providing the public good, the MPCR measures how much
the individual gets back. Clearly the MPCR is less than one (otherwise there is no issue). Higher
MPCRs mean that the private gain from the public good is higher. A lower MPCR means that
the individual is getting less private reward from providing the public good. Isaac and Walker
(1988) demonstrate experimentally that MCPR is the primary determinant of contribution
levels—there is no separate pure group size effect.2 Furthermore, the authors demonstrate
that the strong free rider effect is more pronounced for lower values of MPCR.
In an interesting review of this literature, Chaudhuri (2011) characterizes five main
findings of the pre-1995 literature (attributing the last three to Ledyard, 1995): (1) in one shot
versions of the noncooperative public goods game (described above) there is much less freeriding (more contribution) than predicted by theory; (2) if players repeat the one-shot game,
free-riding increases with repeated interaction; (3) communication facilitates cooperation; (4)

2

Isaac et al (1994) provide support for these findings using significantly larger groups.

Kolstad: May 2014

Page 4

thresholds facilitate cooperation; and (5) higher MPCRs lead to increased cooperation and
decreased free-riding.
Over the past several decades, researchers have been moving beyond simple
characterizations of payoffs to include a variety of “other-regarding preferences” or “social
preferences” on the part of participants (see Sobel, 2005). One of the first extensions of this
nature is the model of “impure altruism” by Andreoni (1989,1990), building in part on Olson
(1971) and Becker (1994). Impure altruism holds that there are two avenues for personal utility
gain from making a voluntary contribution to a public good: via the aggregate level of the public
good and via a “warm glow” associated with the individual contribution. The individual may
appear altruistic but that is because the individual obtains utility from giving. Thus the utility
function in Eqn. (1) becomes u(xi,G,gi). It is easy to see that including a private good dimension
to public good contributions can remedy the apparent anomalies between the experimental
results on free-riding and the theoretical results on contributions to public goods.
Other authors provide alternative models of contributing to public goods, always with
the issue of free-riding as a motivator. Drawing on the fairness literature in psychology and
economics (eg, Kahneman et al, 1986), Fehr and Schmidt (1999) and Bolton and Ockenfels
(2000) posit that inequality aversion drives cooperation. They propose the importance of
inequality aversion as a dimension of utility that promotes cooperation and support the thesis
with experimental evidence. Charness and Rabin (2002) present evidence in partial
contradiction to this result, suggesting that efficiency also plays a role in outcomes in prisoner’s
dilemma games. To illustrate, in the Prisoner’s Dilemma game shown in Fig. 1, theory would
suggest defection will repeatedly occur. However, in an experimental setting, Charness et al
(2008) find cooperation rates of 15%, 45% and 70% for values of x of 4, 5, and 6, respectively.
This suggests more nuanced objectives. In particular, agents seem to be concerned with the
total size of the “pie” as well as their own private payoffs.

Kolstad: May 2014

Page 5

Figure 1: Prisoner’s Dilemma Payoffs from Charness et al (2008).
B Cooperates

B Defects

A Cooperates

(x,x)

(1,7)

A Defects

(7,1)

(2,2)

Note: With payoff (a,b), a is payoff to player A and b is payoff to player B; 2<x<7.

A number of authors have suggested that groups of people interacting strategically
typically fall into at least two groups: self-interested and cooperators. This participant
heterogeneity is said to explain the levels of cooperation observed in experimental and
empirical data. Andreoni and Miller (2002) report experimental results for a dictator game and
find 23% of respondents behave selfishly; the remainder show some degree of altruism.
Fischbacher and Gachter (2010) conduct experiments with linear public goods game (similar to
this paper) and find that 23% of participants are free-riders, contributing nothing; Fischbacher
et al (2001) report a third are free-riders. Many of the remaining subjects are “conditional
cooperators,” cooperating conditional on others cooperating. Fehr and Schmidt (1999) review
a number of papers with experimental results on public good games and conclude the papers,
on average, involve a much higher fraction of pure free-riders (no contributions to the public
good) – 73%. However, even with such a high fraction of free-riders, one can infer that the
remaining subjects are behaving at variance with the purely selfish model. The upshot is that in
groups, one might expect some heterogeneity in preferences—some agents are purely selfish
and others display some sort of altruistic behavior.
Bliss and Nalebuff (1984), in a paper with a superb title, examine the case where
individuals have different “abilities” or costs to supply the public good. They show that even in
a noncooperative, repeated setting, the lowest cost individuals will eventually take it upon
themselves to supply the public good.
Kolstad: May 2014

Page 6

B. International Environmental Coalitions/Agreements
The literature on international environmental agreements (IEA) focuses on countries as
agents maximizing welfare, however expressed. Recognizing that the behavior of an individual
cannot be necessarily extrapolated to the behavior of a country, many of the theoretical results
from one literature are directly applicable in the other literature. The big difference is that the
IEA literature emphasizes the formation of coalitions of countries to coordinate contributions to
the public good; coalitions do not play a significant role in voluntary contributions to public
goods by individuals.
The endogenous formation of groups or coalitions of players to coordinate the provision
of public goods is in the spirit of Olson’s (1971) seminal treatise on the provision of public
goods. Over the past two decades, most of the work on this problem has been done in the
context of the international environmental agreement (IEA). Only recently has the general
public goods literature returned to addressing coalition formation (Kosfeld et al, 2009; Charness
and Yang, 2014).
The literature on IEAs starts with a framework nearly identical to Eqn (1) for voluntary
provision of public goods. The interesting twist added by the IEA literature (drawn from the
cartel stability literature3) is that the noncooperative behavior is represented as a two stage
game (and countries are posited to act as rational utility-maximizing agents). In the first stage
(the “membership game”) agents decide whether they wish to be in a coalition (an IEA).
Specifically, each agent announces “in” or “out;” the first stage game generates a coalition as
the Nash equilibrium in these announcements. In the second stage (the “emissions game”), the
coalition acts as one and emissions choices of the coalition and fringe emerge as a Nash
equilibrium in emissions conditional on the coalition formed in the first stage.
Barrett (1994) provides the first analysis of this problem in the literature (though he
assumes a leader-follower structure rather than a two stage Nash equilibrium). Unfortunately,
3

See d’Aspremont et al (1983) and Donsimoni et al (1986).

Kolstad: May 2014

Page 7

he is unable to come up with many analytic results without simplifying;4 he uses simulations to
suggest that welfare gains from an IEA (relative to the noncooperative outcome) are modest.
An IEA may have many members (relative to N), but in such cases , welfare gains are slight
compared to the noncooperative equilibrium; conversely, when cooperation would increase
net benefits significantly, the equilibrium size of an IEA is small. In other words, generally (but
not always) there is an inverse relationship between the equilibrium number of coalition
members and the gains from cooperation (ie, the welfare difference between a coalitional
outcome and a noncooperative outcome).5 The intuition behind this is straightforward. An
equilibrium coalition is held together by the fact that if any one player defects, the cooperative
strategy of the coalition will fall apart. Thus the equilibrium coalition is the smallest one
possible for which contributing to the public good (abatement) is collectively rational for the
coalition. When there is more to be gained from cooperation, then the minimal viable abating
coalition is smaller; when there is less to be gained, it takes more coalition members for abating
to be collectively rational.
One simplification of the model (Barrett, 1999; Ulph, 2004) is for payoffs to be linear
with identical preferences and identical endowments and a common MPCR. In this case, it is
easy to show that the equilibrium consists of fringe agents free-riding (gi = 0) and coalition
members undertaking some pollution reduction (abatement), providing the coalition is large
enough. Let n* be the smallest size of a coalition which chooses to abate. A basic result is that
n* = 1/MPCR and all stable contributing coalitions are of this size. One can also show that the
benefits from cooperation increase in MPCR whereas the size of a coalition decreases in MPCR,
following the same logic as in the previous paragraph. The assumption of identical
endowments is almost universal in this literature, despite the fact that the size or wealth of a
4

Subsequent authors have refined this model, solving it model analytically. See Finus (2001), Diamantoudi and
Sartzetakis (2006), and Rubio and Ulph (2006).
5

This inverse relationship between MPCR and the equilibrium size of an IEA holds generally in Barrett (1994), as
articulated in his Prop. 1. He does offer specific functional forms where it does not necessarily hold. For instance,
he shows that with constant marginal damage and quadratic costs that the maximum size of an IEA is 3 members.
In this special case the relationship between MPCR and IEA size will not of course hold. See also Finus (2001).

Kolstad: May 2014

Page 8

country seems, in the real world, to be an important factor in driving participation in IEAs. Few
in the IEA literature have explicitly treated social preferences. An exception is Lange (2006),
who explores the significance of equity in reaching agreement in an IEA. In fact, in one of the
few empirical papers on this issue, Lange et al (2007) survey attitudes of individuals involved in
climate negotiations and find a strong preference for equity. Whether this translates into
countries caring about equity is another matter.
Carraro and Siniscalco (1993) underscore the significance of commitment mechanisms
to hold coalitions together, such as punishments for defection. The problem with punishment
is that it is often not individually rational for countries to penalize countries which defect.
However, several authors, starting with Barrett (1999), examine credible punishments that can
hold a coalition together, in the context of an infinitely repeated game. The framework is
renegotiation-proof equilibria (Fudenberg and Maskin, 1986) whereby punishments are built
into an agreement. Provided the discount rate is sufficiently small (agents are sufficiently
patient), full cooperation can be sustained (Asheim and Holtzmark, 2009). Heitzig et al (2011)
apply this to climate change mitigation.
One of the first recent papers to explore coalitions for providing public goods outside
the context of international environmental agreements is Kosfeld et al (2009). In that paper,
the authors suggest a stage game structure very similar to the standard static IEA problem,
though with one additional stage. The first stage is a membership game, the second stage is an
implementation stage and the third stage is a contribution stage. The membership and
contribution stages are identical to the IEA problem. The participation stage involves members
of the coalition deciding whether to “implement” the coalition. An implemented coalition
involves payment of a fixed fee and punishment for not contributing enough (applied to
coalition members). Their theoretical results for standard preferences are a repetition of IEA
results. An interesting extension is their introduction of fairness, using Fehr-Schmidt social
preferences. They show that for a subset of Fehr-Schmidt preferences, the grand coalition is an
organizing equilibrium.
Kolstad: May 2014

Page 9

Researchers have only recently begun to use experiments to validate theory on the
formation of coalitions for public goods provision (Kosfeld et al, 2009; Burger and Kolstad,
2009; Dannenberg et al, 2014). Results are ambiguous though consistent with the private
provision literature – experimental evidence suggests more cooperation and less free-riding.

III.

THEORY: THE BASIC MODEL
The classic model of international environmental agreements is the static one-shot two

stage game first proposed by Barrett (1994), drawing on the earlier cartel literature (Donsimoni
et al, 1986). There are other models, some of which were discussed in the review in the
previous section. In the development below, it is the classic static model which we extend to
involve social preferences on the part of countries (self-interest as well as prosocial objectives).
It should be emphasized that much of the literature we draw on for characterizing
preferences is concerned with the behavior of individuals, not countries. At some risk, we
transfer these individual-level results to the case of a country with an objective (analogous to
an individual utility function). The notion that a country can be viewed as having an objective
function is not embraced by some economists nor by some political scientists.
A. Basic Conditions.
Let there be i=1,…,N countries, each with the potential to emit wi, choosing a level of
abatement (a public good), gi, or equivalently, a level of emissions, xi=wi-gi. Welfare is
positively affected by the direct benefits of emitting, xi (including lower production costs) and
positively affected by the aggregate level of abatement, G (more abatement means less
environmental damage). 6 Building on the terminology of Andreoni (1990), countries are
impurely altruistic; i.e., they have a national welfare function (ui) that is additively separable

6

The notation here is consistent with an alternative model, in the spirit of Bergstrom et al (1986) in which there
are a group of N agents, xi is private goods, gi is private contributions to a public good and wi is wealth, for agent i.

Kolstad: May 2014

Page 10

into an egoistic component (πi) and a prosocial or altruistic component (αi). National welfare
can be viewed as a convex combination of these two components:
ui(xi,G) = λi πi (xi,G) + (1-λi) αi(π)

(2)

where λiε [0,1] is the parameter reflecting the extent to which the country is selfish vs.
altruistic. Note that in Eqn (2), egoistic (self-centered) welfare is given by the function π, which
is the welfare from the payoff from consumption ignoring the well-being of others. The
altruistic (prosocial or other-regarding) component is given by the function α, which depends
on the vector of egoistic payoffs for the other countries. This is a somewhat paternalistic
representation of altruism in that agents care only about the egoistic payoffs of others, not the
overall welfare of others. Additive separability is a modest restriction, though consistent with
the literature, as can be seen below.
Rather than postulate a general egoistic welfare function which depends on individual
and aggregate contributions (as in Bergstrom et al, 1986), we linearize the egoistic payoffs. This
is consistent with a much of the literature, particularly in the experimental realm. It also allows
us to consider heterogeneous preferences, often assumed away in more general models. In the
absence of the altruistic component, this is a standard homogeneous preferences linear public
goods game. Specifically, the egoistic component (which we will also refer to as the monetary
payoff) is given by
πi

= xi + aG

where xi + gi = wi, G = Σi gi

= wi – gi + aG where G = Σi gi and 0 ≤ gi ≤ wi

(3a)
(3b)

Here wi is maximum possible emissions for country i, gi is the level of abatement for country i
and G is the aggregate abatement over all countries. This is equivalent to a linear payoff from
emissions xi and the public good G, with country i making a contribution to a public good, gi,
subject to a feasibility constraint xi+gi=wi. The parameter a is the marginal per country return

Kolstad: May 2014

Page 11

(MPCR), indicating how much of an investment in abatement is returned privately.7 To keep
the problem interesting, we restrict the MPCR, a, to be in the open interval (1/(N-1),1). Thus
we are excluding a=1, for which the country would be indifferent between unilaterally
contributed or not. We also exclude very small a, for which even coordination may not be
enough for abatement. Clearly a could vary from one country to another, though that would
complicate our analysis. We will assume the size of the country, in terms of potential
emissions, may be different from one country to another in our group.
Although a linear payoff is common in the empirical and experimental literature, this is
equivalent to assuming gains from emitting are a perfect substitute with gains from reduced
damage from abating. And this inevitably leads to knife-edge outcomes wherein the agent
either abates completely or not at all. Nonlinear payoffs would make for more subtle behavior
but it would be more difficult to provide an analytic representation of the Nash equilibrium,
particularly when heterogeneous other-regarding preferences are treated.
There are three major representations of the altruistic component of welfare in Eqn. 2
in the literature: Fehr and Schmidt (1999) [FS], Bolton and Ockenfels (2000) [BO] and Charness
and Rabin (2002) [CR]. Andreoni (1990) in the empirical implementation of his model assumes
altruism is manifest by introducing gi into utility – the agent receives a warm-glow from giving.
The notion of warm-glow would appear to be closely related in particular to CR, though the
mechanism whereby giving to the public good generates utility is more ambiguous and
undefined in Andreoni (1990).
As articulated by Cooper and Kagel (2013), both the BO and FS models define the
altruistic component of welfare in terms of how an individual’s payoff compares to the payoff
of others. FS stipulate that αi(π) depends on relative payoffs (for agent i) defined as:
αi(π) = - γi/(N-1) Σj≠imax(πj - πi,0) - βi/(N-1) Σj≠imax(πi – πj,0)

(4a)

7

This is of course more commonly termed the marginal per capita return in the context of a public goods game
with individuals rather than countries. It is the same concept.

Kolstad: May 2014

Page 12

where the γi and βi are in the interval [0,1) and reflect aversion to personally disadvantageous
(countries doing better than i) and advantageous (countries doing worse than i) inequality,
respectively (it is assumed that γi ≤ βi). The authors specifically state that even though agents
may be homogenous in terms of the payoff function, some may have different attitudes
towards inequality than others. Different mixes of “selfish” and “fair minded” people can result
in very different levels of cooperation. We refer to Eqn. (2-4) as F-S social preferences.
BO take a simpler approach, though not restricted to a linear combination of egoistic
and altruistic payoffs (as in Eqn. 2). In the linear version of their model, let
αi(π) = vi(πi / Σjπj)

(4b)

where vi() is a function of payoff share which peaks at 1/N – the point at which one’s own share
is equal to the average share.
Charness and Rabin (2002) suggest that efficiency is also important (see the discussion
in the context of Figure 1). Although they are careful not to reject the Fehr and Schmidt
representation, they suggest that it is incomplete. In fact, they suggest that utility depends on
three dimensions of payoff: personal payoff, an equity term and an efficiency term. Their
approach is to posit utility for agent i as a linear combination of own monetary payoff, the
minimum monetary payoff over the rest of the population (a Rawlsian-like criterion reflecting a
concern for equity) and total monetary payoffs over the population (reflecting concerns for
social efficiency):
αi(π) = [ δi minj≠i πj + εi Σj πj ]/( 1 - λi)

where δi , εi ≥ 0 and δi + εi + λi = 1

(5)

In Eqn. (5), δi reflects the relative importance to agent i of distribution/equity and εi reflects the
importance of efficiency. We refer to Eqn. (2-3, 5) as C-R preferences, though the equity term
in Eqn. (5) is slightly different from the original representation in Charness and Rabin (2002) in
that the minimum excludes own payoffs:
ui(gi)

= λi[ wi - gi + aG)] + δi[wm –gm+aG] + εiΣk[wi -gk+aG]

Kolstad: May 2014

(6a)
Page 13

where λi , δi , εi ≥ 0, δi + εi + λi = 1, G = Σk gk

(6b)

and country m has the lowest payoff has the lowest payoff of all the other countries. Although
modification of the minimum is in part for tractability, the fact is that a concern for equity is
usually thought of as a concern for the well being of others, particularly those less well-off.
The Andreoni warm-glow model could be viewed as a variant of C-R when the warm
glow arises from providing social benefits.
Because the C-R preferences appear to represent a broader perspective on social
preferences (by including equity and efficiency, not just equity as in F-S), we adopt that
representation here. Some readers may find the restrictions implicit in preferences given by
Eqn. (2-3,5) troubling – preferences are linear and altruism is narrowly defined. However, that
is how the literature, primarily experimental, has approached this problem. We adopt a form
of preferences (C-R) widely used and cited in the literature.
B. Efficient and Noncooperative Outcomes
Assume C-R preferences as characterized in Eqn. (6) where individual λ, δ and ε may
vary from one country to another. By assumption, a>1/N; thus the aggregate monetary
(egoistic) payoff is maximized when everyone is abating as much as possible. Clearly, a Pareto
optimum will occur when gi = wi for all i and πi = ui = aN, for all i.
If countries are interacting non-cooperatively, we seek a Nash equilibrium. It would be
helpful to apply the results of Bergstrom et al (1986) to characterize the equilibrium. However
in Bergstrom et al (1986), utility of an individual agent is a function of g and G; in our case, the
vector of g’s enters each utility function due to the equity criterion (see Eqn. 7b below). Only if
δ=0 would gi and G be the only arguments of the utility function.
Assume country m has the lowest payoff. Thus country i≠m chooses g to maximize ui(g),
defined as:
ui(gi)

= λi[ wi - (1-a)gi + aG-i)] + δi[wm –gm+aG] + εiΣk[wi -gk+aG]

Kolstad: May 2014

(7a)
Page 14

where

= λi[ wi - (1-a)gi + aG-i] + δi[wm –gm+a(G-i + gi)] + εi [W+(aN-1)(G-i+gi)]

(7b)

W=Σkwk; λi, δi, εi ≥ 0; λi + δi + εi = 1; G-iΣj≠i gj.

(7c)

To simplify, let Δi(g)  ui(g) – ui(g=0) be the gain to i from abating, which can be written, after
some simplifying, as:
Δi(gi)= gi{a[1+(N-1)εi]-1+δi}

 gi{a + εi [a(N-1)-1] - λi}

(8)

Clearly welfare in Eqn. (8) is maximized at either gi=0 or gi=wi, depending on the sign of the
term in braces in Eqn (8), which leads to the following proposition:
Prop. 1. Assuming the N homogeneous player public goods game with C-R social preferences
(Eqn. 6), then
(1)

Efficient (Pareto Optimal) outcomes involve all countries undertaking maximal

abatement; and
(2)

The Non-cooperative Nash equilibrium involves each agent either not abating (gi=0) or

fully abating (gi=wi) according to
gi= 0 if a < āi

(9a)

gi = wi if a > āi

(9b)

where āi = (λi+εi)/[1+εi(N-1)]

(9c)

In the case where āi = a, then any feasible abatement level for country i is a Nash equilibrium.
The intuition behind Prop. 1 is straightforward. With standard egoistic preferences, the
cutoff between abating and not is a=1. With social preferences, the cutoff is lower: ā ≤ 1. Eqn.
(9c) simply defines how social preferences reduce this cutoff.
Note in Prop. 1 that if λi=1 (standard preferences—all weight is on egoistic payoffs),
then δi = εi = 0 (by Eqn. 7c) and āi=1: the Nash equilibrium is for all countries to contribute
Kolstad: May 2014

Page 15

nothing to the public good, since by assumption ai < 1. The āi in Prop. 1 can be interpreted as
the cutoff MPCR (varying from country to country) between cooperation and noncooperation.
The effect of other-regarding social preferences with some concern for efficiency (εi > 0),
keeping δi constant, is to lower āi, effectively expanding the levels of MPCR wherein
cooperation takes place. This result is quite similar to Proposition 4 in Fehr and Schmidt (1999),
a theorem in which the authors expand the set of MPCRs for which contributing is individually
rational. Note further that in Prop. 1 above, when efficiency is of some concern, then
increasing N has the effect of lowering āi. The logic is simply that from an efficiency point of
view, the payoff from abating increases as the number of countries increases. When εi=0
(welfare does not depend on efficiency), N drops out of āi and the effect of N on āi disappears:
Corollary 1. Assuming the N homogeneous country abatement game with C-R social
preferences Eqn. (6), then the cutoff level between noncooperation and cooperation for an
individual country (āi) as defined in Prop 1, exhibits the following comparative statics:
a. If εi > 0, then increasing the number of countries (N) has the effect of lowering the
cutoff MPCR level between cooperation and noncooperation (ā i), effectively shrinking
the range of values of MPCR associated with noncooperation.
b. If εi = 0 (no concern for efficiency), then changing the number of countries (N) has no
effect on the cutoff MPCR level between cooperation and noncooperation (ā i).
c. Decreasing λ (holding either ε or δ fixed) has the effect of reducing the cutoff MPCR.

IV.

ENDOGENOUS COALITIONS FACILITATING PROVISION
We now consider a slightly more complicated institution. We allow a subset of

countries to endogenously form a coalition for the express purpose of coordinating
abatement—an international environmental agreement (IEA). This is in the spirit of the groups
explored by Olson (1971). Countries voluntarily join the coalition and may leave the coalition.
Kolstad: May 2014

Page 16

Furthermore, any abatement provided by coalition members benefits both coalition members
and non-members (thus it is not a club good in the standard sense). This leads to the obvious
question: why would anyone join the coalition when the fringe enjoys all of the benefits and
none of the costs of the coalition? The answer to this legitimate question lies in the nature of a
Nash equilibrium. A Nash equilibrium is an allocation wherein it is not in any agent’s individual
interest to unilaterially change behavior. Some countries find themselves in the coalition in
equilibrium (and some not), with no incentive to unilaterally defect. It is not relevant what path
a country took to find itself in the coalition or in the fringe (or even, in fact, if such a path
exists).
As is standard in the literature on cartels and international environmental agreements,
we view the problem as a two stage game. In the first stage, countries decide whether or not
to join the coalition. In the second stage, countries decide how much to abate, with the
coalition acting as one – abating at a joint payoff maximum for the coalition. We solve the
problem using backwards induction.
Before moving to these two stages, some notation is in order. Define the members of
the coalition by C = {i|country i is a member of the coalition} and the number of members of
the coalition, C, by n. Let WC be the aggregate potential emissions of the coalition and GC be
the total abatement from the coalition members and GF the total abatement from the fringe.
A. Abatement Stage
In the two-stage game, the second stage is the abatement choice stage, when countries
in the fringe and the coalition determine how much to abate, conditional on the size and
composition of the coalition. This leads to our first result regarding the actions of the fringe.
Lemma 1. With homogeneous C-R preferences and countries divided into members of the
coalition and members of the fringe, it is a dominant strategy for each member (i) of the fringe
to abate maximally or not at all, depending on the value of āi relative to a:
Abate wi

if

Kolstad: May 2014

a > āi

(10a)
Page 17

Abate 0

if

a < āi

(10b)

where āi is defined by Eqn 9c.
Pf:

Identical to proof of Prop. 1 
We can similarly examine the incentives of the coalition, though we need to slightly

restrict the minimum payoff in the C-R preferences. As defined, the minimum is over all agents
in the economy. However, the coalition will be aggregating utility over members of the
coalition. Thus it makes more sense (and is more tractable mathematically) to view equity
within the coalition with respect to the minimum payoff country outside of the coalition. It is
unlikely that this is a significant restriction:
Lemma 2. Assume C-R preferences and countries divided into members of the coalition and
members of the fringe. Furthermore, in the C-R preferences, assume equity concerns of
coalition members are with respect to the minimum payoff of countries outside the coalition.
Then, conditional on the size of the coalition being n, with coalition members indexed by C, it is
a dominant strategy for member i of the coalition to either abate at the level wi or not at all,
according to:
gi= 0 if a < āi(C)

(11a)

gi = wi if a > āi(C)

(11b)

where āi(C) ≡ [λi+ ΣkєC εi]/ ΣkєC [1+εk(N-1)]
Pf:

(11c)

The aggregate payoff for the members of the coalition, kεC, when individual abatement

is gk:
ПC (g) = ΣkεC {λk(wk-gk+a(GC+GF)) + δk(wm+a(GC+GF)) + εkΣi(wi-gi+a(GC+GF))}
= ΣkεC {λk(wk-gk+a(GC+GF)) + (wm+a(GC+GF)) ΣkεC δk + ΣkєC εi [W+a(N-1) (GC+GF)]

Kolstad: May 2014

(12)

Page 18

where GF and GC are the aggregate levels of abatement in the fringe and coalition, respectively.
Thus the payoff for the coalition undertaking no abatement is
ПC (0) = ΣkεC {λk(wk+aGF) + (wm+aGF) ΣkεC δk + ΣkєC εi [W+a(N-1) GF]

(13)

which implies that the difference in payoff between contributing and not, Δ(g)  ПC (g) - ПC (0) is
Δ(g) = -ΣkεC λkgk

+ GC ΣkєC { a + εi [a(N-1) -1]} .

(14)

Clearly the rhs of Eqn. (14) is zero when GC=0 (at g=0). Payoffs will increase for abatement from
any k for which dΔ/dgk > 0:
dΔ/dgk = - λk + ΣkєC { a + εi [a(N-1) -1]} > 0

(15a)

 a > [λk + ΣkєC εi]/ ΣkєC [1+ εi (N-1)] = āi(C)

(15b)

Note that the term in braces in Eqn. (15a) is always positive (by assumption). Thus for any k for
which Eqn. (15) holds, net payoffs will be increased by abating, implying that gk=wk. For any k
for which Eqn. (15) fails to hold (leaving aside cases of equality), abating will only reduce
welfare; thus gk=0. This completes the proof. 
Note the similarity between Lemma 2 and the noncooperative decision to abate in Prop.
1. There are two primary differences between the two results. One is that the size of the
denominator is increased by virtue of the size of the coalition (even if ε is zero). This is a
standard result in the standard theory of international agreements. However, in addition, the
concern for efficiency embodied in ε, the effect is magnified by the aggregation of ε’s over the
coalition. The intuition will become clearer in the next section when we consider a
simplification involving identical preferences.
The following proposition follows directly from these results:
Prop. 2. Assume C-R preferences and countries divided into members of the coalition and
members of the fringe. Furthermore, in the C-R preferences, assume equity concerns of
coalition members are with respect to the minimum payoff of countries outside the coalition.
Kolstad: May 2014

Page 19

Then, conditional on the size of the coalition being n, with coalition members indexed by C, it is
a dominant strategy for the coalition to abate GC:
GC = ΣkєR wk, where R ={kєC | āi(C) < a},

(16)

where āi(C) is defined in Eqn. (11c).
Pf: The proof is a direct application of Lemma 2. 
B. Membership Stage.
Nash equilibrium in the membership game is easy to define but hard to connect to
fundamental characteristics of the game for the case of general heterogeneous preferences. In
particular, a coalition C is a Nash equilibrium of the membership game if (a) the payoff attained
by any member of the coalition, d, inside the coalition is as great as that country can obtain
outside the coalition when the coalition is reduced to C-{d}; and (b) no member of the fringe, f,
outside the coalition can do better by joining the coalition, making it C U {f}. In other words, it
is individually rational for each member of the fringe to stay in the fringe and for each member
of the coalition to stay in the coalition. This is simply the definition of a Nash equilibrium. For
simplicity, we focus on the case where social preferences are the same among countries (λ, δ
and ε), though endowments may differ. We consider this case in the next section.

V.

IDENTICAL PREFERENCES, HETEROGENEOUS SIZE
In the previous sections, we developed theory for the general case of heterogeneous

countries with heterogeneous levels of potential emissions. Although it is possible to obtain
conditions charcterizing an equilibrium in the coalition game for this general problem, clarity is
not well served. It is common (eg, see Bergstrom et al, 1986) to assume homogeneous
preferences and let heterogeneity be manifest through different sizes (potential pollution). We
consider that special case here. Thus we assume all countries share the same λ, δ and ε,
though have different levels of potential pollution, wi.
Kolstad: May 2014

Page 20

The first result concerns the abatement stage of the two stage game. Focusing on the
case where the noncooperative equilibrium involves no abatement, there is a clear result on
the size of a coalition necessary to support abatement as an optimal strategy for the coalition:
Prop. 3. Assume homogeneous C-R preferences such that a non-cooperative equilibrium yields
no abatement. Define ñ as:
ñ = ceil[1/ ē],

(17a)

where ē  {a+ ε[a(N-1)-1]}/λ

(17b)

and the function ceil(x) is smallest integer greater than or equal to x. Then for a two-stage
public goods game with a coalition C, of size n and collective size WC, it is collectively rational
for the coalition (i.e., in the coalition’s aggregate best interest) to abate GC = WC if n ≥ ñ and
GC=0 otherwise.
Pf: From Eqn. (11c), in Prop. 2,
āi(C) ≡ [λi+ ΣkєC εi]/ ΣkєC [1+εk(N-1)]

(18a)

which, for homogeneous preferences, equivalent to
ā ≡ [λ+ nε]/ n[1+ε(N-1)]

.

(18b)

From that Proposition, it is collectively rational for the coalition to fully abate if a < ā (and
similarly to not abate at all if a > ā). The condition that a < ā can be combined with Eqn. (18b)
to yield a condition for it being in the best interest of the coalition to fully abate:
nē < λ

(18c)

which proves the proposition. 
We now turn our attention to the incentives of individual members of the coalition to
voluntarily abate. We are interested in the conditions for abatement being individually rational
for members of the coalition. This is equivalent to internal stability. If it is in the individual
Kolstad: May 2014

Page 21

interests of a member of the coalition to not abate, then that is equivalent to joining the fringe.
It turns out that there all equilibrium coalitions are of the same size – too large and members
defect, too small and abatement is not collectively rational (nor individually rational). We first
prove a result on individual rationality.
Lemma 3: Assume homogeneous C-R preferences such that a non-cooperative equilibrium
yields no abatement and with ñ defined as in Eqn. (17). Then for a two-stage public goods
game with a coalition C, of size n, with the coalition acting collectively rationally, it is
individually rational for coalition members to abate fully if n is such that ñ ≤ n < ñ + 1; otherwise
it is individually rational for each coalition member to pollute and not abate.
Pf: For n < ñ, we already know from Prop. 3 that the coalition will choose to pollute and by
assumption, individuals will not want to unilaterally abate. We thus focus on the situation
where the coalition finds abating collectively rational (n ≥ ñ). In particular, we consider two
cases, one in which n ≥ ñ + 1 (in which case we show that polluting is individually rational) and
one in which ñ ≤ n < ñ + 1, where abating is individually rational, conditional on the other
members of the coalition pursuing the collectively rational strategy.
From Eqn. (7), the payoff for country i in the coalition is given by
ui(gi)

= λ[ wi - (1-a)gi + aG-i)] + δi[wm –gm+aGC] + εΣk[wi -gk+aG-i]
= λ[ wi - (1-a)gi + aG-i] + δ[wm –gm+a(G-i + gi)] + ε[W+(aN-1)(G-i+gi)]

(19a)

For the case of n ≥ ñ + 1, the coalition will continue to want to abate, with or without a
defector. Thus aggregate abatement will be GC for the entire coalition and GC-wi, should i
defect and provide no abatement. This means that the gains for country i from defecting -polluting rather than fully abating -- are given by
Δi

= λ[ wi + a(GC-wi)] + δ[wm –gm+a(GC-wi)] + ε[W+(aN-1)(GC-wi)]
- λaGC - δ[wm –gm+aGC] - ε[W+(aN-1)(GC)]

Kolstad: May 2014

Page 22

= λ(1-a) wi - δawi - ε(aN-1)wi
= {λ + ε – a[1 + ε(N-1)]}wi

(20)

By assumption the noncooperative equilibrium involves no abatement; thus from Prop 1, we
know Δi in Eqn (20) is positive and thus that it is individually rational to defect from the coalition
decision.
For the case of ñ ≤ n < ñ + 1, we know that should one member defect, the coalition will no
longer choose to abate since it will be too small (by Prop. 3). Thus the gain from defecting is
given by
Δi

= λwi + δwm + εW
- λaGC - δ[wm+aGC] - ε[W+(aN-1)GC]
= λ(wi – aGC) – δ a GC – ε (aN-1)GC
= λ wi –GC{a[1+ε(N-1)] – ε }
< GC{ λ+ε + a[1+ε(N-1)]}

(21)

where the inequality in Eqn. (21) is from the fact that wi < GC. Since by assumption a > ā, then
by Prop. 1, the right-hand-side of Eqn. (21) is negative which implies that it is not individually
rational to defect from the coalition. 
It is straightforward to put these results together into a proposition regarding the
solution of the two-stage game.
Prop. 4. Assume homogeneous C-R preferences such that a non-cooperative equilibrium yields
no abatement. Consider the two stage game involving a first stage membership game and a
second stage abatement game with an equilibrium involving a Nash equilibrium in both stages.
Allow coalitions to form in the membership stage and define ñ as in Eqn. (17). All coalitions of

Kolstad: May 2014

Page 23

size ñ are both internally and externally stable (ie, they are Nash equilibria for the two stage
game); all coalitions of different size are internally unstable.
Pf: External stability is easy, since by assumption it is a dominant strategy f 0)or individual
countries to pollute. Internal stability follows from Lemma 3. 
The standard linear model for coalition formation involves identical endowments and
monetary payoffs. The main result from that literature is that all stable coalitions have size
ceil(a). One obvious question is how moving from pure self-interested standard preferences
(λ=0) to other regarding preferences changes the cutoff size of a coalition in Prop. 3. This is
easily answered with comparative statics:
Prop. 5. Assuming homogeneous C-R preferences as in Prop. 4, then
(1) dñ/dλ ≥ 0, holding either δ or ε constant;
(2) dñ/dδ is ≥ 0 holding λ constant and ≤ 0, holding ε constant; and
(3) dñ/dε is ≥ 0 holding δ constant and ≤ 0, holding λ constant.
Pf:

Combine Eqn (17a) and Eqn (17b) and then totally differentiate, ignoring the ceil

function. Further, totally differentiate the identity λ + δ + ε = 1. Solve the two equations for
dñ/dλ, dñ/dε, or dñ/dδ, which proves the lemma. 
This Proposition indicates that introducing C-R social preferences (lowering λ) tends to
lower the size of stable coalitions. Introducing size heterogeneity among countries does not
change the size of coalitions but does influence the overall level of abatement (Prop. 4). This
result on the size of coalitions does contradict the results of Kosfeld et al (2009) who show that
with Fehr-Schmidt preferences (in which players dislike payoff inequality), larger coalitions may
be equilibria (even the grand coalition), depending on parameter values.
It is common to interpret the result on the size of stable coalitions as a “dismal” result in
the theory of IEA’s – dismal in the sense that many MPCRs lead to very small coalitions and the
Kolstad: May 2014

Page 24

larger the MPCR, the smaller the coalition (Barrett, 1994). We would argue that the more
appropriate interpretation of the size of stable coalitions is the size of the smallest effective
coalition. In reality, additional tools will be used to keep a coalition together – incentives,
punishments and interconnecting coalitions, to name a few. However, it is difficult to
overcome the situation wherein a coalition is so small that it is not in the self-interest of the
coalition to contribute to the public good. Thus the fact that social preferences tend to shrink
the size of an effective coalition to provide abatement is good news. Viewing preferences as
social can expand the set of viable coalitions.
It is appropriate to compare these results with those of the simple public goods game
without coalition formation but with heterogeneous agents, some of whom wish to unilaterally
abate and some of whom do not. In this case, there will be a subgroup of contributors and a
subgroup of noncontributors. The contributors may appear to be a coalition of agents with the
same agenda; however the theory really only suggests that individuals in the group will
individually contribute. For example, many argue that the Montreal Protocol for protecting
stratospheric ozone is a good example of a coalition of nations to provide abatement.
However, Murdoch and Sandler (1997) have suggested that the Montreal Protocol is largely an
association of countries which find reducing emissions individually rational.
Note that any coalition of size ñ is an equilibrium coalition. Of all the possible coalitions
of size ñ, the one with the highest aggregate size, WC, will yield the maximal amount of
abatement, GC. Thus from an efficiency point of view there is one coalition which is best
(assuming there are not too distinct coalitions of the same size). Coalitions of large countries
are better, from an efficiency perspective, than coalitions of smaller countries.

VI

CONCLUSIONS
In this paper we revisit the important question of self-enforcing international

environmental agreements. In particular, we are interested in two issues. One is the role of
Kolstad: May 2014

Page 25

social preferences—where self-interest is not the only motivator. How do social preferences
change the received wisdom on abatement in the absence of an IEA? The second issue is the
role of voluntary coalitions in coordinating the provision of abatement. Little is known of how
social preferences modify what we know about international environmental agreements
(viewed as abstract economic coordination entities).
We adopt the specification of social preferences due to Charness and Rabin (2002),
primarily because it contains three important ingredients that characterize many discussions of
social preferences: private gain, equity and social efficiency. Using a linear public goods model
with a fixed MPCR but an arbitrary distribution of size (proxied as potential emissions), we find
that a major consequence of using social preferences is to lower the threshold for abatement
being individually rational. This is in contrast to theory with standard preferences where for
any MPCR less than one, free-riding is individually rational. Thus with heterogeneous
preferences, more countries may find it individually rational to abate (provide the public good)
with social preferences as compared to standard self-interested preferences.
In extending the analysis to voluntary coalitions, we show that social preferences tend
to reduce the size of an equilibrium coalition. Although this would appear to be a discouraging
result, another interpretation is that social preferences expand the set of coalitions for which it
is collectively rational for the coalition to provide the abatement public good. By implication,
the smallest collectively rational contributing coalition is smaller than it would be with standard
preferences: size matters, but in an unusual way.
Related to this result is the fact that conditions that determine the equilibrium size of a
stable coalition are independent of the size of countries. Yet the aggregate abatement
provided by a country or coalition is influenced by size. This suggests that as a refinement of
the multiple stable coalitions that are possible, coalitions of the largest countries will generate
the maximum amount of abatement, and thus the greatest amount of social surplus.

Kolstad: May 2014

Page 26

REFERENCES

Andreoni, J., and J. Miller. “Giving according to GARP: an experimental test of the consistency of
preferences for altruism.” Econometrica, 70:737–53 (2002).
Andreoni, James, “Privately Provided Public Goods in a Large Economy: The Limits of Altruism,”
J. Pub. Econ., 35:57-73 (1988).
Andreoni, James, “Giving with Impure Altruism: Applications to Charity and Ricardian
Equivalence,” J. Pol. Economy, 97:1447-58 (1989).
Andreoni, James, “Impure Altruism and Donations to Public Goods: A Theory of Warm-Glow
Giving,” Economic J., 100:464-77 (1990).
Asheim, GB and B. Holtzmark, “Renegotiation-Proof Climate Agreements with Full Participation:
Conditions for Pareto-Efficiency,” Env. and Res. Econ., 43:519-33 (2009).
Barrett, Scott, “Self-Enforcing International Environmental Agreements,” Oxford Economic
Papers. 46:878-94 (1994).
Barrett, Scott, “A Theory of Full International Cooperation,” J. Theoretical Politics, 11:519-41
(1999).
Becker, Gary, “A Theory of Social Interactions,” J. Pol. Econ., 82:1063-93 (1974).

Bergstrom, Ted, Larry Blume and Hal Varian, “On the Private Provision of Public Goods,” J. Pub.
Econ., 29:25-49 (1986).

Bliss, C and B. Nalebuff, “Dragon Slaying and Ballroom Dancing – The Private Supply of a Public
Good,” J. Pub. Econ., 25:1-12 (1984).

Kolstad: May 2014

Page 27

Bolton, Gary E., and Axel Ockenfels, “ERC: A Theory of Equity, Reciprocity and Competition,”
Amer. Econ. Rev., 90:166-93 (2000).

Burger, Nicholas and Charles D. Kolstad, “Voluntary Public Goods Provision, Coalition Formation
and Uncertainty,” NBER Working Paper 15543, Cambridge, Mass. (Nov. 2009).

Carraro, C. and D. Siniscalco, “Strategies for the International Protection of the Environment.” J
Public Econ., 52:309-28 (1993).
Charness, Gary and Mathew Rabin, “Understanding Social Preferences with Simple Tests,”
Quart. J. Econ., 117:817-69 (2002).

Charness, G., L. Rigotti, and A. Rustichini, “Cooperation rates as a function of payoffs for mutual
cooperation," UC Santa Barbara Working Paper (2008).
Charness, Gary and Chun-Lei Yang, “Starting Small towards Voluntary Formation of Efficient
Large Groups in Public Goods Provision,” J. Econ. Beh. Org, 102:119-32 (2014).

Chaudhuri, Ananish, “Sustaining Cooperation in Laboratory Public Goods Experiments: A
Selective Survey of the Literature,” Exp. Econ. 14:47-83 (2011).

Cooper, D.J. and J. H. Kagel, “Other-Regarding Preferences: A Selective Survey of Experimental
Results,” Handbook of Experimental Economics (forthcoming, 2013).

d’Aspremont, C., A. Jacquemin, J. Jaskold-Gabszewicz and J. Weymark, “On the Stability of
Collusive Price Leadership,” Canadian J. Economics, 16:17-25 (1983).

Dannenberg, Astrid, Andreas Lange and Bodo Sturm, “Participation and Commitment in
Voluntary Coalitions to Provide Public Goods,” Economica, 81:257-75 (2014).

Kolstad: May 2014

Page 28

Diamantoudi, E. and E.S. Sartzetakis, “Stable International Environmental Agreements: An
Analytical Approach,” J. Public Econ. Theory, 8:247-63 (2006).

Donsimoni, M.-P., N.S. Economides, and H.M. Polemarcharkis, “Stable Cartels,” International
Economic Rev., 27:317-27 (1986)

Farrell, Joseph and Eric Maskin, "Renegotiation in repeated games," Games and Economic
Behavior, 1:327-360 (1989)

Fehr, Ernst and Klaus M. Schmidt, “A Theory of Fairness, Competition and Cooperation,” Q. J.
Econ., 114:817-68 (1999).

Finus, Michael, Game Theory and International Environmental Cooperation (Edward Elgar,
Cheltenham, 2001).

Fischbacher, Urs and Simon Gächter, “Social Preferences, Beliefs, and the Dynamics of Free
Riding in Public Goods Experiments,” Amer. Econ. Rev., 100:541-56 (2010).

Fischbacher, Urs, Simon Gächter, and Ernst Fehr, “Are People Conditionally Cooperative?
Evidence from a Public Goods Experiment,” Econ. Letters, 71:397-404 (2001).

Heitzig, J., K. Lessmann and Y. Zou, “Self-enforcing strategies to deter free-riding in the climate
change mitigation game and other repeated public good games,” Proc. Natl Acad Sci,
108:15739-44 (2011).

Isaac, R.M. and J. M. Walker, “Group Size Effects in Public Goods Provision: The Voluntary
Contributions Mechanism.” Quart. J. Econ.. 103:179-99 (1988).

Kolstad: May 2014

Page 29

Isaac, R.M., J.M. Walker and A.W. Williams, “Group Size and the Voluntary Provision of Public
Goods: Experimental Evidence Utilizing Large Groups.” J Pub. Econ.,. 54:1-36 (1994).
Kahneman, Daniel, Jack L. Knetsch and Richard Thaler, “Fairness as a Constraint on Profit
Seeking: Entitlements in the Market,” Amer. Econ. Rev., 76:728-41 (1986).
Kim, O. and J.M. Walker, “The Free Rider Problem: Experimental Evidence.” Public Choice. 43:324 (1984).
Kosfeld, Michael, Akira Okada, and Arno Riedl, “Institution Formation in Public Goods Games,”
Amer. Econ. Rev., 99:1335-55 (2009).
Lange, Andreas and Carsten Vogt, “Cooperation in international environmental negotiations
due to a preference for equity,” J. Public Econ., 87:2049-2067 (2003).
Lange, Andreas, “The Impact of Equity Preferences on the Stability of International
Environmental Agreements,” Env. Res. Econ., 34:247-67 (2006).
Ledyard, John O., “Public Goods: Some Experimental Results,” Ch. 2 in J. Kagel and A. Roth
(Eds), Handbook of Experimental Economics (Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ,
1995).
Murdoch, J.C. and T. Sandler, “The Voluntary Provision of a Pure Public Good: The Case of
Reduced CFC Emissions and the Montreal Protocol,” J. Pub. Econ., 63:331-49 (1997).
Olson, Mancur, The Logic of Collective Action, 2nd Ed. (Harvard University Press, Cambridge,
Mass., 1971).
Rubio, S. J. and A. Ulph, “Self-Enforcing International Environmental Agreements Revisited,”
Oxford Econ. Papers, 58:233-63 (2006).
Smith, Vernon L., “Experiments with a Decentralized Mechanism for Public Goods Decisions,”
Amer. Econ. Rev., 70:584-99 (1980).

Kolstad: May 2014

Page 30

Sobel, Joel, “Independent Preferences and Reciprocity,” J. Econ. Lit., 43:392-436 (2005).
Ulph A., “Stable international environmental agreements with a stock pollutant, uncertainty
and learning,” J. Risk and Uncertainty, 29:53-73 (2004).

Kolstad: May 2014

Page 31

