NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ACCESS TO HEALTH INSURANCE AND THE USE OF INPATIENT MEDICAL CARE:
EVIDENCE FROM THE AFFORDABLE CARE ACT YOUNG ADULT MANDATE
Yaa Akosa Antwi
Asako S. Moriya
Kosali Simon
Working Paper 20202
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20202
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2014

The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Yaa Akosa Antwi, Asako S. Moriya, and Kosali Simon. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Access to Health Insurance and the Use of Inpatient Medical Care: Evidence from the Affordable
Care Act Young Adult Mandate
Yaa Akosa Antwi, Asako S. Moriya, and Kosali Simon
NBER Working Paper No. 20202
June 2014
JEL No. I13
ABSTRACT
The Affordable Care Act of 2010 expanded coverage to young adults by allowing them to remain
on their parent’s private health insurance until they turn 26 years old. While there is evidence on
insuranceeffects, we know very little about use of general or specific forms of medical care. We
study the implications of the expansion for the use of inpatient hospitalizations. Given the prevalence
of mental health needs for young adults, we also specifically study mental health related inpatient
care. We find evidence that compared to those aged 27-29 years, treated young adults aged 19-25
years increased their inpatient visits by 3.5 percent. Visits related to mental illness increased 9.0
percent. The prevalence of uninsurance among hospitalized young adults decreased by 12.5 percent;
however, it does not appear that the intensity of inpatient treatment changed despite the change in
reimbursement composition of patients.
Yaa Akosa Antwi
Indiana University
Purdue University-Indianapolis
425 University Blvd
CA 530
Indianapolis, IN 46202
yakosaan@iupui.edu
Asako S. Moriya
School of Public and Environmental Affairs
Indiana University
1315 E. Tenth Street Room 441
Bloomington, IN 47405
asako.moriya@gmail.com

Kosali Simon
School of Public and Environmental Affairs
Indiana University
Rm 359
1315 East Tenth Street
Bloomington, IN 47405-1701
and NBER
simonkos@indiana.edu

I. Introduction
In the United States, the transition from adolescence to young adulthood is associated
with the loss of health insurance coverage (Anderson, Dobkin, and Gross, 2012). Prior to the
Affordable Care Act (ACA), uninsurance among the non-elderly peaked at around ages 21 to 23
at close to 40 percent.1 The precarious health insurance status of young adults motivated the
early ACA provision that starting in September 2010 has allowed young adults to remain as
dependents on their parents’ private health insurance plans until they turn 26 years old. The
mandate has substantially reduced uninsurance in this population (Cantor et al., 2012; Sommers
and Kronick, 2012; Sommers et al., 2013; and Akosa Antwi, Moriya, and Simon, 2013).
However, there is as yet sparse evidence on the effect of this health insurance expansion on
young adults’ use of health care.
Young adults are a key population targeted under the ACA even beyond the specific
mandate we study. On the one hand, because young adults are comparatively healthy, high
young-adult enrollment is seen as an important goal for the success of health insurance
exchanges (Weaver and Radnofsky, 2013). On the other hand, young adults tend to have high
mental health care needs (Grant and Potenza, 2010). Estimating the effect of this ACA young
adult insurance expansion on health care use in general as well as mental health care use in
particular is crucial for understanding the law fully, as well as for anticipating the effects of later
expansions on this population. Empirical evidence of the impact of this provision is of high
1

Author’s calculation using 2008 Current Population Survey data.

1

interest to policymakers, who will likely continue to fine-tune the details of the ACA for some
time; it also contributes to the growing academic literature on the effect of health insurance on
medical care use.
We use the Nationwide Inpatient Sample (NIS), a nationally-representative database of
inpatient admissions, to evaluate the early effect of the ACA young adult insurance expansion on
the use of inpatient medical care in general and mental healthcare specifically, on treatment
intensity, and on insurance status of inpatient visits. Inpatient visits are rare but expensive
medical events and are a vital component of any effort to “bend the health care cost curve”. For
instance, for 19-to-25-year age group targeted by the ACA dependent care mandate, inpatient
visits represented about 31 percent of total health care expenditures even though only 5.4 percent
of individuals in this age group had an inpatient visit in 2008.2 We identify the effects of policy
on the targeted age group using a differences-in-differences (DD) method that compares the
treatment group of 19-to-25-year-olds to 27-to-29-year-olds, the latter being a comparison group
that is close to but excluded from the expansion. We also conduct extensive robustness checks
regarding the assumptions underlying this identification strategy and find them to be viable.
We first examine the impact of the ACA young adult mandate on the total number of
non-birth hospitalizations. The transition from adolescence to adulthood often involves many life
changes that can trigger mental distress, making services related to mental illness an important
component of young adult medical care (Patel et al., 2007; and Yu et al., 2008). Not surprisingly,

2

Author calculations from 2008 Medical Expenditure Panel Survey.

2

mental disorder is the most frequent reason why young adults seek hospital-based care, aside
from visits related to childbirth.3 Thus, the second aspect we consider is the effect of the
mandate on mental illness admissions. For both types of utilization, we analyze the impact of the
mandate separately on admissions that originate from the emergency room (ER) and those that
are direct admissions. To shed light on the changes that hospitals will likely face in
reimbursement for young adult care as a result of reform, we estimate the change in insurance
composition as well. We end by evaluating the impact of the law on treatment intensity as
measured by length of stay, number of procedures, and hospital charges.
We find that compared to slightly older young adults, those targeted by the law increased
their overall non-birth inpatient visits by 3.5 percent after the law’s implementation. This is
driven by direct inpatient admissions which tend to be more discretionary than admissions that
result from the ER, and might be more responsive to changes in health insurance coverage.
Consistent with evidence that mental illness treatment is more responsive to health insurance
coverage than general medical care, mental-illness-related inpatient visits increase by 9.0
percent, driven mainly by visits that originate through the ER. Corresponding to these changes in
service utilization, we find that the fraction of hospitalized young adults without insurance
decreased by 12.5 percent compared to other adults who did not benefit from the expansion. In
examining whether treatment intensity of hospital usage is affected, we find no robust evidence
of the impact of the law on length of stay, number of procedures, and total charges.
3

This is based on author’s calculations from the National Inpatient Sample.

3

II. Prior Literature
The Effect of Health Insurance Expansion on Inpatient Care
A large body of empirical research studies the effect of health insurance expansions on
the use of inpatient care. Studies on Medicaid and Medicare, for instance, find that they lead to
an increase in the consumption of inpatient medical care (Dafny and Gruber, 2005; Card,
Dobkin, and Maestas, 2008; and Finkelstein et al., 2012). But research on the impact of a nearuniversal health insurance coverage expansion in Massachusetts finds no change in
hospitalizations (Kolstad and Kowalski, 2012).
Research especially relevant for our work studies the impact of health insurance on
medical-care use by young adults. Anderson, Dobkin, and Gross (2012 and 2014) estimate the
effect of health insurance coverage on inpatient and ER visits by exploiting the sharp change in
insurance coverage rates that result from young adults “aging out” of their parent’s health
insurance plans at ages 19 and 23. They find significant reductions in inpatient and ER visits at
both age cutoffs. Losing health insurance at 23 decreases the probability of an inpatient visit by
77 percent. The same statistic at age 19 is 61 percent.

Effect of Insurance Expansion on Inpatient Mental Health Care
Evidence from the RAND health insurance experiment shows that mental health care is
almost three times as responsive to insurance generosity as other forms of health care, (Manning

4

et al. 1989). While this evidence pertains to outpatient care only, it might have implications for
inpatient care as well. Research from the 2007 Massachusetts health insurance expansion in
Meara et al (2014) shows that there was little to no change in inpatient admissions for mental
health among young adults (consistent with Kolstad and Kowalski ( 2012)’s result for inpatient
care in general), and a small but statistically significant reduction in admissions for substance use
disorders. The authors caution that the generalizability of evidence from Massachusetts is not
straightforward since the availability of behavioral health outpatient providers is much higher in
Massachusetts than in other states.4

Effect of ACA Dependent Coverage on Use of Medical Care
Although there is no prior work on the effect of the young adult mandate on inpatient
care, Sommers et al. (2013) find evidence that the mandate increased self-reported access to care
but had no statistically significant effect on self-reported usual source of care. Mulcahy et al.
(2013) find that the expansion led to a 3.1-percentage-point increase in the share of nondiscretionary emergency care that is paid by private insurance.
Taken together, prior literature on the impact of health insurance on all and mental health
inpatient admissions is rather mixed. Some studies find a sizeable increase in use while others
find small or no effects. There is no literature on the impact of the ACA young adult mandate

4

Meara et al. (2014) report that Massachusetts has 32.4 psychiatrists per 100,000 residents compared with 14.5 for
the United States.

5

inpatient admissions, but evidence suggests an increase in access to healthcare in general, but not
necessarily an increase in a usual source of care.
Our research makes several distinct contributions. In addition to providing the first
evidence on the impact of the ACA dependent coverage expansion on inpatient use, we
contribute to the literature on the effect of insurance on use of care among young adults by
evaluating the effect of gaining rather than losing health insurance on medical use. Evidence
provided by Anderson, Dobkin, and Gross (2012 and 2013) measure the effect of anticipated loss
of health insurance on medical-care use. The effect of gaining and losing health insurance may
not be symmetric. Third, we examine the national impact of providing coverage to young adults
on their use of inpatient mental health care, a particularly high need in this age group. Fourth, we
examine the effect of the law on prevalence of insurance coverage among young adults using
inpatient services, and its implications for intensity of treatments provided.

III: Mechanisms
The mechanisms by which the availability of health insurance is expected to affect
medical-care use have been well covered in prior literature (Finkelstein et al., 2012; Kolstad and
Kowalski, 2012; and Miller, 2012), thus our discussion of the hypotheses remains brief.
Access to health insurance reduces the cost of medical care for the newly insured, and
moral hazard suggests that newly insured young adults would increase their consumption of
medical care. The effect of health insurance on how newly insured young adults enter the

6

medical system is not clear. If inpatient and outpatient care are substitutes for some conditions,
then having health insurance could reduce hospital admissions through better outpatient care.
Several studies reviewed above find inpatient care increases after insurance expansions,
suggesting hospital care could be on net a complement rather than a substitute for other forms of
care.
The moral hazard of insurance is stronger in mental healthcare than other types of
healthcare (Horgan, 1986; Taube et. al, 1986; Frank and McGuire, 2000, Manning et. al 1989),
leading to an expectation that the ACA will likely increase mental health care use especially in
light of recent reductions in social stigma associated with seeking treatment (Mojtabai, 2007).
Garfield et al. (2011) predict that full implementation of the ACA will increase mental health
care use (including inpatient forms) by 4.5 percent. This increase will most likely not be uniform
across all US states given evidence from Massachusetts suggesting that inpatient mental health
care use may not increase in response to an expansion of health insurance coverage if there is
capacity for improved outpatient care (Meara et al. 2014). In addition, in response to the
perceived higher moral hazard of mental health care, insurers have traditionally placed greater
limitations on coverage for mental health services than other forms of care. These restrictions
gave rise to a movement of state mandates aimed at parity. Although a federal parity statute
passed in 1996, that law is relatively weak compared to state and federal laws passed since 2000
(Buchmueller et al., 2007). The 2008 Mental Health Parity and Addiction Equity Act
(MHPAEA) was effective January 2010, and required closer parity between mental and medical

7

care coverage. It is unclear whether strong parity laws will lead to an increase in use of services
(HCCI 2014), partly because insurers have been adopting aggressive forms of management for
mental health care delivery. Providers could constrain the use of expensive forms of care which
is usually inpatient based by contracting with specialized managers to carve out mental health
care benefits (Goldman et al.1998 and Sturm, 1997). Barry and Ridgely (2008) find evidence
that insurance plans intensified their use of utilization management techniques in response to the
increased likelihood of moral hazard due to parity legislation.
There are competing hypotheses about the likely effect of the mandate on overall
treatment intensity, conditional on hospitalization. The law is expected to change the health
insurance composition of hospitalized young adults by reducing the proportion of uninsured
visits and increasing the proportion covered by private insurance. If private health insurance
status leads to more treatment by health care providers (Doyle, 2005), then we would expect an
increase in treatment intensity after the law. Intensity of care may decrease, if the marginal
young adults seeking care after the expansion are healthier than others, especially since young
adults whose parents have private insurance tend to be from higher socio-economic status
families. Thus, the direction of predicted change in intensity is ambiguous, and we explore this
point using analyses that do and do not control for the case-mix of admissions.

IV. Data

8

The main data we use for our analysis is from the Nationwide Inpatient Sample (NIS),
Healthcare Cost and Utilization Project (HCUP), Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. .
The NIS data contains all discharges from a 20% stratified sample of community hospitals in the
United States. On average the NIS has information on about eight million hospital stays a year
from about 40 states in the U.S.5
We use the NIS data from 2007 to 2011 (the latest year for which data is available) to
allow a sufficient look-back period to test for differences in trends between treatment and control
groups. Each observation in the NIS is a patient discharge abstract, which includes detailed
clinical information, such as primary and secondary diagnoses, and demographic information,
such as age, gender, and race/ethnicity. We restrict our attention to discharges for ages 19 to 29.
We follow prior literature by using non-birth visits.6 Our final sample is composed of 794,392
hospital visits. In our secondary analysis of mental illness visits, we restrict our sample 128,310
visits that belong to Major Diagnostic Category (MDC) 19: Mental Diseases and Disorders.7
Henceforth we refer to non-birth admissions as “all” admissions to distinguish them from our
secondary analysis which singles out mental health related admissions. Our data also includes

5

Data from Alabama, Delaware, the District of Columbia, and Idaho are not in our sample because they do not
contribute data to the NIS in any year of our sample. We exclude data from California, Maine, and Texas because
precise information on age, which is crucial for our study design, is not available and thus prevents us from
separating the control and treatment groups. However, we note that results are qualitatively the same when we
include these states and estimate models with less than ideal control and treatment group age definitions.
6
Non-birth visits here denote all inpatient visits except those classified as major diagnostic category 14: pregnancy,
childbirth and puerperium.
7
The majority of mental health hospitalizations occur in community hospitals (Meara et al, 2014), but we note here
that specialty psychiatric hospitals and prison hospitals, which do not report data to AHRQ, are also a major source
of care.

9

information on health insurance status such as private insurance, Medicaid, Medicare, other
insurance, and no insurance. We cannot separately identify treated young adults who are
dependents on their parent’s health insurance from those who have their own ESI or non-group
insurance. To calculate our dependent variables measuring number of inpatient visits, we
aggregate hospital discharges by age and year-quarter for each hospital.

V. Method
To estimate the effect of the federal young adult coverage expansion on inpatient medical
care, one must isolate the policy’s impact from contemporaneous national changes. We use a
difference-in-difference (DD) method that compares all targeted young adults, 19-25-year-olds
and a control group of 27-29-year-olds, who are as similar as possible in age but excluded from
the insurance expansion. We also conduct sensitivity checks comparing separately those who are
19-22 years and 23-25 years as alternate treatment subgroups to those 27-29 years (control
group). We also compare young adults on either side of the age cutoff, that is, 25 year-olds vs.
age 27 year-olds. We exclude 26-year-olds since we cannot accurately classify them as part of
either group. Our empirical strategy rests on the strong assumption that the control group will
account for other time-varying factors that would have led the treatment group to experience
different rates of medical care access and use after reform. We start our empirical work by
testing the validity of the DD estimator assumptions including common trends and also conduct
placebo tests using data prior to the ACA.

10

Our main analysis examines how the reform affected the use of inpatient medical care.
Using aggregated discharge data, we estimate a model similar to that of Kolstad and Kolwalski
(2012), who use the NIS to evaluate health reform in Massachusetts. Our estimating equation is:

where Yhsgt represents our outcome variables of interest for ageg in hospital h, state s, and
quarter t. Implementt represents a dummy for the period after the law was implemented in
September 2010. Since our analysis is at the quarterly level, our implementation phase starts
from the fourth quarter of 2010 and runs through the latest period of available data , the fourth
quarter of 2011. The variable Treatg is a binary variable for membership in the 19-25 age range
(relative to the 27-29 range); in the non-interacted term Ageg we include a full set of age
indicators. The interaction of Implementt and Treatg captures the average impact after the law
was implemented in September 2010 by comparing hospital visits during this period to visits
before the enactment of the law among the treatment group relative to the control group.
To examine possible anticipatory changes, we add a dummy variable,

, to capture

the period between enactment and implementation of the law, from April 2010 to September
2010, and its interaction with the treatment dummy variable. The Xst vector represents quarterly
linear state-specific time trends. The recession and the subsequent slow recover span our sample
period. These national macroeconomic conditions could differentially affect the use of hospitalbased medical care by our treatment and control groups. Although we conduct tests of
11

differential time trends prior to reform to validate our study design, we account for the possibility
that the macroeconomy could also influence age trends after reform by including two variables:
the quarterly unemployment rate, and its interaction with age dummies. We also include dummy
variables for year and quarter in τt, to control for seasonality and year fixed effects that are
common to the treatment and control groups. We include hospital fixed effects in ζhs to account
for time-invariant hospital characteristics. We use ordinary least squares to estimate all of our
continuous outcomes and the linear probability models for our binary outcomes. To account for
correlation of hospital-level errors over time due to common forces, we cluster standard errors by
hospital. However, inference drawn from this model may be incorrect as the policy variation
occurs only at the age by time level. We are not able to block-bootstrap the standard errors as
suggested by Bertrand et al. (2004) because we have an extremely small number of “groups”
(two). Thus, we follow Cameron, Gelbach, and Miller (2008) by estimating our main model
alternatively by aggregating data to the national age by year-quarter level, and implement the
Wild cluster bootstrap method using time as the grouping variable. Our results from this
estimation, which we report in the appendix, reinforce the results stemming from our models that
cluster at the hospital level. We also estimate all reported models by aggregating data to the age
by time level and clustering at the age level, and find qualitatively similar results [results
available upon request].

VI. Results
12

Summary Statistics
We present sample means of our treatment and control groups, before and after ACA
implementation, in Table 1. Other than for the expected age differences between the older and
younger cohorts, the means of most demographic and clinical variables appear similar across
groups and over time. Targeted young adults have a higher likelihood of a mental health
admission (17.7 percent) compared to slightly older adults (15.2 percent) in the period prior to
ACA enactment. The spread increases in the post implementation period, with the likelihood
rising to 19.2 percent for the targeted group relative to 15.7 percent for the slightly older group.
There is very little other evidence in the descriptive statistics of differential changes in clinical
characteristics or utilization measures.
When we consider health insurance status as our outcome, we see some stark differences
in the mean changes experienced by the two groups. Conditional on seeking inpatient care, older
adults are less likely to have private health insurance over time (37.9 percent vs. 32.4 percent)
while private coverage increases slightly among targeted young adults (38.9 percent vs 39.5
percent). There is corresponding evidence of reductions in uninsurance among targeted young
adults relative to slightly older adults.8

Validity of Study Design

8

Means of aggregated variables such as group totals of admissions are reported in regressions tables.

13

Estimating the impact of policies by comparisons between national treatment and control
groups involve especially strong assumptions. For example, when we identify the impact of the
mandate on hospitalizations by comparing the count of admissions by our treatment and control
groups before and after the law, we assume the control group and treatment group would have
similar trends absent the law. Given the fact that our sample coincides with the most recent
recession, this assumption is even stronger if there is a differential impact of the recession on
younger vs older adults. Roberts and Terrell (2014) find evidence that job market prospects
deteriorated furthest for new job market entrants during the past recession. A volatile
macroeconomy is linked to greater indications of depressive symptoms (Tefft, 2011), increased
suicide (Luo et al., 2011), and losses of health insurance (Cawley, Moriya and Simon, 2013)
which likely further exacerbate health conditions. Maclean (2013) finds that leaving school in a
bad economy has a persistent negative impact on the health outcomes of men and Kuhn, Lalive
and Zweimüller (2009) find that job loss increases the use of mental health care, including
inpatient care. Our treatment group of 19 to 25 year-olds contain ages when young adults leave
school and are new workers, thus we turn next to testing the time trends of outcomes by age prior
to the law.
Following Akosa Antwi, Moriya, and Simon (2013), one approach to increasing
confidence in our ability to use those older than 26 to capture trends in hospitalizations that
would have affected younger adults had the policy not occurred would be to examine the trends
of our outcomes of interest prior to the law’s implementation. If we were to find that

14

hospitalization rates increased for the treatment group relative to the control group even prior to
the policy, this would suggest that the impact we estimate could be a continuation of prior trends.
We first present visual pre-trends of main analysis in Figures 1- 4. In Figure 1, we show
trends for number of visits for our treatment and control groups. The vertical lines represent the
passage of the law, the implementation of the law in September 2010 and the start of 2011, when
most new health insurance plans start respectively. We plot graphs for overall visits, visits
through an ER, and visits not through an ER for our main sample and sample with mental illness
diagnosis. The plots are quarterly unconditional means of the aforementioned variables. For all
visits, visits that originated from the ER, and visits not originating from the ER (top row), we
observe differences between the treatment and control groups in levels, but no visible differences
in trends. There is some evidence of differential trends after the implementation of the law,
especially in the bottom row graph for mental illness admissions through an ER.
In Figure 2, we examine trends by health insurance status. In the first row of plots, visual
inspection of the first graph shows that the two groups follow a similar trend before the law, with
a sharp increase in the share of treatment group visits paid by private insurance after the
implementation. The second plot shows the trend for the uninsured. Again, the two groups
follow a similar trend before the law, with a sharp post-law decrease in the share of visits
accounted for by uninsured young adults who are targeted by the law. In Figures 3 and 4, we
show trends for our treatment intensity variables for all visits and mental illness visits. These
plots show no strong pre-trends and no sharp changes post-law either.

15

We formalize our trend tests in Table 2 by estimating regressions with our outcomes of
interest as left-hand-side variables. We only use data prior to the enactment of the law. The righthand-side variables for this regression include the same control variables as our main model,
described above, except that the key variable of interest is an interaction between the linear time
trend and the treatment group dummy instead of the usual difference-in-difference variables. In
the first panel of Table 2, which covers all admissions and mental illness admissions, we show
that none of the trends are statistically significantly different between the treatment and control
groups in the period prior to the ACA. In the second and third panels, we report our pre-reform
trend test for insurance results and intensity of treatment for both types of care. For all health
insurance outcomes, our treatment and control groups follow similar pre-trends. In the intensity
of treatment trends, we see one marginally statistically significantly different trend for log length
of stay (LOS) when risk adjustment variables are included, and four statistically significantly
different trends in terms of charges (both levels and logs), when risk adjustment variables are
excluded. Overall, these pre-trend tests are reassuring, especially for admissions volume, and
health insurance composition of the admissions. As additional checks on the validity of our study
design, we also conduct placebo tests, and estimate models that compare between 25 and 27
year olds, who are very close in age, and thus less likely to be differentially affected by other
forces such as recession. All analyses provide reassuring evidence that the assumptions behind
the DD study design are valid.

16

Impact of the ACA Young Adult Mandate on Use of Medical Care and Source of Admission
Table 3 contains regression results from Equation [1], where the dependent variable is the
number of admissions at the quarter, hospital, and age level. The results indicate that the
implementation of the law had a statistically significant impact on overall inpatient visits.
Relative to a mean average quarterly visits per hospital per age of 7.27 prior to the passage of the
law, the coefficient of 0.253 in the second set of rows of column 1 of Table 3 indicates that the
overall number of visits increased by 3.5 percent. Our result on the impact of the ACA dependent
coverage expansion on overall visits is comparable in direction with Anderson, Dobkin, and
Gross (2012), who find that young adults decrease their visits for non-birth inpatient visits when
they age out of insurance.
In considering the possible substitution away from ER care to outpatient care, we
investigate the effect of the health insurance expansion on the source of inpatient admission by
estimating the impact of the law on ER and non-ER admissions. In columns 2 and 3 of Table 3,
we find that our overall result is driven by direct hospital admissions that bypass the ER. Direct
hospital admissions tend to be scheduled visits and are likely more sensitive to health insurance
access, hence the larger percent increase is not surprising.

Impact of the ACA Young Adult Mandate on Mental Illness Visits
We study mental health admissions separately because they may be especially impacted
by the ACA young adult mandate given the particular health needs of this population. We

17

present our analysis of the impact of the mandate on the total number of mental health
admissions in the last three columns of Table 3. We find a statistically significant 9 percent
increase in the number of visits after implementation. These results differ from Meara et al.
(2014) finding for Massachusetts that shows no or small decreases in mental health inpatient
visits after reform. Parsing our results by the source of admission, we find that visits originating
from the ER comprise a significant portion of our overall mental health results. Our estimate for
non-ER admissions after the law, while positive and marginally statistically significant, is
smaller in magnitude.

Impact of the ACA Young Adult Mandate on the Health Insurance Status of Inpatient Visits
In Table 4, we evaluate the impact of the mandate on the health insurance composition of
young adults who sought inpatient care after the reform using the same sample and regression
framework we describe above. The dependent variable here is the fraction of the hospital-agequarter-level inpatient population with private insurance, no insurance, Medicaid, Medicare, and
other insurance. These health insurance categories are mutually exclusive, so the horizontal sum
of all the coefficients presented in Table 4 is zero. Our DD estimate presented in the first column
of the top panel of Table 4 shows that the proportion of young adults in our treatment group with
private insurance increased by 2.1 and 6 percentage points, respectively, as a result of the
enactment and the implementation of the law. Relative to the mean baseline quarterly fraction of
privately insured visits, these represent 5.3 and 15.3 percent increases in private coverage of all

18

visits among our treatment group. This result is not surprising as mandate expanded health
insurance coverage to young adults whose parents have private health insurance. Our next set of
results shows that the fraction of young adults in our treatment group without health insurance
decreased by a marginally statistically significant 1 percentage point (4.4 percent) and
statistically significant 2.9 percentage points (12.5 percent) as a result of the law’s enactment and
implementation respectively. There is a statistically significant negative coefficient associated
with reform implementation for Medicaid and other insurance coverage.
The bottom panel of Table 4 shows the impact of the law on the health insurance status
of hospitalized young adults with a mental illness diagnosis. In the first column, we estimate a
5.8 percentage-point (17.7 percent) increase in the fraction of young adult mental-health-related
inpatient visits paid through private health insurance. There is also suggestive evidence of a
small decrease in the prevalence of uninsurance among mental-illness-related inpatient care. We
also find evidence of a large decline, 3.1 percentage points (9.1 percent), in mental illness visits
reimbursed by the Medicaid program. We find no meaningful impact of the law on Medicare or
on other forms of insurance payment (last two columns).

Impact of the ACA Young Adult Mandate on the Treatment Intensity of Inpatient Visits
We study treatment intensity using a DD regression model that is similar to Equation [1]
except that the unit of observation for this model is at the individual level rather than the
hospital-quarter level. In the Massachusetts context, Kolstad and Kowlaski (2012) argue that if
19

health insurance expansion alters the observable characteristics of patients who seek care, then
including these characteristics in a regression framework would blunt any estimated impact of
the reform. As a result they estimate models with and without controlling for patient
demographics and clinical characteristics and consider the model without patient characteristics
as the preferred specification. We do the same in our evaluation of the impact of the mandate on
treatment intensity. For models in which we include patient characteristics, we include a new
vector Zighst not present in Equation [1]. This vector contains patient demographics and clinical
indicators such as age, gender, race/ethnicity, whether the patient was admitted on the weekend,
Charlson Index, the number of diagnosis codes (up to nine codes), an indicator for each of 27
comorbidity measures calculated using the HCUP Comorbidity Software, and indicator variables
for Major Diagnostic Categories (MDCs).
As with our study of the number of hospitalizations, we consider all non-birth inpatient
visits (Table 5) and visits related to mental illness (Table 6). Starting in columns 1 and 2 of Table
5, we find that there is no statistically significant effect of the law on the levels or log
transformation of length of stay. There is also no effect on the number of procedures. We find
marginally statistically significant effect on total charges (but not log charges), with the
enactment and implementation showing opposite signed and small changes. Thus, our results for
total charges are sensitive to the inclusion of patient characteristics and functional form
assumption, but overall suggest minimal change.

20

In Table 6, we present the impact of the ACA mandate on intensity of mental-healthrelated inpatient visits. Across the different specifications, there are only two coefficients that are
statistically significant, and they are both significant at the 10 percent level only. Moreover, both
results are small and are sensitive to functional form (in one case the log specification is
significant while the level is not, and vice versa in the other case). Overall we find a small and
mainly statistically insignificant effect of the young adult mandate on the treatment intensity of
young adults.

VII. Heterogeneous Effect of the Mandate
Given prior research findings from Massachusetts that mental health results can vary by
exact type, and that substance use is a closely related disorder that is also highly relevant to the
young adult population, we explore this heterogeneity in analysis presented in Table 7. We
separated the MDC 19 mental health category into subcategories of depression, psychoses and
other mental illness, using the relevant International Classification of Diseases (ICD) 9 codes.
In Table 7, we see that for depression, there are sizable and statistically significant
increases in all inpatient admissions and visits through the ER. Using unreported baseline means,
the coefficient magnitudes are on the order of 8.5 percent and 11.3 percent increases. There are
also sizable insurance shifts in this category of hospitalizations, with private insurance
increasing, and uninsurance and Medicaid decreasing by similar magnitudes; other insurance
also decreases. We also observe sizable increases in psychoses admissions after implementation,

21

stemming mostly from visits through the ER. There is no statistically significant increase in other
mental illness admissions, although insurance composition shifts towards private coverage and
away from Medicaid. The health insurance shifts are not surprising given the strong negative link
between mental health and employment that prior to the law, young adults who suffer from
mental illness are likely to participate in the Medicaid program. In Table 7, we also examine
another category of admission that is of high relevance for young adults: substance abuse
admissions (Frank and McGuire, 2000; Meara et al. 2014). Somewhat surprisingly, there is no
indication of increases in inpatient admissions, although consistent with all our other findings,
we document evidence of strong private insurance gains. The lack of increase in substance use
admissions could indicate that becoming insured allows better management of care outside the
hospital for this disorder, as this is the category of care for which inpatient admissions decreased
the most in Meara et al (2014).
Another dimension of heterogeneity we explore is at the age level. Although our main
analysis uses treatment and control groups that are relatively close in age (19-25-year-olds vs.
27-29-year-olds), a closer comparison would use those just below and above the age cutoff of 26.
Specifically, we evaluate the impact of the mandate by comparing 25-year-olds to 27-year-olds.
These two age groups are likely the most similar on observable characteristics and the influence
of macroeconomic factors. We re-estimate our analysis reported in Table 3 (inpatient admissions
volume) in Table 8, and find estimates that are consistent with but larger than our main results in
Table 3. Compared to 27-year-olds and relative to the period before the law, among 25-year-

22

olds, the number of admissions increased by 5.9 percent; admissions through the ER increased
by 5.3 percent, and admissions that did not originate from the ER increased by 7.1 percent. The
corresponding numbers in Table 3 are 3.5 percent, 6 percent and 9 percent.

VIII. Further Robustness Checks
An implicit assumption we make in comparing the change in volume of inpatient
admissions for the treatment versus control group is that the relative cohort size of the two
groups does not change during our sample period. However, an alternative explanation for the
3.5-percent increase in the number of visits we estimate could be that the population of 19-to-25year-olds increased faster than the population of 25-to-29-year-olds. We verify that population
trends do not drive our results by aggregating our data to the national level (by age and time) and
dividing by population estimates available from U.S. Census Bureau from 2007 to 2011. We also
use this specification to implement the standard error solution suggested by Cameron, Gelbach,
and Miller (2008) in the presence of a small number of groups across which variation occurs. We
present these results in Appendix Table 1, along with a test of the common trends assumption for
this model. We see that the results are qualitatively very similar to those in Table 3. Statistical
significance of results in Appendix Table 1 is slightly higher in one case, but the same in all
other cases, relative to Table 3. Inpatient admissions now increase by 2.75 percent (relative to
3.5 percent earlier), and mental health admissions increase by 7.25 percent (relative to 9 percent
earlier); results for other specifications are also similar. The common trends tests also remains

23

fairly plausible, but there is now one statistic (for admissions not through the ER) that is
marginally statistically significantly different.
While in Table 8 we showed results for the 25 year old subset of the treatment group, in
Appendix Table 2 and 3, we show results for further subsets. In Appendix Table 2 we find that
among 19-22 year olds (relative to 27-29 year olds), there is a 3.9 percent increase in inpatient
admissions and a 11.3 percent increase in mental health visits. Appendix Table 3 shows that
among 23-25 year olds, relative to 27-29 year olds, there is a 2.9 percent increase in inpatient
visits and 5.8 percent increase in mental health, suggesting that there are statistically significant
effects among both younger and older segments of the treatment group. There is evidence of
common trends between treatment and control groups for all relevant statistics except one.
Last, we conduct a set of placebo tests where we estimate several additional models
falsely assuming that the reform took place in quarters prior to March 2010. For each of the 11
quarters between January 2007 and March 2010 and using data from this time period, we reestimate Equation [1] assuming a placebo date for the ACA law and create a distribution of the
results from the replications. We perform this test for both all and mental illness admissions, as
well as for our subsample analysis of 25- vs. 27-year-olds and report results in Appendix Table
4.
We first examine the mean and standard deviation of the estimates reported in Appendix
Table 4 relative to the values obtained in Tables 2, and 3 for our sample of all and mental-healthrelated admissions, for quantity of visits as well as the insurance composition of visits. When we

24

consider our sample of all admissions, only one specification out of eight has two or more
placebo results that are statistically significant at the 10-percent-or-smaller level. One
specification contains one placebo result that is statistically significant at the 10% percent level.
We note that the coefficients of placebo laws are smaller than those we obtain in Tables 3 and 4.
Among the mental health illness categories, only four out of 88 possible estimates are
statistically significantly different from zero: one at the 1-percent level, and three at the 10percent level. Since significance at the 10 percent level contains zero, we interpret our placebo
analysis as suggesting that the impact of the law that we estimate is not due to chance.
As with our trends tests, even though of estimates of the impact of the law on treatment
intensity are sensitive to functional form assumptions and are mainly not statistically significant,
we find instances of statistically significant tests for our treatment intensity variables in our
placebo analysis. In Appendix Tables 6, we show that in total there are 19 placebo results that
are statistically significant at the 5% or lower level, out of a possible 132 cases. In Appendix
Table 7, we present placebo tests for the treatment intensity of mental illness admissions. We see
here that there are 17 placebo tests that show statistically significant effects, out of a possible
132. In summary, the validity tests in this section confirm that our study design is reasonable and
that our estimates likely capture the effects of the mandate rather than the difference in trends
between the treatment and control groups. Even though the number of estimates that are
significant for our treatment intensity variables is not very far from what would be expected by

25

chance alone, we note that these are also the outcomes that show the least consistent effects due
to reform.
IX. Discussion and Conclusion
We present the first estimates of the impact of the ACA health insurance expansion on
inpatient medical care received by young adults using a nationally representative database of
inpatient hospital visits. We estimate the impact of the law on 19-25-year-olds, for whom access
to parental insurance coverage was especially poor prior to the ACA. We find evidence of
greater demand response to health insurance coverage for mental health care than for medical
care. Compared to another group of individuals who are close in age but excluded from the law
(27-29-year-olds), young adults who benefitted from the mandate increased their overall number
of non-birth inpatient visits by 3.5 percent. This result is driven mainly by admissions not
through the ER. In our exploration of the impact of the mandate on mental health visits, an
important component of inpatient care use by young adults, we find that young adults increased
their visits by 9 percent. Unlike general admissions, the increase in mental health admissions
arises mainly through the ER. We also find strong evidence that the law achieved its intended
purpose of decreasing uninsurance among young adults who use hospital-based care. The
fraction of young adult hospitalizations that is uninsured decreased by 2.9 percentage points
(12.5 percent) due to the law. Our analysis of the impact of the mandate on the intensity of
medical care shows no consistent or significant change in how long young adults stay in a
hospital, the number of procedures that are performed on them, or on hospital charges.

26

Our findings contribute to the literature on the effect of health insurance coverage on
access and medical care utilization. The general consensus in the literature is that health
insurance increases the use of medical services, including inpatient care. Our findings are
consistent with this hypothesis as we find that young adults increased their overall use of
inpatient services in response to gaining access to health insurance.
However, our results differ from the experience of Massachusetts which saw no change
in general inpatient admissions (Kolstad and Kowalski, 2012) and no change or small decreases
in use of mental health care by young adults (Meara et al 2014). We note that the health
insurance expansion we study here is much smaller than other large-scale efforts such as the
near-universal health insurance expansion in Massachusetts. In addition, we study the short-run
effect of the ACA health insurance expansion on young adults, leaving for future work the
examination of the long-run effects. The findings by Meara et al.(2014) of no change or
decreases in the use of hospital-based mental health care by young adults after the Massachusetts
health insurance reform could reflect the availability of outpatient mental health care providers in
Massachusetts that might be absent in other states. This means that the interaction of demand
and supply-side constraints could determine the long and short run impact of health insurance
expansions. Cunningham (2009) finds that shortage of mental health care providers is as much a
barrier to mental health care access as lack of health insurance coverage.
There are several other limitations to our work. Since we use hospital discharge data that
do not contain individual identifiers, we are unable to distinguish whether the increase in

27

inpatient visits we document is the result of increased frequency of visits by the same patients or
an increase in visits by new patients. We also do not observe visits to private mental health
hospitals. Future work using household- or individual-level surveys as well as more
comprehensive hospital data sets will help us better understand the mechanism behind the
increase in inpatient care use found in this study, as well as shed light on the effects of the law on
the use of care in other settings.

28

Acknowledgements
We are grateful for helpful comments from Jim Marton, Lauren Nicholas, Ben Sommers, and seminar audiences at
the Drexel University, Lehigh University, University of California Irvine, University of Kansas, Ball State
University, University of Cincinnati, University of Mississippi, University of New Mexico, Agency for Healthcare
Research and Quality, RAND, 2013 Association of Public Policy Analysis and Management conference (APPAM),
2014 Midwest Health Economics Conference (MHEC), the 23rd Annual Meeting of the Midwest Econometrics
Group, and IUPUI-IUP Mini-Conference. Contact information for corresponding author: Kosali Simon, Professor,
The School of Public and Environmental Affairs (SPEA), Indiana University, Rm 359, 1315 East Tenth Street
Bloomington, IN 47405-1701, simonkos@indiana.edu, 812-856-3850 (w)

References
1. Akosa Antwi, Y., A. S. Moriya, and K. Simon (2013). “Effects of Federal Policy to
Insure Young Adults: Evidence from the 2010 Affordable Care Act Dependent Coverage
Mandate.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 5(4): 1-28.
2. Anderson, M., C. Dobkin, and T. Gross (2012). “The Effect of Health Insurance
Coverage on the Use of Medical Services.” American Economic Journal: Economic
Policy 4(1): 1-27.
3. Anderson, M. L., C. Dobkin, and T. Gross (2014). “The Effect of Health Insurance on
Emergency Department Visits: Evidence from an Age-Based Eligibility Threshold.”
Review of Economics and Statistics vol. 96(1), 189-195.
4. Barry, C. L. and M. S. Ridgely (2008). Mental Health and Substance Abuse Insurance
Parity for Federal Employees: How did Health Plans Respond? Journal of Policy
Analysis and Management, 27(1), 155-170.
5. Bertrand M, Duﬂo E, Mullainathan S. (2004). How much should we trust differences-indifferences estimates? Quarterly Journal of Economics 119(1): 249–275
6. Cameron, A. C., J. B. Gelbach and D. L. Miller (2008). Bootstrap-based Improvements
for Inference with Clustered Errors. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 90(3), 414427.
7. Buchmueller, T. C., P. F. Cooper, M. Jacobson, and S. H. Zuvekas (2007). Parity for
whom? Exemptions and the extent of state mental health parity legislation. Health
Affairs, 26(4), w483-w487
8. Cantor, J. C., A. C. Monheit, D. DeLia, and K. Lloyd (2012). “Early Impact of the
Affordable Care Act on Health Insurance Coverage of Young Adults.” Health Services
Research 47(5): 1773-1798.
29

9. Card, D., C. Dobkin, and N. Maestas. (2008). “The Impact of Nearly Universal Insurance
Coverage on Health Care Utilization and Health: Evidence from Medicare.” American
Economic Review 98(5): 2242-2258.
10. Cawley, J., Moriya, A. S., and Simon, K. (2013). The impact of the macroeconomy on
health insurance coverage: Evidence from the great recession. Health economics.
11. Cunningham, P. J. (2009). Beyond Parity: Primary Care Physicians’ Perspectives on
Access to Mental Health Care. Health Affairs, 28(3), w490-w501.
12. Dafny, L., and J. Gruber (2005). “Public Insurance and Child Hospitalizations: Access
and Efficiency Effects.” Journal of Public Economics 89(1): 109-29.
13. Doyle Jr., J. J. (2005). “Health insurance, treatment and outcomes: using auto accidents
as health shocks.” Review of Economics and Statistics 87(2): 256-270.
14. Finkelstein, A., S. Taubman, B. Wright, M. Bernstein, J. Gruber, J. P. Newhouse, H.
Allen, and K. Baicker (2012). “The Oregon Health Insurance Experiment: Evidence from
the First Year.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 127(3):1057-1106.
15. Frank, R. G. and McGuire, T. G. (2000). Economics and Mental health. Handbook of
Health Economics, 1, 893-954.
16. Garfield, R. L., S. H. Zuvekas, J. R. Lave and J. M. Donohue (2011). The impact of
national health care reform on adults with severe mental disorders. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 168(5), 486-494.
17. Ginde, A. A., R. A. Lowe, J. L. Wiler (2012). “Health Insurance Status Change and
Emergency Department Use Among US Adults.” Archives of Internal Medicine 172(8):
642-647. doi:10.1001/archinternmed.2012.34.
18. Goldman, W., J. McCulloch and R. Sturm (1998). Costs and Use of Mental Health
Services Before and After Managed Care. Health Affairs, 17(2), 40-52.
19. Grant, J. E., and M. N. Potenza, eds. (2010). Young Adult Mental Health. Oxford
University Press.
20. Health Care Cost Institute (HCCI) 2014. Impact of the Mental Health Parity and
Addiction Equity Act on Inpatient Admissions. Available at
http://www.healthcostinstitute.org/news-and-events/issue-brief-impact-mental-healthparity-and-addiction-equity-act-inpatient-admission
21. HCUP Nationwide Inpatient Sample (NIS). Healthcare Cost and Utilization Project
(HCUP). 2006-2011. Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, Rockville, MD.
www.hcup-us.ahrq.gov/nisoverview.jsp
22. Horgan, C.M. (1986), “The Demand for Ambulatory Mental Health Services from
Specialty Providers,” Health Services Research, 21(2): 291-320.
30

23. Kessler, R. C., Berglund, P., Demler, O., Jin, R., Merikangas, K. R. and Walters, E. E.
(2005). Lifetime prevalence and age-of-onset distributions of DSM-IV disorders in the
National Comorbidity Survey Replication. Archives of General Psychiatry, 62(6), 593602.
24. Kolstad, J. T., & Kowalski, A. E. (2012). The impact of health care reform on hospital
and preventive care: Evidence from Massachusetts. Journal of Public Economics, 96(11),
909-929.
25. Kuhn, A., R. Lalive, and J Zweimüller. 2009. “The public health costs of job loss”,
Journal of Health Economics, 28(6), 1099-1115
26. Levine, P. B., R. McKnight, and S. Heep (2011). “How Effective are Public Policies to
Increase Health Insurance Coverage among Young Adults?” American Economic
Journal: Economic Policy 3(1): 129-156.
27. Luo, F., Florence, C. S., Quispe-Agnoli, M., Ouyang, L., & Crosby, A. E. (2011). Impact
of business cycles on US suicide rates, 1928-2007. American Journal of Public
Health, 101(6).
28. Maclean, J. C. (2013). The Health Effects of Leaving School in a Bad Economy. Journal
of Health Economics, 32(5), 951-964.
29. Manning, W. G., K. Wells, and J. Buchanan. 1989. Effects of Mental Health Insurance:
Evidence from the Health Insurance Experiment. Santa Monica, CA: RAND.
30. Meara, E., Golberstein, E., Zaha, R., Greenfield, S. F., Beardslee, W. R. and Busch, S. H.
(2014). Use of Hospital-Based Services among Young Adults with Behavioral Health
Diagnoses Before and After Health Insurance Expansions. JAMA Psychiatry, 71(4), 404411.
31. Miller, S. (2012). “The Effect of Insurance on Emergency Room Visits: An Analysis of
the 2006 Massachusetts Health Reform.” Journal of Public Economics 96(11): 893-908.
32. Mojtabai R. (2007) Americans’ Attitudes toward Mental Health Treatment
Seeking:1990–2003. Psychiatric Services58(5):642–51.
33. Monheit, A. C., J. C. Cantor, D. DeLia, and D. Bell (2011). “How Have State Policies to
Expand Dependent Coverage Affected the Health Insurance Status of Young Adults?”
Health Services Research 46(1): 251- 267.
34. Mulcahy, A., K. Harris, K. Finegold, A. Kellermann, L. Edelman, and B. D. Sommers
(2013). “Insurance Coverage of Emergency Care for Young Adults under Health
Reform.” New England Journal of Medicine 368(22): 2105-2112.
35. Nicholson, J. L., S. R. Collins, V. B. Mahato, E. Gould, C. Schoen, and S. D. Rustgi
(2009). “Rite of Passage? Why Young Adults Become Uninsured and How New Policies
Can Help.” August 2009 Update. New York: The Commonwealth Fund Issue Brief.
31

36. Patel, V., A. J. Flisher, S. Hetrick, and P. McGorry (2007). “Mental health of young
people: a global public-health challenge.” The Lancet 369(9569): 1302-1313.
37. Roberts, B. and Terrell, D. (2014). A cohort component analysis of the 2007-2009
recession. Monthly Labor Review.
38. Sommers, B. D., T. Buchmueller, S. L. Decker, C. Carey, and R. Kronick (2013). “The
Affordable Care Act Has Led To Significant Gains In Health Insurance And Access To
Care For Young Adults.” Health Affairs 32(1): 165-174.
39. Sommers, B. D., and R. Kronick (2012). “The Affordable Care Act and Insurance
Coverage for Young Adults.” Journal of the American Medical Association 307(9): 913914.
40. Sturm, R. (1997). How Expensive is Unlimited Mental Health Care Coverage under
Managed Care? JAMA, 278(18), 1533-1537.
41. Taube, C.A., Kessler, L.G., and Burns, B.J. (1986), “Estimating the Probability and Level
of Ambulatory Mental Health Services Use,” Health Services Research, 21(2): 321-340.
42. Tefft, Nathan. 2011. "Insights on unemployment, unemployment insurance, and mental
health." Journal of Health Economics 30.2 (2011): 258-264.
43. Yu, J. W., S. H. Adams, J. Burns, C. D. Brindis, and C. E. Irwin, Jr. (2008). “Use of
mental health counseling as adolescents become young adults.” Journal of Adolescent
Health 43(3): 268-276.
44. Weaver, C., and L. Radnofsky (2013). “New Health-Care Law's Success Rests on the
Young.” Wall Street Journal July 25, 2013. Available at
htttp://online.wsj.com/news/articles/SB1000142412788732426340457861370027332042
8 (last accessed on November 26, 2013).

32

Table 1: Summary Statistics of Treatment and Control Group
19-25 years old
Before ACA
enactment
Demographic characteristics
Age
Indicator: male
Indicator: white
Indicator: African-American
Indicator: Hispanic
Clinical Characteristics
Indicator: mental illness
Number of diagnosis codes
Indicator: admitted on weekend
Indicator: admitted through ER
Utilization measures
Length of stay (LOS)
Log of LOS
Number of procedure codes
Total charges
Log of total charges
Health insurance status
Indicator: covered by private insurance
Indicator: uninsured
Indicator: covered by Medicaid
Indicator: covered by Medicare
Indicator: covered by other insurance
Number of observations

27-29 years old

After ACA
implementation

Before ACA
enactment

After ACA
implementation

22.1
0.500
0.622
0.207
0.103

22.1
0.501
0.602
0.235
0.097

28.0
0.474
0.617
0.210
0.104

28.0
0.473
0.607
0.233
0.097

0.177
4.74
0.238
0.654

0.192
5.22
0.221
0.652

0.152
5.15
0.237
0.628

0.157
5.66
0.223
0.638

4.38
1.39
1.08
24,298
9.55

4.36
1.39
1.08
28,972
9.71

4.33
1.40
1.15
24,333
9.58

4.35
1.40
1.15
29,648
9.75

0.389
0.214
0.275
0.045
0.073
523,487

0.395
0.193
0.291
0.048
0.065
213,482

0.379
0.195
0.263
0.095
0.064
270,630

0.324
0.203
0.298
0.103
0.065
106,715

Note: Sample estimates from the NIS data, 2007-2011, using data of non-birth related admissions of young adults aged from 19-29,
except for the removal of 26 year olds who are in neither control nor treatment. Means of the variables are obtained for treatment and
control groups before ACA enactment (2007 Q1- 2010 Q1) and after ACA implementation (2010 Q4 and onward). The data from
California, Maine and Texas are excluded because precise information on age was not available. Observations in which length of stay
exceeds 90 days are excluded. The mean for the race categories is calculated using observations in which race\ethnicity variable is
available in the data. Not all states provide information on race\ethnicity for all years in the NIS dataset.

33

Table 2: Test for Equality of Pre-Reform Trends
Number of admissions and admissions by source
Non-birth Related Admissions
Number of
all
admissions
Interaction of time trend and a
dummy variable for treatment group

Number of
admissions
through ER

Number of
admissions
not through
ER

Mental Illness Admissions
Number of
Number of
admissions
Number of all
admissions
not
admissions
through ER
through
ER

-0.047

-0.050

0.003

-0.006

-0.008

0.002

(0.046)

(0.031)

(0.025)

(0.031)

(0.022)

(0.019

Fraction of Admissions by Health Insurance
Private
Insurance

Uninsured

Medicaid

Medicare

Other
Insurance

Non-birth admissions
Interaction of time trend and a
dummy variable for treatment group

0.000

-0.001

-0.002

0.001

0.002

(0.002)

(0.002)

(0.002)

(0.001)

(0.001)

Mental illness admissions
Interaction of time trend and a
dummy variable for treatment group

0.005

-0.001

-0.001

0.000

-0.002

(0.004)

(0.003)

(0.004)

(0.003)

(0.002)

Intensity of treatment
LOS

Log of LOS

Number of
procedures

Total charges

Log of total
charges

Non-birth admissions
Risk-adjustment variables (including individuals' demographic characteristics) are excluded.
Interaction of time trend and a dummy
-0.022
-0.003
-0.004
-261.9
variable for treatment group
(0.016)
(0.002)
(0.004)
(97.2)
Risk-adjustment variables are included.
Interaction of time trend and a dummy
variable for treatment group

-0.022

-0.003

(0.014)

(0.002)

*

***

-0.005

**

(0.002)

-0.002

-216.4

(0.004)

(87.4)

**

(0.002)

-0.004

85.1

0.003

**

Mental illness admissions
Risk-adjustment variables (including individuals' demographic characteristics) are excluded.
Interaction of time trend and a dummy
0.040
0.000
0.001
variable for treatment group
Risk-adjustment variables are included.
Interaction of time trend and a dummy
variable for treatment group

(0.041)

(0.004)

(0.003)

(83.0)

(0.004)

0.054

0.002

0.001

115.8

0.004

(0.041)

(0.004)

(0.003)

(83.2)

(0.004)

Note: (1) First panel: Number of observations is 95,040 for the first three columns and 34,730 for the last three columns. Second panel: Number
of observations is 70,782 for the first set of rows and 24,536 for the second set of rows. Third panel: Number of observations in the first set of
rows is 731,727 in the first four columns and 729,116 in the last two columns, and the number of observations in the second set of rows is
122,546 in the first four columns and 122,275 in the last two columns. (2) First and second panels: Quarterly hospital-age level variables are
calculated, using young adults aged from 19-29, except for the removal of 26 year olds who are in neither control nor treatment. Third panel:
Individual level variables are used. (3) Data: The NIS data for the period from the first quarter of 2007 to the fourth quarter of 2009, which is

34

prior to the passage of the ACA in March 2010. The data from California, Maine and Texas are excluded because precise information on age was
not available. Observations in which length of stay exceeds 90 days are excluded. (4) Dependent variables in the first panel - column 1: number
of all non-birth related admissions; column 2: number of non-birth related admissions originated from the ER; column 3: number of non-birthrelated admissions that did not originate from the ER; column 4: number of total mental illness admissions; column 5: number of mental illness
admissions originated from the ER; and column 6: number of mental illness admissions that did not originate from the ER. Second panel column 1: ratio of non-birth admissions covered by private health insurance; column 2: ratio of uninsured non-birth admissions; column 3: ratio
of non-birth admissions covered by Medicaid; column 4: ratio of non-birth admissions covered by Medicare; and column 5: ratio of non-birth
admissions covered by other insurance. Third panel - column 1: length of stay; column 2: log of the sum of length of stay and one; column 3:
number of procedure codes (up to six codes); column 4: total charges; and column 5: log of the sum of total charges and one. (5) Cells of the table
contain: coefficients, and standard errors in parentheses. Coefficients are from the interaction of a dummy variable for treatment group and a
linear measure for time trend (number of quarters since the first quarter of 2007), which shows whether there was a different time trend for the
control vs. the treatment group in the period prior to policy enactment. (6) Other regressors are a linear time trend, a dummy variable for the
treatment group, and all other explanatory variables included in our main specification. (7) Standard errors are clustered at the hospital level.

35

Table 3: Effect of Mandate on the Number and Sources of Admissions
All non-birth admission
Number of
all
admissions
ACA Enactment Effect
(2010 Q2-Q3)
ACA Implementation Effect
(2010 Q4-)
Dependent Variable Means
Treatment, before ACA enactment
Control, before
Treatment, after ACA implementation
Control, after

0.124
(0.117)
0.253
(0.113)
7.27
8.76
7.70
8.99

**

Number of
admissions
through ER

Mental illness admissions

Number of
admissions not
through ER

0.047
(0.078)
0.092
(0.076)

0.077
(0.064)
0.162
(0.061)

4.75
5.50
5.02
5.73

2.52
3.26
2.69
3.26

***

Number of
admissions

Number of
admissions
through ER

0.032
(0.091)
0.315
(0.086)

-0.007
(0.067)
0.234
(0.061)

3.52
3.64
4.08
3.89

***

2.09
2.15
2.41
2.25

***

Number of
admissions
not through
ER
0.039
(0.052)
0.081
(0.048)

*

1.43
1.49
1.67
1.65

Notes: (1) Number of observations is 158,740 in the first three columns and 57,930 in the last three columns. (2) Quarterly hospital-age level variables are calculated using the non-birth related admissions
(for columns 1-3) and mental illness admissions (for columns 4-6) of young adults aged from 19-29, except for the removal of 26 year olds who are in neither control nor treatment. (3) Cells of the table
contain: coefficients and standard errors in parentheses. Coefficients in the first row are from the interaction of a dummy variable for treatment group (19-25 years old) and a dummy variable for the period
after ACA enactment but before implementation (the second and third quarters of 2010); coefficients in the second row are from the interaction of a dummy variable for treatment group and a dummy
variable for the period after ACA implementation (the fourth quarter of 2010 and onwards). (4) Data: The NIS data from 2007 to 2011. The data from California, Maine and Texas are excluded because
precise information on age was not available. Observations in which length of stay exceeds 90 days are excluded. (5) Dependent variables— column 1: number of all non-birth related admissions; column 2:
number of non-birth related admissions originated from the ER; column 3: number of non-birth-related admissions that did not originate from the ER; column 4: number of total mental illness admissions;
column 5: number of mental illness admissions originated from the ER; and column 6: number of mental illness admissions that did not originate from the ER. (6) Other regressors are an indicator for each
age, year fixed effects, quarterly fixed effects, state-specific linear time trend, hospital-specific fixed effects, quarterly national-level unemployment rate, interaction of unemployment and an indicator for
each age. (7) Means of dependent variables are obtained for treatment and control groups before ACA enactment (2007 Q1- 2010 Q1) and after ACA implementation (2010 Q4 and onward). See Note (7)
under Table 2. *** Significant at the 1 percent level. ** Significant at the 5 percent level. * Significant at the 10 percent level.

Table 4: Fraction of Admissions Insured: Non-Birth Related Admissions and Mental Illness Admissions
All non-births admissions
Private
Insurance
ACA Enactment Effect
(2010 Q2-Q3)
ACA Implementation Effect
(2010 Q4-)
Dependent Variable Means
Treatment, before ACA enactment
Control, before
Treatment, after ACA implementation
Control, after

ACA Enactment Effect
(2010 Q2-Q3)
ACA Implementation Effect
(2010 Q4-)
Dependent Variable Means
Treatment, before ACA enactment
Control, before
Treatment, after ACA implementation
Control, after

0.021
(0.007)
0.060
(0.005)

***
***

Uninsured
-0.010
(0.006)
-0.029
(0.004)

*
***

0.392
0.394
0.398
0.335

0.228
0.196
0.211
0.210

Private
Insurance

Uninsured

0.006
(0.011)
0.058
(0.009)
0.326
0.273
0.346
0.224

***

-0.001
(0.008)
-0.013
(0.007)
0.179
0.165
0.170
0.179

Medicaid
0.005
(0.006)
-0.020
(0.005)

***

Medicare
-0.012
(0.004)
-0.005
(0.003)

0.265
0.256
0.276
0.291
Mental illness admissions

*

Medicaid
0.006
(0.011)
-0.031
(0.009)
0.341
0.323
0.340
0.358

***

***

0.040
0.086
0.042
0.093

Medicare

Other
Insurance
-0.003
(0.003)
-0.006
(0.003)

**

0.070
0.062
0.066
0.064
Other
Insurance

-0.006
(0.009)
-0.003
(0.008)

-0.004
(0.006)
-0.009
(0.005)

0.067
0.169
0.060
0.161

0.081
0.064
0.076
0.070

*

Notes: (1) Number of observations is 117,771 in the first set of rows and 40,469 in the second set of rows. (2) Quarterly hospital-age level variables are calculated using the non-birth related admissions (for
the first panel) and mental illness admissions (for the second panel) of young adults aged from 19-29, except for the removal of 26 year olds who are in neither control nor treatment. (3) Dependent
variables—column 1: ratio of admissions covered by private health insurance; column 2: ratio of uninsured admissions; column 3: ratio of admissions covered by Medicaid; column 4: ratio of admissions
covered by Medicare; and column 5: ratio of admissions covered by other insurance. (4) See Note (7) under Table 2 and Notes (3), (4), (6) and (7) under Table 3. *** Significant at the 1 percent level. **
Significant at the 5 percent level. * Significant at the 10 percent level.

37

Table 5: Effect of Mandate on Intensity of Treatment for All Non-births Admissions

LOS

Log of LOS

Risk-adjustment variables (including individuals' demographic characteristics) are excluded.
ACA Enactment Effect (2010 Q2-Q3)
0.021
0.002
(0.046)
(0.005)
ACA Implementation Effect (2010 Q4-)
-0.009
0.000
(0.037)
(0.005)
Risk-adjustment variables are included.
ACA Enactment Effect (2010 Q2-Q3)
0.012
0.002
(0.043)
(0.005)
ACA Implementation Effect (2010 Q4-)
-0.027
-0.003
(0.031)
(0.004)
Dependent Variable Means
Treatment, before ACA enactment
4.38
1.39
Control, before
4.33
1.40
Treatment, after ACA implementation
4.36
1.39
Control, after
4.35
1.40

Number of
procedures

Total charges

*

Log of total
charges

0.018
(0.012)
-0.003
(0.009)

730.5
(410.2)
-537.5
(304.2)

0.007
(0.011)
0.008
(0.007)

530.9
(369.7)
-322.0
(259.6)

0.004
(0.006)
-0.002
(0.005)

1.08
1.15
1.08
1.15

24,298
24,333
28,972
29,648

9.54
9.58
9.71
9.75

*

0.008
(0.007)
-0.009
(0.006)

Notes: (1) Number of observations is 1,246,517 in the first four columns and 1,242,770 in the last two columns. (2) Observations are non-birth-related admissions of young adults aged from 19-29, except for
the removal of 26 year olds who are in neither control nor treatment. Observations in which length of stay exceeds 90 days are excluded. (3) Dependent variables—column 1: length of stay; column 2: log of
the sum of length of stay and one; column 3: number of procedure codes (up to six codes); column 4: total charges; and column 5: log of the sum of total charges and one. (4) Other regressors - an indicator
for the period after ACA enactment but before implementation, an indicator for the period after ACA implementation, an indicator for treatment group, year-specific fixed effects, quarter-specific fixed
effects, quarterly state-specific linear time trends, hospital-specific fixed effects, quarterly national unemployment rate, and interaction of unemployment rate and an indicator for each age are included in the
both sets of regressions. Risk-adjusted variables that are included in the second set of the regressions are an indicator for each year of age, gender, race/ethnicity, an indicator for admission occurred on the
weekend, Charlson Index, the number of diagnosis codes (up to nine codes), an indicator for each of 27 comorbidity measures obtained by the HCUP Comorbidity Software, and indicator variables for major
diagnostic categories. (5) See Note (7) under Table 2 and Notes (3), (4), (5) and (7) under Table 3. *** Significant at the 1 percent level. ** Significant at the 5 percent level. * Significant at the 10 percent
level.

38

Table 6: Effect of Mandate on Intensity of Treatment for Mental Illness Admissions
LOS

Log of LOS

Risk-adjustment variables (including individuals' demographic characteristics) are excluded.
ACA Enactment Effect (2010 Q2-Q3)
-0.147
-0.011
(0.131)
(0.011)
ACA Implementation Effect (2010 Q4-)
-0.129
-0.015
(0.103)
(0.009)
Risk-adjustment variables are included.
ACA Enactment Effect (2010 Q2-Q3)
-0.154
-0.011
(0.124)
(0.011)
ACA Implementation Effect (2010 Q4-)
-0.160
-0.018
(0.099)
(0.009)
Dependent Variable Means
Treatment, before ACA enactment
6.49
1.73
Control, before
6.63
1.76
Treatment, after ACA implementation
6.40
1.73
Control, after
6.64
1.76

**

Number of
procedures

Log of total
charges

Total charges

-0.007
(0.011)
0.008
(0.007)

-130.6
(284.8)
-297.7
(220.6)

-0.005
(0.013)
-0.003
(0.010)

-0.008
(0.011)
0.008
(0.007)

-150.2
(273.3)
-362.6
(212.5)

-0.006
(0.012)
-0.008
(0.009)

0.24
0.27
0.26
0.27

13,135
13,399
15,093
15,568

*

9.06
9.10
9.23
9.26

Notes: (1) Number of observations is 214,785 in the first four columns and 214,403 in the last two columns. (2) Observations are mental illness admissions of young adults aged from 19-29, except for the
removal of 26 year olds who are in neither control nor treatment. Observations in which length of stay exceeds 90 days are excluded. (3) Other regressors are the same as those listed in Note (4) under Table
4 except that we include an indicator variable for DRGs instead of an indicator variable for major diagnostic categories. (4) See Note (7) under Table 2, Notes (3), (4), (5) and (7) under Table 3, and Note (3)
under Table 4. *** Significant at the 1 percent level. ** Significant at the 5 percent level. * Significant at the 10 percent level.

39

Table 7: Effect of Mandate on Mental Illness Admissions Subcategories, and Substance Abuse Admissions
Number of
admissions
not through
ER

Number of
admissions

Number of
admissions
through ER

0.010

-0.020

0.029

-0.005

0.014

(0.041)

(0.030)

(0.028)

(0.017)

(0.013)

0.024

0.092

Private
Insurance

Uninsured

Medicare

Other
Insurance

-0.007

0.0015

-0.005

(0.018)

(0.0090)

(0.009)

0.0002

-0.018

Medicaid

Mental illness admissions
Depression
ACA Enactment Effect
(2010 Q2-Q3)
ACA Implementation Effect
(2010 Q4-)
Psychoses
ACA Enactment Effect
(2010 Q2-Q3)
ACA Implementation Effect
(2010 Q4-)
Other mental illness
ACA Enactment Effect
(2010 Q2-Q3)
ACA Implementation Effect
(2010 Q4-)
Substance abuse
admissions
ACA Enactment Effect
(2010 Q2-Q3)
ACA Implementation Effect
(2010 Q4-)

0.096

**

0.072

***

***

-0.035

***

-0.035

***

(0.037)

(0.027)

(0.022)

(0.014)

(0.011)

(0.013)

(0.007)

(0.007)

-0.032

-0.017

-0.015

0.002

0.013

0.003

-0.0015

-0.015

(0.058)

(0.042)

(0.032)

(0.014)

(0.012)

(0.018)

(0.0156)

(0.009)

0.022

0.035

0.001

-0.025

-0.0109

-0.001

(0.009)

(0.013)

(0.012)

(0.006)

0.001

-0.0027

-0.005

(0.014)

(0.019)

(0.0136)

(0.011)

-0.018

-0.038

0.0008

-0.013

(0.011)

(0.014)

(0.010)

(0.008)

-0.020

-0.0201

(0.019)

(0.0097)

(0.011)

-0.0092

-0.005

(0.007)

(0.008)

0.167

***

0.145

***

(0.049)

(0.037)

(0.029)

(0.011)

0.055

0.030

0.025

0.033

(0.041)

(0.030)

(0.027)

(0.017)

0.052

0.017

0.035

(0.033)

(0.024)

(0.020)

(0.014)

0.082

0.042

0.039

0.065

(0.060)

(0.031)

(0.046)

(0.019)

0.064

0.030

0.035

0.102

(0.047)

(0.028)

(0.033)

(0.015)

*

0.070

***

*
***

***

-0.024

-0.038

*

**

(0.018)
***

-0.049
(0.014)

***

-0.039
(0.015)

*

***

***

**

**

*

0.011

Note: (1) Number of observations is 57,930 in the first three columns and 27,924 in the last five columns in the first three panels. Number of observations is 62,970 in the first three columns and 22,295 in
the last five columns in the last panel. (2) Quarterly hospital-age level variables are calculated using admissions related to each condition of young adults aged from 19-29, except for the removal of 26 year
olds who are in neither control nor treatment. (3) Dependent variables— column 1: number of admissions; column 2: number of admissions originated from the ER; column 3: number of admissions that did
not originate from the ER; column 4: ratio of admissions covered by private health insurance; column 5: ratio of uninsured admissions; column 6: ratio of admissions covered by Medicaid; column 7: ratio of
admissions covered by Medicare; and column 8: ratio of admissions covered by other insurance. (3) See Note (7) under Table 2 and Notes (3), (4), (6) and (7) under Table 3.

40

Table 8: Effect of the Mandate on the Number and Sources of All Non-birth Admissions among 25 and 27 years old
Number of
admissions
ACA Enactment Effect
(2010 Q2-Q3)
ACA Implementation Effect
(2010 Q4-)
Dependent Variable Means
Treatment, before ACA enactment
Control, before
Treatment, after ACA implementation
Control, after

0.168
(0.152)
0.470
(0.119)
7.90
8.53
8.25
8.52

***

Number of
admissions
through ER
0.039
(0.108)
0.273
(0.092)
5.14
5.41
5.40
5.47

***

Number of
admissions
not through
ER
0.129
(0.094)
0.197
(0.066)

***

2.76
3.13
2.85
3.04

Notes: (1) Number of observations is 31,748. (2) Quarterly hospital-age level variables are calculated using the non-birth related admissions of young adults aged 25 and 27. (2) Dependent variables—
column 1: number of all non-birth related admissions; column 2: number of non-birth related admissions originated from the ER; and column 3: number of non-birth-related admissions that did not originate
from the ER. (3) See Note (7) under Table 2 and Notes (3), (4), (6) and (7) under Table 3. *** Significant at the 1 percent level. ** Significant at the 5 percent level. * Significant at the 10 percent level.

41

Figure 1: Number of Admissions

Notes: (1) Sample estimates from the NIS data, using data from 2007 to 2011. (2) The solid line indicates number of admissions among 19-25-year-olds per hospital, and the dashed line indicates number of
admissions among 27-29-year-olds per hospital. (3) The first vertical line indicates the first quarter of 2010 when the ACA was passed, the second vertical line indicates the third quarter of 2010 when the
dependent coverage mandate was implemented, and the third vertical line indicates the first quarter of 2011 when most new insurance plan years start after the implementation of the mandate.

42

Figure 2: Percent of Admissions Insured

Notes: (1) The solid line indicates the mean of the percent of admissions for each insurance type among 19-25-year-olds at the hospital level, and the dashed line indicates mean of the percent of admissions
for each insurance type among 27-29-year-olds at the hospital level. (2) See Notes (1) and (3) under Figure 1.

43

Figure 3: Treatment Intensity of Non-birth Admissions

Notes: (1) The solid line indicates the mean of each outcome among 19-25-year-olds admitted for non-birth related conditions, and the dashed line indicates mean of each outcome among 27-29-year-olds
admitted for non-birth related conditions. (2) See Notes (1) and (3) under Figure 1.

44

Figure 4: Treatment Intensity of Mental Illness Admissions

Notes: (1) The solid line indicates the mean of each outcome among 19-25-year-olds admitted for mental illness, and the dashed line indicates mean of each outcome among 27-29-year-olds admitted for
mental illness. (2) See Notes (1) and (3) under Figure 1.

45

Appendix Table 1: DD Results using Aggregated Quarterly Data and Wild Cluster Bootstrap-t Procedure
Effect of Mandate on the Number and Sources of Admissions
Non-birth Related
Number of
all
admissions

Number of
admissions
through
ER

Mental Illness
Number of
admissions
not through
ER

Number of
admissions

Number of
admissions
through ER

Number of
admissions
not through
ER

ACA Enactment Effect

0.046
-0.003
0.049
0.004
-0.009
0.013
(2010 Q2-Q3)
(0.602)
(0.876)
(0.532)
(0.882)
(0.508)
(0.256)
ACA Implementation Effect
0.186 ***
0.050
0.136 ***
0.087 ***
0.067 ***
0.021
(2010 Q4-)
(0.002)
(0.204)
(0.002)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.078)
Dependent Variable Means
Treatment, before ACA enactment
6.74
4.42
2.33
1.20
0.71
0.48
Control, before
8.42
5.30
3.12
1.28
0.76
0.52
Treatment, after ACA implementation
6.72
4.38
2.35
1.29
0.77
0.53
Control, after
8.15
5.19
2.96
1.29
0.74
0.54
Notes: (1) The number of observations is 200. (2) Outcome variables are the number of admissions per 1,000 people for each age per
quarter. (3) P-values are in parentheses. We cluster on year-quarter and perform wild cluster bootstrap-t test with 999 replications,
following Cameron, Gelbach and Miller (2008).

*

Test for Equality of Pre-Reform Trends for Number of Admissions
Non-birth Related Admissions
Number of
Number of
Number of
admissions
admissions
all
through
not through
admissions
ER
ER
Interaction of time trend and a
dummy variable for treatment group

0.015
(0.022)

-0.009
(0.016)

0.024
(0.013)

*

Mental Illness Admissions
Number of
Number of
Number of
admissions
all
admissions
not through
admissions
through ER
ER
0.003
(0.008)

Notes: (1) The number of observations is 200. (2) See Notes (2) and (3) under the panel above.

46

0.000
(0.006)

0.003
(0.005)

Appendix Table 2: 19-22 yrs old vs 27-29 yrs old: Extensive Margin Results and Trend Test
Effect of Mandate on the Number and Sources of Admissions
Non-birth Related
Number of all
admissions
ACA Enactment Effect
(2010 Q2-Q3)
ACA Implementation Effect
(2010 Q4-)
Dependent Variable Means
Treatment, before ACA enactment
Control, before
Treatment, after ACA implementation
Control, after

0.170
(0.144)
0.276
(0.142)

Number of
admissions
through ER

Mental Illness
Number of
admissions not
through ER

0.073
(0.096)
0.079
(0.095)

*

6.98
8.76
7.48
8.99

4.56
5.50
4.83
5.73

0.097
(0.078)
0.197
(0.076)

***

2.43
3.26
2.65
3.26

Number of
admissions
0.070
(0.108)
0.398
(0.099)

3.51
3.64
4.20
3.89

***

Number of
admissions
through ER
0.047
(0.080)
0.280
(0.072)

2.07
2.15
2.47
2.25

***

Number of
admissions
not through
ER
0.023
(0.061)
0.118
(0.053)

**

1.44
1.49
1.74
1.65

Notes: (1) Number of observations is 111,118 in the first three columns and 40,551 in the last three columns. (2) Quarterly hospital-age level variables are calculated using the non-birth
related admissions (for columns 1-3) and mental illness admissions (for columns 4-6) of young adults aged from 19-22, and 27-29 year olds. (3) Cells of the table contain: coefficients
and standard errors in parentheses. Coefficients in the first row are from the interaction of a dummy variable for treatment group (19-22 years old) and a dummy variable for the period
after ACA enactment but before implementation (the second and third quarters of 2010); coefficients in the second row are from the interaction of a dummy variable for treatment group
and a dummy variable for the period after ACA implementation (the fourth quarter of 2010 and onwards). (4) See Note (7) under Table 2 and Notes (4) –(7) under Table 3.

Test for Equality of Pre-Reform Trends for Number of Admissions
Non-birth Related Admissions
Number of all
admissions
Interaction of time trend and a
dummy variable for treatment group

-0.038
(0.056)

Number of
admissions
through ER

Number of
admissions not
through ER

-0.047
(0.038)

0.008
(0.029)

Mental Illness Admissions
Number of
Number of
Number of all
admissions
admissions
admissions
not through
through ER
ER
0.004
(0.037)

-0.005
(0.025)

0.009
(0.023)

Notes: (1) Number of observations is 66,528 in the first three columns and 24,311 in the last three columns. (2) See Notes (3), (5), (6) and (7) under Table 2, Note (5) under Table 3, Note (2) under the panel
above.

47

Appendix Table 3: 23-25 yrs old vs 27-29 yrs old: Extensive Margin Results and Trend Test
Effect of Mandate on the Number and Sources of Admissions
Non-birth Related

ACA Enactment Effect
(2010 Q2-Q3)
ACA Implementation Effect
(2010 Q4-)
Dependent Variable Means
Treatment, before ACA enactment
Control, before
Treatment, after ACA implementation
Control, after

Number of
all
admissions

Number of
admissions
through ER

0.063
(0.104)
0.223
(0.093)

0.012
(0.074)
0.108
(0.065)

7.64
8.76
8.00
8.99

**

*

5.00
5.50
5.26
5.73

Mental Illness
Number of
admissions
not through
ER

0.051
(0.059)
0.115
(0.053)

**

2.64
3.26
2.74
3.26

Number of
admissions
-0.018
(0.096)
0.205
(0.089)

3.52
3.64
3.92
3.89

**

Number of
admissions
through ER
-0.079
(0.070)
0.173
(0.062)

2.10
2.15
2.33
2.25

***

Number of
admissions
not through
ER
0.061
(0.057)
0.033
(0.056)

1.42
1.49
1.58
1.65

Notes: (1) Number of observations is 95,244 in the first three columns and 34,758 in the last three columns. (2) Quarterly hospital-age level variables are calculated using the nonbirth related admissions (for columns 1-3) and mental illness admissions (for columns 4-6) of young adults aged from 23-29, except for the removal of 26 year olds who are in
neither control nor treatment. (3) Cells of the table contain: coefficients and standard errors in parentheses. Coefficients in the first row are from the interaction of a dummy variable
for treatment group (23-25 years old) and a dummy variable for the period after ACA enactment but before implementation (the second and third quarters of 2010); coefficients in
the second row are from the interaction of a dummy variable for treatment group and a dummy variable for the period after ACA implementation (the fourth quarter of 2010 and
onwards). (4) See Note (7) under Table 2 and Notes (4) – (7) under Table 3.

Test for Equality of Pre-Reform Trends for Number of Admissions
Non-birth Related Admissions
Number of
Number of
Number of
admissions
all
admissions
not through
admissions
through ER
ER
Interaction of time trend and a
dummy variable for treatment group

-0.060
(0.039)

-0.055
(0.027)

**

-0.005
(0.022)

Mental Illness Admissions
Number of
Number of
Number of all
admissions
admissions
admissions
not through
through ER
ER
-0.020
(0.032)

-0.011
(0.023)

-0.008
(0.020)

Notes: (1) Number of observations is 57,024 in the first three columns and 20,838 in the last three columns. (2) See Notes (3), (5), (6) and (7) under Table 2, Note (5) under Table 3, Note (2) under the panel
above.

48

Appendix Table 4: Effects of Placebo Laws on the Number of Admissions
Number of coefficient
estimates that are significant
in the placebo law regressions
(out of 11 estimates for each
row)

Distribution of the
coefficients of the
placebo laws

Mean

Standard
deviation

1%
level

5%
level

Estimated effects in the main
specification
Enactment
effect (2010
Q2-Q3)

10%
level

Implementation
effect (2010
Q4-)

Non-birth related Admissions
Number of total admissions

-0.026

0.114

0

0

0

0.124

0.253

Number of admissions through ER

**

-0.028

0.119

1

0

2

0.047

0.092

Number of admissions not through ER

0.002

0.056

0

0

0

0.000

0.004

0

0

0

0.162
0.060

***

Rate of private health insurance

0.077
0.021

0

-0.010

-0.029

***

-0.020

***

Rate of uninsured

0.000

0.004

0

0

***
*

***

Rate of Medicaid

-0.002

0.005

0

0

0

0.005

Rate of Medicare

0.001

0.004

0

0

0

-0.012

Rate of other insurance

0.001

0.004

0

0

1

-0.003

-0.006

**

Mental Illness Admissions
Number of total admissions

0.000

0.072

0

0

0

0.032

0.315

***

-0.008

0.056

0

0

0

-0.007

0.234

***

0.009

0.044

0

0

0

0.039

0.081

*

1

0.006

0.058

***

-0.013

*
***

Number of admissions through ER
Number of admissions not through ER
Rate of private health insurance

0.005

0.013

0

0

***

-0.005

Rate of uninsured

-0.001

0.014

1

0

0

-0.001

Rate of Medicaid

-0.002

0.014

0

0

0

0.006

-0.031

Rate of Medicare

-0.001

0.012

0

0

1

-0.006

-0.003

1

-0.004

-0.009

Rate of other insurance

-0.001

0.009

0

0

*

Note: (1) Data: The NIS data for the period from the first quarter of 2007 to the fourth quarter of 2009, which is prior to the passage of the ACA in March 2010. The data from California, Maine and Texas
are excluded because precise information on age was not available. (2) We select each possible quarter between the second quarter of 2007 and the fourth quarter of 2009 one at a time. We then estimate the
main model using each separate placebo date for defining the “Implement” variable. We show here the means and standard deviations of the coefficients we obtain. (3) The last two columns repeat estimates
from Tables 3 and 4 for comparison.

49

Appendix Table 5: Effects of Placebo Laws on Treatment Intensity, Non-Birth Related Admissions
Number of coefficient
estimates that are significant
in the placebo law regressions
(out of 11 estimates for each
row)

Distribution of the
coefficients of the
placebo laws

Mean

Standard
deviation

1%
level

5%
level

10%
level

Estimated effects in the main
specification
Enactment
effect (2010
Q2-Q3)

Implementation
effect (2010
Q4-)

Risk-adjustment variables (including individuals' demographic characteristics) are excluded.
Length of stay (LOS)
-0.017
0.047
0
0

0

0.021

-0.009

Log of LOS

-0.001

0.008

0

1

0

0.002

0.000

Number of procedures

-0.003

0.017

0

1

0

0.018

-0.003

Total charges

-171.2

567.3

1

2

1

730.5

Log of total charges

-0.002

0.015

2

3

0

0.008

-0.009

Risk-adjustment variables are included.
Length of stay (LOS)

-0.017

0.046

0

0

0

0.012

-0.027

**

Log of LOS

-0.002

0.008

0

2

1

0.002

-0.003

**

Number of procedures

-0.002

0.013

0

1

0

0.007

0.008

Total charges

-152.9

436.2

0

2

1

530.9

-322.0

Log of total charges

-0.002

0.014

1

4

0

0.004

-0.002

Note: (1) See Notes (1) and (2) under Appendix Table 4. (2) The last two columns repeat estimates from Table 5 for comparison.

50

*

-537.5

*

Appendix Table 6: Effects of Placebo Laws on Treatment Intensity, Mental Illness Admissions
Number of coefficient
estimates that are significant
in the placebo law regressions
(out of 11 estimates for each
row)

Distribution of the
coefficients of the
placebo laws

Mean

Standard
deviation

1%
level

5%
level

Estimated effects in the main
specification
Enactment
effect (2010
Q2-Q3)

10%
level

Implementation
effect (2010
Q4-)

Risk-adjustment variables (including individuals' demographic characteristics) are excluded.
Length of stay (LOS)
0.019
0.196
0
0

0

-0.147

-0.129

Log of LOS

0.001

0.017

0

0

1

-0.011

-0.015

Number of procedures

0.001

0.016

1

1

0

-0.007

0.008

Total charges

63.9

357.6

0

1

0

-130.6

-297.7

Log of total charges

0.003

0.024

0

1

0

-0.005

-0.003

Risk-adjustment variables are included.
Length of stay (LOS)

0.026

0.238

0

0

1

-0.154

-0.160

Log of LOS

0.002

0.016

0

1

0

-0.011

-0.018

Number of procedures

0.001

0.016

1

1

0

-0.008

0.008

79.7

399.6

0

1

1

-150.2

-362.6

0.004

0.023

1

1

2

-0.006

-0.008

Total charges
Log of total charges

Note: (1) See Notes (1) and (2) under Appendix Table 4. (2) The last two columns repeat estimates from Table 6 for comparison.

51

**
*

