NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PREMIUM TRANSPARENCY IN THE MEDICARE ADVANTAGE MARKET:
IMPLICATIONS FOR PREMIUMS, BENEFITS, AND EFFICIENCY
Karen Stockley
Thomas McGuire
Christopher Afendulis
Michael E. Chernew
Working Paper 20208
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20208
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2014

This research was supported by a grant from the National Institute on Aging (Grant No. P01 AG032952),
and by the Marshall J. Seidman Program in Health Economics in the Department of Health Care Policy
at Harvard Medical School. Stockley gratefully acknowledges support from the National Science Foundation
Graduate Research Fellowship under Grant No. DGE-1144152. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w20208.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Karen Stockley, Thomas McGuire, Christopher Afendulis, and Michael E. Chernew. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Premium Transparency in the Medicare Advantage Market: Implications for Premiums, Benefits,
and Efficiency
Karen Stockley, Thomas McGuire, Christopher Afendulis, and Michael E. Chernew
NBER Working Paper No. 20208
June 2014
JEL No. I11
ABSTRACT
In the Medicare Advantage (MA) market, private health insurers compete to offer plans with the most
attractive premium and benefit package. Medicare provides a subsidy, based on a "benchmark payment
rate", for each Medicare beneficiary a plan enrolls. We investigate how this subsidy, the primary policy
lever in the market, affects the equilibrium premiums and benefits of MA plans. We exploit variation
in benchmark payment rates within plans over time, coming from rebasing years where benchmark
changes differed across areas in ways that were plausibly exogenous, to determine empirically how
plan premiums and benefit generosity respond to changes in benchmarks. We find that premiums do
not respond to changes in the benchmark payment rate on average but that insurers do pass through
a portion of the benchmark increase by increasing plan benefit generosity.
We argue that the way premium information is communicated to consumers influences the way in
which plans pass through subsidy dollars and can account for the empirical results. More specifically,
institutional features make it difficult for consumers to observe a large component of the plan premium,
leading to a lack of demand response to premium reductions below the premium charged by traditional
Medicare (the fee-for-service Part B premium). When demand does not respond to lower premiums,
plans have an incentive to pass-through cost subsidies to consumers via more generous benefits that
consumers may not value at cost, creating an inefficiently high level of benefit generosity. Our results
provide evidence that a lack of premium transparency in the MA market may distort the combination
of premium levels and benefit generosity offered in equilibrium, resulting in some degree of inefficiently
high benefits. We conclude by discussing changes to the choice environment that would increase premium
transparency and potentially soften the premium rigidities we find.
Karen Stockley
Department of Economics
Harvard University
kstockley@fas.harvard.edu
Thomas McGuire
Department of Health Care Policy
Harvard Medical School
180 Longwood Avenue
Boston, MA 02115
and NBER
mcguire@hcp.med.harvard.edu

Christopher Afendulis
Department of Health Care Policy
Harvard Medical School
180 Longwood Avenue
Boston, MA 02115
afendulis@hcp.med.harvard.edu
Michael E. Chernew
Harvard Medical School
Dept. of Health Care Policy
180 Longwood Avenue
Boston, MA 02115
and NBER
chernew@hcp.med.harvard.edu

1

Introduction

The Medicare program provides health insurance coverage to nearly 50 million aged and disabled
individuals in the United States. Medicare beneficiaries have the option of enrolling in a private
health insurance plan through the Medicare Advantage (MA) market as an alternative to traditional, fee-for-service (FFS) Medicare coverage. In 2013, 29% of beneficiaries chose to enroll in
an MA plan (Gold et al., 2013). These private plans are heavily subsidized by Medicare, with the
federal government spending $123 billion in payments to these plans in 2012 (Congressional Budget
Office, 2013), an amount estimated to be 7% greater than what the government would have spent
on care for these beneficiaries had they chosen to remain in FFS Medicare in that year (Medicare
Payment Advisory Commission, 2012).
Insurers have considerable flexibility in designing plans to offer on the MA market. Plans differ
in the premium charged to consumers, the provider network, and the benefit generosity, provided
the benefits are at least as generous as those in FFS Medicare. Plan choices over these dimensions
determine the menu of plans available to consumers in an area. The key policy lever available to
the government to influence plan premiums, benefits, and enrollment is the “benchmark payment
rate” or simply the benchmark. Prior studies have shown that higher benchmark payment rates are
associated with higher enrollment and a greater number of plans participating in the MA market
(McGuire et al., 2011). However, little is known about how higher benchmark payments are divided
among lower premiums, more generous benefits, and higher plan profits, and whether the division
is efficient.
This paper makes two contributions. First, we estimate the response of plan premiums and benefit generosity to changes in benchmark payment rates. Changes to benchmark payment rates
are frequently discussed as a means of controlling Medicare Advantage program costs, and the
way in which these changes affect premiums and benefit generosity are a first-order concern. Understanding how government subsidies influence equilibrium premiums and benefit generosity in
private insurance markets is also of interest for understanding competitive outcomes in both the
MA market and other regulated, subsidized markets for private health insurance including the new
state insurance exchanges established under the Affordable Care Act. To estimate how plan premiums and benefit generosity respond to changes in benchmarks we exploit variation in benchmark
payment rates within plans over time, coming from payment “rebasing” years when benchmark
changes differed across areas in ways that were plausibly exogenous. We find that on average plan
premiums do not respond to increases in benchmark payment rates, but that benefits do increase.
Second, we identify an important feature of the choice environment that explains why plans pass on
additional subsidy dollars in the form of more generous benefits, rather than lower premiums. As we
explain in more detail later, FFS Medicare and MA plan premiums are presented to beneficiaries
2

in such a way that plan premium reductions below the level of the premium charged by FFS
Medicare, known as the Part B premium, are not salient to consumers, leading to a sharp drop-off
in the premium elasticity of demand at this point. This behavior can be represented with a demand
curve “kinked” at the FFS Medicare Part B premium. The kinked demand model implies that profit
maximizing MA plans price at the kink, for a wide range of marginal costs, benchmark payment
rates, and consumer preferences. Consistent with this theory, more than half of MA plans charge
a premium exactly equal to the FFS Medicare Part B premium. We argue that this institutional
feature causes premiums to under-respond to changes in benchmarks and creates incentives for
some consumers to select plans with inefficiently high premiums and benefits. We conclude by
discussing simple and inexpensive changes to the choice environment that would increase premium
transparency.
The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. First, we summarize the relevant institutional
features of the MA market and relevant prior literature. Second, we establish predictions from two
simple models of the expected response of premiums and benefit generosity to changes in benchmark
payment rates to aid in interpreting our empirical results. Next, we describe our empirical strategy
and results. Finally, we discuss the implications of our results and conclude.

2
2.1

Background
Medicare Advantage

The 1982 Tax Equity and Fiscal Responsibility Act authorized Medicare to begin risk-based contracting with private insurers in 1985 under the Medicare+Choice program. Under this program,
now known as Medicare Advantage (MA), the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS)
contracts with insurers, and those insurers offer plans with varying degrees of premiums and benefits to Medicare beneficiaries. Medicare pays these plans prospectively, and plans assume full
responsibility for the covered costs incurred by enrollees. Beneficiaries have the option of enrolling
in a private plan or remaining in traditional, fee-for-service (FFS) Medicare. Private plan enrollment was low in the early years of the program but has increased dramatically over time as a result
of a variety of changes to the program’s structure and payment generosity. In 2013, 29%, or 15
million, Medicare beneficiaries were enrolled in a private plan, compared to 17%, or 7 million, in
2000 (Gold et al., 2012, 2013). The goals of the MA program are twofold. One goal is to give beneficiaries choice in their health plan, a departure from the previous regime where all beneficiaries
received coverage through the government-run traditional FFS Medicare plan. The second goal
is to increase efficiency in the provision of Medicare benefits and decrease costs in the Medicare
program (McGuire et al., 2011).

3

The 2003 Medicare Prescription Drug, Improvement, and Modernization Act (MMA) changed the
payment scheme from a uniform capitation rate for all plans with the same service area to one where
plans receive different capitation rates based on their bids.1 The current payment scheme works
as follows. Each year Medicare sets county-level benchmark payment rates, which were originally
intended to reflect the expected cost of covering an average beneficiary under FFS Medicare in that
area. Plans then submit a bid, representing what they will accept to provide an actuarial equivalent
of the standard benefit package covered under FFS Medicare.2 Plans can elect to provide more
generous benefits, on top of the standard benefit package, for which they may charge a premium.
Medicare pays plans the lower of the plan bid and the benchmark payment rate for the plan’s service
area.3 Plans bidding below the benchmark also receive an additional “rebate” payment equal to
a fixed percent of the difference between their bid and the benchmark that they are required to
return to their enrollees in the form of a reduced premium or a more generous benefit structure.
Prior to 2011 plans received 75% of the difference as a rebate payment, but since 2012 the percent
of the difference rebated to plans depends on the plan’s quality rating, as specified in the Affordable
Care Act. Beginning in 2014, the rebate percentage is now either 50%, 65%, or 70% with higher
quality plans receiving higher rebate percentages.4
The total premium charged to consumers for an MA plan has three components. The first is the
Part B premium, which goes toward the standard benefits package that all MA plans are required
to cover. All Medicare beneficiaries, whether they elect to enroll in an MA plan or traditional FFS
Medicare, pay a Part B premium.5 The Part B premium under FFS Medicare was $96.40 from
2008-2010 and $104.90 in 2013, but MA plans can choose to charge a lower Part B premium than
the one charged under FFS Medicare.6 Although MA plans are able to charge a lower premium
than the FFS Medicare premium, the mechanism for doing so is somewhat convoluted. Plans may
charge a premium below the FFS premium by “buying down” the Part B premium, which consists
of paying CMS to reduce the Part B premium amount the enrollee is obligated to pay CMS. For
reasons described below, this “buy down” may not be transparent to consumers. The other two
components of the MA premium are the Part C premium, which goes toward any additional medical
1

We use the word “bid” to be consistent with the language of the MA program, however these are not bids in
the sense of a traditional auction. Even the plan with the highest bid is allowed to enter the market.
2
The bid is supposed to equal the plan’s cost of providing the standard benefits package covered under FFS
Medicare, plus a profit margin. However, plans have some flexibility in how they report costs. The allowable profit
margin varies by insurer as it is based on the insurer’s rate-of-return in its non-MA business. It is required to fall
within a plan or contract-specific range according to a complicated formula. CMS refers to the profit margin as the
“gain/loss margin” and the allowed profit threshold as the plan sponsor’s “corporate requirement”. Allowable profit
margins are consistent over time and across plan types.
3
The payments are risk adjusted to reflect the varying health status of the plan’s enrollee pool. See Newhouse et
al. (2011).
4
Quality-adjusted benchmark payment levels were phased in beginning in 2012 (Medicare Payment Advisory
Commission, 2011).
5
There are a few rare circumstances where FFS beneficiaries do not pay the Part B premium.
6
Beginning in 2007, higher income Medicare beneficiaries pay a higher Part B premium.

4

benefits the plan chooses to offer, and the Part D premium, which goes toward any prescription drug
benefits the plan chooses to offer. In sum, the total consumer premium for enrolling in traditional
FFS Medicare is equal to the Part B premium (plus an additional Part D premium for beneficiaries
that also enroll in a stand alone prescription drug plan through the “Part D only” market), and
the total consumer premium for enrolling in an MA plan (with drug coverage) is equal to the sum
of the Parts B, C, and D premiums charged by the MA plan.7
CMS imposes two relevant constraints on the plan’s choice of its premium and benefit package.
First, the rebate payment must be allocated toward either offsetting the cost of additional benefits,
or reducing the plan premium.8 Second, the total cost of the plan’s additional benefits must equal
the sum of the Parts C and D premiums, net of any Part B buy down, plus the rebate dollars
allocated toward additional benefits. In other words, if the plan’s bid was equal to the benchmark
and the plan charged a zero Part C and D premium the plan could not offer any additional benefits
beyond the standard benefits package. The rebate provides the only incentive for plans to bid low,
because plans can use rebate dollars to make their products more attractive to consumers. These
constraints are intended to limit insurer profits and ensure that consumers capture surplus due to
benchmarks that exceed plan costs via more generous benefits or lower premiums.9 As a result of
these constraints, the rebate, premium, and benefit generosity are related by the following identity:
b = rebate + p, where b is additional benefits and p is the sum of the Parts C and D premiums, net
of any Part B buy down (negative p’s are possible).
The most common MA plan premium has a Part B premium equal to the FFS Medicare Part B
premium, and Part C and D premiums set at $0. Roughly half of consumers are enrolled in these
“zero” premium plans and only 5% of consumers are enrolled in plans with Part B premiums below
the FFS Part B premium.10 A plot of the premium distribution in 2008, shown in Figure 1, makes
the extent of clustering at the $96.40 FFS Part B premium clear. An economic analysis of MA plan
behavior should account for this clustering at “zero” for premiums that can fall along a continuum.
Medicare beneficiaries enroll in MA plans in one of two ways. First, they can search for all plans
available in their market through the online Medicare Plan Finder. On the initial page of search
results, consumers will see the following pieces of information about each plan: the estimated annual
drug cost, the estimated annual drug plus health costs, the monthly premium, the deductible(s)
7

The vast majority of MA plans offer drug coverage. In our sample, over 90% of consumers are enrolled in an
MA plan with drug coverage.
8
Costs include both the direct claims paid by the plan as well as administrative costs, such as claims processing.
The cost can also include a small profit margin.
9
The degree to which CMS is able to enforce these constraints is unknown. All insurers are required to provide
provide actuarial justification that they have met these constraints during the annual bid submission process and
may be audited. Because plans repeatedly contract with Medicare, CMS may partially enforce these constraints by
allowing only limited variation in a plan’s reported costs and actuarial assumptions from year to year.
10
A plan must have a $0 Part C and D premium before it can buy down the Part B premium.

5

and copay or coinsurance amounts, whether the plan restricts doctor choice, the OOP spending
limit, drug coverage restrictions, and a plan quality rating. Importantly, the monthly premium
displayed includes only the Parts C and D premium. It does not include the Part B premium,
note any reduction in the Part B premium the plan offers, or even note that the consumer will
be required to pay a Part B premium upon enrolling in the plan. Thus, if a plan charges a lower
Part B premium than the standard FFS premium, it is not displayed in the initial comparison
of plans. Figure 2 displays an example of an initial page of search results on the Medicare Plan
Finder. The initial plan listed is traditional FFS Medicare, and the subsequent plans are two MA
plans (additional plans not shown). In order to view the Part B premium amount the consumer
must click on the name of a plan to get to a page with more detailed information about the plan,
scroll down to the section labeled “monthly premiums” and view the Part B premium listed in that
section. Furthermore, the page with detailed plan information displays the net Part B premium
(i.e. the original Part B premium minus any buy-down by the plan) so unless the enrollee recalls the
original Part B premium it may not even be clear that the Part B premium available under the plan
is lower than the original Part B premium, particularly if the reduction is only a few dollars. The
second way beneficiaries enroll in a plan is through an agent or broker. We have less information
on the way the Part B premium is communicated to consumers in that setting, as it will vary by
agent or broker. However, in promotional materials released by the insurers themselves, a plan’s
monthly premium is also displayed as the Parts C and D premium only. Given these circumstances,
consumers are likely to view all plans with a “zero” premium as having the same price, regardless
of the Part B premium amount. A final reason that the Part B premium may not be salient to
consumers is that most beneficiaries have their Part B premium automatically deducted from their
Social Security check. Many consumers may not even connect the automatic deduction from their
Social Security check with their MA plan, particularly because it is not emphasized during the
enrollment process.
The implication is that if an MA plan premium is less than or equal to the premium the consumer
would pay under FFS Medicare, the premium is communicated to consumers as $0. Labeling this
level of premium as “zero” creates the mistaken impression that 1) plans with a zero premium are
free, and 2) that a zero premium plan is the cheapest possible plan. We explore the implications
of these features for determining equilibrium premiums and benefits, and for the pass through of
government subsidies below.

2.2

Previous Literature

A large prior literature has studied the behavior of private plans in Medicare since their introduction
in the 1980s. Past research has found that enrollment, plan availability, and plan generosity have
been highly responsive to changes in payment rates (McGuire et al., 2011). There is also substantial
6

evidence that prior to risk-adjustment there was advantageous selection into this market, with
healthier beneficiaries choosing private plans and sicker beneficiaries preferring to stay in FFS
Medicare (Medicare Payment Advisory Commission (2000), Morgan et al. (1997)). However, recent
evidence indicates that selection is becoming much less of a problem under the new risk adjustment
methodology (McWilliams et al., 2012; Newhouse et al., 2012).
Much of the prior literature studies the pre-2006 period before the current payment system based
on the bidding and rebate mechanism began. Song et al. (2012, 2013) provide the first evidence of
how plan bids respond to changes in benchmark payment rates under the current payment system.
They estimate market-level models and find that a $1 increase in the benchmark is associated with
a $0.49 increase in HMO plan bids. This indicates that plans have some flexibility in selecting their
bid, despite the restriction that the bid equal an allowed mark-up of the plan’s cost of providing
the standard benefit package. Song et al. (2012, 2013) interpret these estimates as meaning that
$.49 of every $1 increase in benchmark payments is captured by plans as higher profits, and infer
that the remaining portion that results in higher rebate payments is passed on to consumers in
the form of more generous benefits or lower premiums. This paper furthers their analysis by
directly estimating the extent to which higher benchmark payments are passed onto consumers in
the form of lower premiums or more generous benefit packages. To our knowledge, no published
work examines how plan premiums and benefits respond to benchmark payment changes within
the current payment regime based on bids and rebates. Concurrent work by Duggan et al. (2014)
estimates how benchmark payment rates affect premiums and benefit generosity as part of an
analysis of the division of surplus between consumers and private insurers in the MA market under
the current payment regime. Using a different source of variation in benchmark payment rates,
they estimate effects on premiums and benefit generosity similar to what we find in this paper.
However, they find that bids are more responsive to benchmark changes (i.e. rebates are less
responsive) compared to the estimates in Song et al. (2012, 2013) and this paper. Interestingly,
they also find that higher benchmarks do not have a measurable effect on plan quality and may
cause insurers to spend more on advertising.
Our focus on the response of benefit generosity to payment rates in the MA market is closely
related to the work of Pizer et al. (2003) on Medicare+Choice, the previous incarnation of Medicare
Advantage. The Medicare+Choice market differed from the current MA market in that all plans
were paid the same benchmark payment rate for a given enrollee in a given county. Plans did not bid
or receive rebates from CMS, so the benchmark functioned as a simple cost subsidy. Additionally,
plans were not allowed to charge a premium lower than that of FFS Medicare by buying down the
Part B premium as in the current MA market. Pizer et al. (2003) argued that the lower bound
on premiums prevented some plans from selecting an interior optimum of the premium and benefit
combination that maximizes consumer utility. They found that in the Medicare+Choice market

7

benefit generosity responded more to payment rate changes in “zero” premium plans (i.e. where
the premium was equal to the FFS Medicare Part B premium) relative to non-zero premium plans
(where the premium exceeded the Part B premium). They interpret this as evidence of inefficiently
high benefits in zero-premium plans based on the assumption that zero-premium plans would have
chosen the lower benefit increases (and premium decreases) of non-zero premium plans if they had
been able to decrease premiums further.11
Based on their findings Pizer et al. (2003) argued that removing the lower bound on premiums
by allowing plans to offer premium rebates would allow plans that were constrained under the old
system to select an unconstrained optimal combination of premium and benefit generosity, with
premiums below the FFS Medicare Part B premium and less generous benefits. This is similar
to the policy now in place where plans have the option of buying down the Part B premium,
as described above. However, we still observe over half of consumers enrolled in plans offering a
premium equal to exactly the FFS Part B Premium and only 5% of consumers enrolled in plans
with premiums less than FFS Medicare through Part B premium buy downs. This suggests that
some real or perceived constraint still exists that causes a non-smooth demand response, which we
explore in this paper.

3

Theoretical Predictions

We begin by deriving predictions from two simple models of plan premium and benefit setting that
will be useful in interpreting our empirical results. In the first, consumers observe and respond to
the “real price” of a plan, whereas in the second, the real price is obscured for the institutional
reasons described above.

3.1

Basic Model with Observed Premium

Let consumer demand for plan j be a general function of the additional benefit generosity of the
plan and its premium, sj (pj , bj ) and denote the profit function of plan j as




πj = bidj + pj + .75(benchj − bidj ) −bj − P tABj  sj (bj , pj ) − F Cj
|
{z
}|
{z
}
revenue

cost

11

If CMS was able to enforce the requirement that additional payments be allocated toward lower premiums or
more generous benefits this result is mechanically true due to the zero lower bound. Of course, non-zero premium
plans may not be a good counterfactual for zero premium plans since the consumers that select into the two different
types of plans likely have different preferences over premiums and benefits. Despite these issues their main argument,
that the lower bound on premiums prevents some plans from selecting an interior optimum of the premium and
benefit combination that maximizes consumer utility, is sound.

8

where bidj denotes the plan’s bid, benchj denotes the plan’s benchmark payment rate, P tABj
denotes plan j’s cost of covering the standard level of benefits provided under Parts A and B
of traditional FFS Medicare (hereafter referred to as standard benefits), F Cj denotes the plan’s
fixed costs, pj denotes the premium, and bj represents the level of additional benefits (above the
required standard benefit package) and is measured in dollars spent by plan j. In this notation, pj
denotes the net premium revenue received by the plan, which equals the sum of the Parts C and
D premium minus any Part B premium buy down. A positive pj indicates the plan sets the Part
C and D premium equal to pj and does not buy down the Part B premium, while a negative pj
indicates the plan sets a zero Part C and D premium and buys down the Part B premium by pj .
The term in brackets is the plan’s per-enrollee profit. For each enrollee the plan receives its bid,
rebate payment, and net premium as revenue and incurs the cost of providing the standard benefit
package plus the cost of providing any additional benefits.
Medicare Program rules specify that benefits above the generosity of the standard benefit package,
bj , must equal the sum of the plan’s net premium revenue and the rebate payment.
bj = pj + .75(benchj − bidj )
|
{z
}
rebate

This constraint makes it clear that the entire rebate payment must go toward either additional
benefits or lower premiums. When the rebate increases, either bj must increase or pj must decrease
(or some combination), for the equation to balance. Note that due to this constraint the plan’s unit
profit is determined solely by its bid. This can be seen readily by using the constraint to substitute
out for pj in the profit function
πj = [bidj − P tABj ] sj (bj , bj − .75(benchj − bidj )) − F Cj
The plan chooses the size of the rebate, and thus the amount of the benchmark to pass onto
consumers, through its choice of bid. In other words, MA plans exercise any market power by
marking up their bid, rather than the premium, over costs (Song et al., 2013).
In order to simplify expressions and focus on the response of premiums and benefit generosity,
the following models take that bid (and hence rebate) choice as given and ask how a plan will
adjust its premium and benefit generosity for a given bid/rebate response. Incorporating the bid
as an additional endogenous variable complicates some of the expressions, but does not change
the model’s implications for equilibrium benefit generosity or the comparative statics of premiums
and benefits with respect to the rebate.12 In the empirical work, we will estimate the rebate/bid
12
This is because given the choice of mark-up, the plan maximizes profits by choosing its premium and benefit
generosity to maximize demand, so pj and bj are only affected by the plan’s bid choice via its effect on the size of
the rebate payment.

9

response to the benchmark directly, since it affects the magnitude of the predicted premium and
benefit response to a change in benchmark.
For a given bid, the plan chooses a premium and benefit generosity to maximize profits. Given that
additional benefits and the premium are related by the rebate constraint, we simplify the plan’s
choice to be over a single variable, which yields the profit maximizing choices of the premium and
benefit generosity as
b∗j =
p∗j =

rebatej
1 + εp /εb

rebatej
− rebatej
1 + εp /εb

Thus the comparative statics of equilibrium premium and benefit generosity with respect to the
benchmark and the rebate are a function of the relative demand elasticities with respect to premiums
and benefits, εp and εb .
drebatej
∂bj
1
=
∂benchj
1 + εp /εb dbenchj
∂pj
=
∂benchj




drebatej
1
−1
1 + εp /εb
dbenchj

The comparative statics with respect to the rebate give the predicted share of each additional
rebate dollar to be allocated between benefits and premiums.
∂bj
1
=
∂rebatej
1 + εp /εb
∂pj
1
=
−1
∂rebatej
1 + εp /εb
This general set-up does not yield any predictions for the response of premiums and benefits to
changes in the benchmark payment rate without knowledge of the relative size of the elasticities.
We can generate clear predictions by placing more structure on the consumer demand and utility
functions. Consider a market where homogeneous consumers have quasi-linear utility over MA plan
benefits. We denote utility for plan j as
uj = v(bj ) − pj
where consumers are assumed to have concave utility over plan benefit generosity, v 0 > 0 and

10

v 00 < 0. The profit function is then
πj = [bidj + pj + .75(benchj − bidj ) − bj − P tABj ] sj (v(bj ) − pj ) − F Cj
where the demand function for plan j, sj (uj ), is now assumed to be an increasing function of
consumer utility for plan j, s0 > 0.
Maximizing over benefit generosity yields the equilibrium condition
v 0 (b∗ ) = 1
which implicitly defines the plan’s profit maximizing benefit generosity. Using the rebate constraint,
the optimal premium is then given by
p∗j = b∗j − rebatej
The first condition states that the plan will set benefit generosity such that the marginal utility
of benefits is equal to the marginal utility of a dollar to the consumer (which is also equal to
the marginal cost of an additional unit of benefits, given our normalization). This model implies
that benefits are always set at the socially optimal level, regardless of the benchmark payment rate,
because consumers are always willing to pay an additional dollar in premiums for benefits they value
at more than a dollar. At bj > b∗j consumers would always prefer to pay a dollar less in premiums
than have a benefits package that is a dollar more generous. The second condition indicates that
the premium will then equal the cost of providing the optimal benefit generosity minus the rebate
payment, the portion of the government subsidy the plan passes through to consumers.
From these two conditions the model’s predictions of the response of benefits and premiums to
changes in the benchmark payment rate easily follow as
∂bj
=0
∂benchj
and

∂pj
drebatej
=−
∂benchj
dbenchj

These yield two clear testable predictions. First, plans will allocate the entire increase in the rebate
payment following a benchmark payment increase toward lowering premiums. Second, changes
to the benchmark payment rate will not affect the equilibrium level of benefits. These predictions
serve as a useful benchmark for comparing the predictions of the next model, which incorporates the
lack of premium transparency described earlier. Note that this model does not yield any testable

11

predictions of the level of premiums or benefits. Based on consumer preferences (the v(·) function)
benefit generosity and the corresponding premium might be very high or very low. The model
predicts that once the plan has optimized over the level of benefit generosity and corresponding
premium, future changes in the benchmark should only affect premiums.

3.2

Lack of Premium Transparency and a Kinked Demand Curve

The previous model implicitly assumed that both premium and benefit information are fully transparent to consumers when they select a plan. However, we have argued that the choice environment
makes it difficult for consumers to observe premium reductions below the FFS Part B premium.
Given this lack of premium transparency and the large degree of clustering of plans with premiums
equal to the FFS Part B premium, we hypothesize that consumer demand is not sensitive to premiums that are less than or equal to the FFS Part B premium. This type of demand response can be
represented with a kinked demand curve where plans face a downward sloping demand curve until
the Parts C and D premiums reach zero and the total premium equals the FFS Part B premium,
after which demand becomes much less responsive.
To formalize how a kinked demand curve affects the plan’s optimal choice of benefits we replace
uj = v(bj ) − pj with the “decision utility” uj = v(bj ) − pj 1{pj > 0} − αpj 1{pj ≤ 0}, where
0 ≤ α < 1. This captures that consumers fully respond to premiums above the kink, but less than
fully respond to premiums below the kink, or even don’t respond at all if α = 0. We now write the
plan’s problem as
max [bidj − P tABj ] sj (v(.75(benchj − bidj ) + pj ) − pj 1{pj > 0} − αpj 1{pj ≤ 0}) − F Cj
pj

where we’ve now substituted out for bj using the constraint. There are two potential FOCs for pj ,
depending on whether pj > 0
[bidj − P tABj ] s0j · [v 0 − 1] = 0
[bidj − P tABj ] s0j · [v 0 − α] = 0
When p∗j > 0, the equilibrium is the same as in the non-kink case, with v 0 (b∗j ) = 1 and p∗j =
b∗j − rebatej . If not, the plan increases bj past the efficient b∗j , up until the point where v 0 (bj ) = α.
For α sufficiently close to zero, as we expect, there will be no interior solution allowing the FOC
to hold. The corner solution will be to drive the FOC as close to zero as possible by setting pj =0
and allocating the entire rebate payment toward benefits, bj = rebatej . In that case,
∂bj
drebatej
=
∂benchj
dbenchj

12

indicating a prediction that all additional rebate dollars stemming from a benchmark payment
increase will be allocated to making plans more generous rather than less expensive. Intuitively,
plans have no incentive to reduce the premium further because doing so does not increase quantity
demanded (or has a very small effect) and comes at the opportunity cost of allocating the rebate
dollars toward higher benefits, which at least have some effect on demand.
The implications of the kinked demand response for equilibrium premiums and benefits can best be
seen by plotting the corresponding indifference curves, θ(b; u), representing the amount consumers
are willing to pay for each level of benefits at a given utility level.13 Figure 3 depicts these functions
for three different utility levels, where consumers are indifferent between each point on a given curve.
For each utility level, the function is concave in b as long as the premium remains greater than
or equal to the FFS Medicare Part B premium. At the FFS Part B premium, the curve becomes
vertical reflecting the fact that consumers are not willing to trade-off any amount of benefits for
a premium reductions below that level. The dotted lines represent what the function would be if
premiums were fully transparent to consumers.
Figure 3 also plots the identity that relates the plan premium, benefit generosity, and rebate
payment. When utility is quasi-linear in premiums and plan benefits, the case discussed above,
in the absence of the kink the equilibrium benefit generosity occurs where the marginal rate of
substitution between benefits and money is equal to the marginal cost of benefits, or where the
indifference curve is tangent to the identity. When the rebate is equal to rebate0 , the equilibrium is
unconstrained by the kink and benefits are at the efficient b∗ . However when the rebate increases
to rebate000 , equality between the kinked indifference curve and the identity occurs at the kink of
θ(b; u2 ) where b > b∗ . Were the premium fully transparent to consumers, equilibrium would occur
at the point of tangency between the identity and the non-kinked indifference curve, θ(b; u3 ), at
b∗ yielding a higher consumer utility level, u3 > u2 . The vertical distance between the identity at
rebate000 and the identity at the lower rebate00 represents the money-metric welfare loss, the amount
of money that could have been saved to achieve the same level of utility.
The graph makes clear that there will be a range of rebate amounts for which plans will price exactly
at the kink, resulting in a lack of response of premiums to local changes in benchmark payment
rates. The kink can also explain the cross-sectional bunching of plans at the “zero” premium level.
Any plan composed of consumers of a type whose un-kinked indifference curve is tangent to the
identity below the FFS Part B premium will choose a premium equal to the FFS Part B premium.
To emphasize this phenomenon, we’ve depicted extreme versions of the kinked indifference curves,
where consumers are not willing to trade-off any amount of benefits for a premium below the Part
B premium (α = 0). More generally, any set of indifference curves that became steeper at the
kink would also result in bunching of plans at the “zero” premium level and a welfare loss from
13

These may also be referred to as expenditure functions, as in Rosen (1974).

13

inefficiently high benefits.
Our Figure 3 parallels Figure 1 in Pizer et al. (2003), who studied plan premiums and benefits
under Medicare+Choice. Whereas in Pizer et al. (2003) the plan is constrained not to charge a
premium below the FFS Part B premium, in our model the kinked demand response induces plans
to choose a premium equal to the FFS Part B premium. The result is the same, leading to an
equilibrium where welfare could be improved by lowering benefits and premiums.
We will rely on the insights of both of these models in interpreting our empirical results. The
kinked demand model explains why we expect to see plans passing on higher benchmarks through
more generous benefits when plans are within the range where demand is not responsive to lower
premiums. The key insight from the simple, observed premium model is that profit-maximizing
plans offer any benefits that consumers value at or above the plan’s cost of providing those benefits,
regardless of the subsidy level. If this is true then incremental changes in benefits caused by changes
to the subsidy level must not be valued by consumers at cost. The kinked demand curve creates an
incentive for plans to pass on higher subsidies through more generous benefits, even if those benefits
are not valued by consumers at their cost, because doing so is the only way to affect demand.

4
4.1

Empirical Methodology and Data
Identification Strategy

Our research design exploits changes in benchmark payment rates within plans over time. Our
approach is similar to the identification strategy employed by Song et al. (2012), with the main
difference being that they estimate market-level models while we estimate plan-level models (i.e.
they utilize variation within markets over time). For this source of variation to identify the effect
of interest, it must be the case that changes in benchmark payment rates are uncorrelated with
changes in other unobserved factors affecting changes in plan rebates, premiums, and benefits.
CMS updates benchmark payment rates annually, and the type of update depends on whether the
year is a rebasing or non-rebasing year. In non-rebasing years, all county benchmark payment rates
receive the same percentage update. In rebasing years, county benchmarks receive the maximum
update possible under a number of potential politically motivated update mechanisms (including
floor payments to rural and urban counties, increases based on national trends, increases based on
historical payment rates, and increases based on lagged estimates of county per-capita spending
under FFS Medicare). This leads to a “ratcheting up” effect because payments can only increase
under this system, never decrease. As a result, benchmark changes in rebasing years are based on
a hierarchy of administrative update rules largely unrelated to changes in contemporaneous costs
(Biles et al., 2009). The assumption that changes in payment rates are orthogonal to changes in costs
14

and other determinants of plan profitability has been used frequently in the prior literature (Frakt
et al. (2012), Song et al. (2012), Chernew et al. (2008)). To further investigate this assumption,
we plotted changes in plan benchmarks against changes in the best available measure of plan costs,
the realized per-capita spending by FFS Medicare in the plan’s service area, in our analysis sample
(described in more detail in the next section).14 The FFS spending data capture market level
trends in medical care utilization, including adoption of new technologies. Since one potential
update mechanism is based on lagged measures of this variable, this is the exact mechanism by
which we might be concerned that benchmark changes are correlated with changes in plan costs.
We do not find a strong or systematic relationship between changes in benchmarks and changes in
FFS spending in our data, as shown in Figure A.1, giving us confidence that benchmark changes
are uncorrelated with changes in unobserved costs.
Using variation within plans over time controls for unobservable, time-invariant plan characteristics that may be correlated with benchmark payment rates, including time-invariant characteristics
of the plan’s market, known as its service area. An approach relying on changes in benchmark
payments over time, rather than cross-sectional variation in benchmarks across plans, is preferable
because in the cross-section areas with higher benchmarks are also different along other unobservable dimensions that also affect plan rebates, premiums, and benefits. This is because benchmark
levels are partly based on historical differences in per-capita FFS spending levels such that, for
example, counties with high benchmark levels may be areas where providers tend to practice an
intensive style of care. In contrast, changes in benchmarks over time are unlikely to be problematic
for reasons described in the last paragraph.
We focus on benchmark payment changes that occurred between 2006-2007 and 2008-2009 for
two main reasons. First, we want to restrict our analysis to before 2012, since beginning in 2012
benchmark payment changes are correlated with plan quality as measured by star level. This leaves
2006-2011 as potential study years (MA began in 2006). Of these years, 2007 and 2009 are the only
payment rebasing years. Aggregated to the plan-year level, the mean plan benchmark change in
our sample was $33.81, with a standard deviation of $17.55 (benchmarks are set on a per-member
per-month basis, so the implied annual change is $405.72).15
To identify the marginal allocation of rebate dollars we focus on three outcome measures. First, we
estimate the response of the plan rebate to changes in the benchmark to ascertain the additional
rebate dollars to be allocated toward lower premiums and additional benefits. As described earlier,
the plan receives a rebate payment from CMS equal to 75% of the difference between its bid
and the benchmark, which it then must pass on to consumers through premiums or benefits. A
14

The measure is standardized to an individual of average risk.
These are the enrollment-weighted statistics. The unweighted mean and standard deviation are $32.43 and
$14.72, respectively.
15

15

plan therefore chooses the portion of the benchmark to pass on to consumers by adjusting its
bid. The additional rebate dollars to be allocated toward premiums or benefits will be equal
to ∆rebatej = .75(∆benchj − ∆bidj ). If the plan does not adjust its bid following a benchmark
increase, the rebate increases by $0.75 for every $1 increases in the benchmark. If the plan increases
its bid by the full amount of the benchmark increase, then the rebate will not change.
We next estimate the response of the plan premium to changes in the benchmark. A response of
plan premiums to benchmark payment changes can be interpreted as plans allocating additional
rebate dollars toward premium reductions, since an exogenous change in the benchmark should
only affect plan premiums via the effect on rebates. As plans are required to allocate the rebate
towards either premiums or benefits, we interpret the change in benefits as the residual of the
change in rebate minus the change in premiums. We attempt to estimate the change in benefits
directly using a summary measure of benefits generosity, the projected out-of-pocket costs (OOPC)
for each plan. As discussed below this is an imprecise measure of the true plan benefit generosity,
so we will put more weight on the findings based on premiums, which are precisely measured.

4.2

Econometric Specification

Our econometric specification is
0
yjt = Xjt
β + γbenchjt + δt + ψj + εjt

where yjt is the rebate, premium, or benefit generosity of plan j in year t, Xjt is a vector of plan
characteristics in year t, benchjt is the plan benchmark in year t, δt is a vector of year dummies,
and ψj is a vector of plan fixed effects. We describe how we construct the plan benchmark from
administratively set county benchmarks in the next section. To isolate variation between 20062007 and 2008-2009, we first difference the data and estimate our models on the 2007 and 2009
first differenced data.
0
∆yjt = ∆Xjt
β + γ∆benchjt + ∆δt + ∆εjt

The identifying assumption is that, conditional on ∆Xjt and ∆δt , changes in the benchmark payment rates within plans are uncorrelated with the error. The coefficient of interest is γ, the impact
of a $1 change in benchmark payment rates on plan premiums and benefit generosity. We present
results with several specifications of Xjt . The fixed effects specification already controls for time
invariant plan characteristics and the time effect controls for changes that were common to all plans
over time, so the reason for including additional controls in Xjt is to account for time-variant plan
(including market) characteristics that may be correlated with both benchmark payment changes
and our outcomes of interest.

16

The main time-varying factors of concern are changes in plan costs and market structure. As
described above, the best available measure of MA plan costs is the realized FFS Medicare percapita expenditures in each county. Although we did not find a strong relationship between changes
in FFS spending and changes in benchmarks, our preferred specification nevertheless includes this
variable as the best available measure of plan costs.16 The results are very similar when we don’t
condition on contemporaneous FFS costs, giving us additional confidence that underlying changes
in unobserved costs are uncorrelated with benchmark changes. Changes in market structure may
be a concern if insurers tend to enter markets that receive higher benchmark payment increases, as
earlier work has found. To address this concern we control for the number of insurers in the plan’s
market, as described in more detail in the next section. We also estimate specifications allowing
for plan-type specific time trends for additional flexibility. Since our sample includes only two plan
types, HMOs and PPOs, this consists of adding an interaction of a dummy for PPO and δt . We
weight all regressions by mean plan enrollment over the sample period and cluster standard errors
at the plan level.
In interpreting our results, a few limitations should be kept in mind. First, since we measure
plan responses occurring in the same year of the benchmark payment change these are short run
estimates. Increases in benchmarks may have longer-term effects, including on insurer entry and
the number of Medicare beneficiaries choosing MA, that could affect plan premiums and benefit
generosity. Second, our analysis treats the plan as the profit maximizing unit. Since insurers
typically have multiple plans in a given market, the insurer is more likely to be the profit maximizing
unit. However, treating the plan as the unit of analysis makes the empirical work easier to interpret,
since our outcomes of interest vary at the plan level. Finally, the range of benchmark variation in
our study years was relatively modest. Plan responses could be quite different with more dramatic
changes in benchmark levels.

4.3

Data

We use plan- and county-level data from the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS)
for plan years 2006-2009: data on plan bids and rebates comes from the plan payment files; data
on enrollment comes from the plan enrollment files and Contract-Plan-State-County enrollment
files; data on county-level benchmark payment rates and FFS costs come from the MA Ratebooks
and the County FFS Expenditure data; data on plan premiums and benefit generosity comes
from the Medicare Options Compare database. Our measure of benefit generosity is the projected
16

To some extent plan costs may also respond to changes in benchmarks if, for example, providers are able to
negotiate higher reimbursement rates following benchmark increases. We also note that it is possible that FFS costs
could respond to changes in benchmark payment rates if increases in benchmarks change the pool of individuals
choosing MA vs FFS Medicare.

17

out-of-pocket spending an average enrollee would expect to spend in each plan. These are the outof-pocket cost (OOPC) estimates beneficiaries see on the official CMS website when they browse
and compare plans. They are computed by applying each plan’s benefits rules (covered services,
cost sharing) to the actual utilization of a sample of FFS Medicare beneficiaries responding to the
Medicare Current Beneficiary Study (MCBS). The OOPC data are an imperfect measure of benefit
generosity because they are estimated off a sample of FFS beneficiaries, do not reflect the risk pool
of the plan, and assume no demand side response to the plan’s benefit measure. Additionally, since
the sample of MCBS respondents used to compute the OOPC estimates changes from year to year,
the change in the sample introduces additional noise when comparing changes in the OOPC over
time. However, they are the best available measures of plan benefit generosity, and other papers in
the literature have relied on the OOPC as a summary measure of benefit generosity (McWilliams et
al., 2011; Dunn, 2010). Unfortunately, the OOPC data is not available for 2006 so we are limited to
estimating models of benefit generosity on the 2008-2009 sample. We also harmonize plan identifiers
over time using the CMS plan crosswalk files.17
Benchmark payment rates are set at the county level, but CMS bases payments on plan-specific
benchmarks, derived as a (projected) enrollment weighted average of the benchmarks of the counties
in the plan’s service area. Since we do not have access to the plan-specific benchmark used in
practice, we construct plan-level benchmarks using an ex-post enrollment weighted average of the
benchmarks of the counties in the plan’s service area. A plan may change its service area from
year to year. Since the changes over time in a plan’s service area and the relative enrollment across
the counties in its service area are endogenous to changes in benchmark payment rates (plans may
enter into or more aggressively market to counties that experience large payment rate increases),
we use weights that are stable over time to aggregate county-level benchmarks to the plan level.18
In this way, we are only using variation in benchmark payment rates resulting from administrative
changes. We aggregate county per-capita FFS expenditure data to the plan level using the same
weights.
There are three main types of plans in the MA market: HMOs, PPOs, and private fee-for-service
(PFFS) plans. We focus on findings from HMO and PPO plans, because PFFS plans had a
17

The Medicare Options Compare database for each of the years under study was procured from CMS. The
remaining files are publicly available and can be found at Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (2008-2009a),
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (2008-2009b), Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (2008-2009c),
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (2008-2009d), and Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (2008-2009e).
18
If Ji is the set of all counties existing in plan i’s service area in at least one year, then plan i’s weight for county
j is
,
X
XX
wij =
enrolljt
enrolljt
t

j∈Ji

t

P
where
j∈Ji wij = 1 ∀i. Because not every county in Ji exists in a plan’s service area in any given year (i.e.
|Jit | ≤ |Ji |) the weights are rescaled to sum to one within each year.

18

different cost structure from HMO and PPO plans during our study period.19 We also eliminate
a few particular types of MA plans that only serve a restricted set of Medicare beneficiaries. We
eliminate Special Needs Plans which serve beneficiaries with specialized health care needs including
institutionalized beneficiaries and dual eligibles. We also exclude regional PPO plans (which are
reimbursed under a different set of payment rules) and employer plans (which are only available to
current or former employees of a particular firm). Since we only have rebate data for plans bidding
below the benchmark, we restrict our sample to those plans. Since 97% of HMO and PPO plans
bid below the benchmark in 2006-2009, this eliminates very few plans.20
A general concern with fixed effects specifications on firm level data is dealing with the potential
selection problem caused by firm entry and exit. In our case, we observe very little exit in our
study period so our sample can be said to be representative of plans in the base years before the
benchmark payment changes (2006 and 2008). However we do observe some plan entry, particularly
between 2006-2007. This entry largely consists of PFFS plans and small HMO and PPO plans (see
Tables A.1 to A.3 for further detail). Although PFFS plans are not included in our analysis sample
they do compete with the HMO and PPO plans in our sample to at least some degree. The concern
for our identification strategy would be if entry was correlated with changes in both the benchmark
and our outcomes of interest. We address this concern in two ways. First, we note that our analysis
sample is very similar on observables to the unrestricted sample (Tables 1 and A.4). Second, we
control for entry in our models by including the number of insurers in the plan’s market.21 Note
that since we estimate first differences models this controls for changes in the number of insurers,
i.e. insurer entry. Our final sample consists of 1,085 plans that existed in both 2006 and 2007 and
1,461 plans that existed in both 2008 and 2009.
Tables 1 and 2 present enrollment weighted and unweighted summary statistics of our sample. The
plan benchmark, bid, rebate, premium, and out-of-pocket cost are all measured on a per-member
per-month basis. The average plan has over 4,300 enrollees, but there is a large degree of variation
in plan size, with a standard deviation of over 9,000 (not shown). Weighting by plan enrollment,
the average plan per-enrollee monthly benchmark is $785.36 in 2006 and $877.92 in 2009. The
average plan bids substantially below the benchmark, yielding a plan per-enrollee monthly rebate
payment of $84.52-$110.45 which plans pass onto consumers in the form of premium reductions
or more generous benefits. As noted earlier, over 50% of plans set a premium at exactly the FFS
Medicare Part B premium by setting the Parts C and D premium to zero and not buying down the
Part B premium. The projected out-of-pocket costs (OOPC) measure indicates that the average
19

During this period, PFFS plans were not required to establish provider networks. Instead, they were allowed to
pay providers using the rates established under the Medicare Fee Schedule for FFS Medicare.
20
We might be concerned if benchmark changes caused plans to switch from bidding above to below the benchmark,
however there are no plans in our sample for which this is the case.
21
This is constructed as an enrollment-weighted average of the number of insurers in each county of the plan’s
service area, aggregated from the county to the plan-level in the same way as the benchmark and FFS cost variables.

19

plan enrollee in 2009 can expect to spend $118.82 per month out-of-pocket for medical expenses
(not including the premium).

5

Empirical Results

Table 3 presents the results of regressions of the plan rebate, the portion of the benchmark payment
that plans return to consumers in the form of lower premiums or more generous benefits, on
the benchmark payment rate. We present specifications with no control variables (column 1),
controlling for FFS Medicare spending (column 2), adding a separate time trend for the type of
plan (column 3), and adding a control for the number of insurers in the plan’s market (column 4).
The four specifications are quite similar, with coefficients of interest on the benchmark ranging from
0.385-0.394. These estimates indicate that for every $1 increase in the benchmark payment rate
the rebate increases by $0.39, in the case of our preferred specification. For comparison, Song et
al. (2012), using market-level fixed effects models of the bid on the benchmark, found a coefficient
of 0.49 on the benchmark which implies a increase in the rebate of $0.38 ((1 − .49) × .75) for every
$1 increase in the benchmark. Our estimates are consistent with their finding that only a portion
of additional benchmark payments are captured by consumers through higher rebates.
Our primary interest is how plans allocate these additional rebate dollars between premiums and
benefit generosity. Table 4 presents the results of regressions of the total plan premium (i.e. the
sum of the Parts B, C, and D premiums) on the benchmark payment rate, using the same four
specifications as Table 3. Again we find similar coefficients in all specifications, ranging from 0.070 to -0.061, none of which are statistically different from zero at the 10% level. Although not
statistically significant, the preferred point estimate of -0.062 represents 16% of additional rebate
payments. These results indicate that on average plans allocate close to zero additional rebate
dollars towards lowering premiums.22
Finally, we present estimates of regressions of our proxy for plan benefit generosity, the projected
enrollee out-of-pocket spending (OOPC) under the plan, on the benchmark payment rate. These are
estimated on the 2008-2009 sample only, since OOPC data is not available for 2006. For reference,
the coefficient estimates of interest for the rebate and premium models presented in column 4 of
Tables 3 and 4 estimated on the same 2008-2009 sample are 0.409 and -0.004 respectively. As
noted earlier, the OOPC data provide an imprecise measure of plan benefit generosity because
the OOPC is computed by applying each plan’s cost-sharing structure to the utilization history of
a changing sample of FFS Medicare beneficiaries. Given the measurement error in our outcome
variable, we expect the coefficients of interest to be biased towards zero and do not expect to
22

The results from models defining the premium as only the Part C and D premiums are virtually identical, since
very few plans actually buy down the Part B premium.

20

estimate a coefficient equal to the full change in the rebate. Nevertheless, we expect to see some
response of this measure since it is correlated with benefit generosity. Note that since the OOPC is
the out-of-pocket spending of the enrollee, a lower OOPC indicates that a plan has a more generous
benefit package. Thus a negative coefficient indicates that benefit generosity increases following a
benchmark payment increase. As shown in Table 5, we estimate coefficients ranging from -0.159 to
-0.141, all but one of which are significant at the 10% level. Not surprisingly, the 95% confidence
intervals are quite large, ranging from -0.316 to 0.034 in the case of column 4. We interpret these
findings as providing qualitative support for our conclusion that plans are responding to benchmark
payment increases by allocating rebate dollars towards more generous benefits, but do not put much
faith in the point estimates.
We prefer relying on the point estimates from the rebate and premium models, since those outcomes
are precisely measured, and using those estimates to infer the change in benefit generosity using
the MA program accounting rules. As plans are required to allocate the rebate towards either
premiums or benefits (and provide actuarial documentation that they have done so), we can infer
the change in benefit generosity to be the residual of the change in rebate minus the change in
premiums. Specifically, since a $1 increase in the benchmark causes a $0.39 increase in the rebate
and relatively little change in premium then the causal effect on plan benefit generosity must be
the majority of the increase in the rebate, $0.39. This implies that the average plan returns all, or
nearly all, of additional rebate dollars stemming from higher benchmark payment rates in the form
of more generous benefits.
Our approach of inferring the change in benefits as the residual of the change in rebate and change in
premium contrasts with that of Duggan et al. (2014), who instead interpret the sum of the premium
and benefit estimates as the total pass-through to consumers.23 While we agree that estimating the
total pass-through directly from each component would be ideal, given that the benefits estimates
are almost certainly biased toward zero we do not feel confident in doing so. We prefer using the
change in rebate as the best available measure of the overall change in pass-through and relying
on the rebate constraint to infer changes in benefits, as described above. While we acknowledge
that insurers may not perfectly comply with the constraints, we argue that the incentive structure
is such that it is not in the interest of the plan to choose a rebate amount they do not intend to
pass through to consumers via premiums or benefits. Since a portion of the difference between
the bid and the benchmark (25% during our study period) is retained by Medicare, plans forfeit
$0.25 of potential revenue for each $1 they bid below the benchmark. If insurers were not bound
by the rebate constraint we identify and were able set premiums and benefits without regard to
the rebate, the optimal strategy would be to bid at the benchmark to maximize the subsidy from
Medicare. Insurers choose to bid below the benchmark so they are allowed to make their plans
23

They also consider changes in plan quality as a potential pass-through channel, but find no effect.

21

more generous without a commensurate increase in premiums. As the rebate constraint provides
the only incentive for plans to bid below the benchmark, and we observe nearly all plans doing
so, we conclude it must have bite. As such, we feel reasonably comfortable inferring the change in
benefits using the constraint.
Given that our kinked demand theory has different predictions for plans with premiums at the kink
compared to plans with premiums above the kink in the base year (i.e. plans with premiums at
versus above the FFS Part B premium in 2006 or 2008), we test for a differential effect for plans at
the kink versus above the kink. To do so, we add an interaction of the benchmark variable with an
indicator for whether the plan charged a premium above the FFS Part B premium in the base year
(labeled N ON ZERO in the tables because this translates to a non-zero Parts C and D premium).
We expect a benchmark increase to cause a decrease in premiums for plans above the kink and no
change in premium for plans at the kink. That is, we expect the main effect to be zero and the
interaction term to be negative in a regression with the total premium as the outcome variable.
We first present estimates with the rebate as the outcome variable, since these provide estimates
of the share of additional benchmark dollars returned to consumers for plans at and above the
kink, in Table 6. Column 1 reproduces the specification in column 4 of Table 3, column 2 adds
the interaction term, and column 3 presents a robustness check dropping plans with very large
premium changes (more than $100 in abolute value). The coefficients on the main effect are
similar to those in Table 3, and the coefficients on the interaction terms are positive, although
not statistically different from zero in column 3. This indicates that the average plan above the
kink returned more of the additional benchmark payment increase to consumers than the average
plan at the kink. Now turning to models with the premium as the outcome variable, shown in
Table 7, the main effect remains statistically indistinguishable from zero and our estimates of the
interaction term are negative and statistically significant, ranging from -0.451 to -0.625 depending
on the specification. These estimates indicate that plans at the kink do not adjust premiums in
response to benchmark increases, but plans above the kink do decrease premiums, as predicted
by the kinked demand theory. Tables 8 and 9 break out the estimates by sample period. For the
2006-2007 sample, plans at the kink experienced a modest or no increase in the rebate and did
not adjust their premiums in response to additional benchmark payments. Plans above the kink
increased the rebate by $0.71 more than plans at the kink for every $1 increase in the benchmark
(statistically indistinguishable from a full pass-through of $0.75) and decreased premiums by $0.67
more, statistically indistinguishable from the $0.71 additional rebate increase. For the 2008-2009
sample, plans at the kink increased their rebates but did not increase premiums in response to
benchmark payment increases as expected, however the estimates for plans above the kink are too
noisy to draw any conclusions. This may be because there is much less variation in the data available
for estimating the effect of benchmark changes for plans above the kink between 2008-2009. For

22

plans above the kink, the standard deviation of the 2008-2009 change in the benchmark was only
$1.92 (mean of $27.62), whereas for plans at the kink, the standard deviation of the change in the
benchmark was $25.56 (mean of $36.24). The fact that plans with premiums above the FFS Part
B premium experienced very similar increases in the benchmark between 2008 and 2009 makes it
difficult to estimate a separate treatment effect for this subset of plans. Unfortunately, we don’t
have an explanation for the difference in the rebate response for plans at and above the kink for
the two sample periods. We conclude that the empirical support for the kinked demand theory
is strongest for the 2006-2007 sample, although the 2008-2009 sample provides some additional
support and does not contradict the theory.
Unfortunately we can only directly test for a differential response by type of plan for benefits
(OOPC) in the 2008-2009 sample, when there is little variation in the data for estimating the effect
of benchmark changes for plans above the kink. For the OOPC regressions, we expect a negative
main effect and a positive interaction term of roughly equal size as the main effect since plans
above the kink should not be changing benefit generosity in response to higher benchmarks (recall
that a positive interaction term means plans above the kink are reducing out-of-pocket costs less
than plans at the kink, meaning they are increasing benefit generosity less). As shown in Table 10,
the main effect, although negative as expected, is no longer significant and the interaction term is
imprecisely estimated.

6

Discussion

We find that on average benefit generosity, but not premiums, responds to changes in the benchmark
payment rate, but for plans with premiums above the FFS Part B premium the opposite is true.
These results are predicted by the kinked demand theory, but not the frictionless model where
consumers perfectly observe premiums. The kinked demand curve creates an incentive for plans to
pass on higher subsidies through more generous benefits, even if those benefits are not valued by
consumers at their cost, because doing so is the only way to affect demand. The frictionless model,
although it abstracts from many important factors, highlights the observation that consumers
should always be willing to pay for benefits that are valued above their cost, regardless of the subsidy
level. If this is true then incremental changes in benefits caused by changes to the subsidy level must
not be valued at cost, meaning consumer welfare would be increased by applying additional rebate
dollars toward lower premiums rather than more generous benefits. Thus the problem identified
by Pizer et al. (2003) in the former Medicare+Choice program, that many plans offered efficiently
high benefits because the lower bound on plan premiums prevented them from further reducing
premiums, remains a concern in the current Medicare Advantage market. The lack of transparency
of the Part B premium creates an artificial lower bound for plan premiums below which the returns
23

to the plan of lowering the premium are close to zero, and the only way for plans to influence
demand is by changing benefits.
If, as we have argued, a lack of salience of a reduction in the Part B premium causes consumers
to “irrationally” not respond to premium reductions below the FFS Part B premium, a natural
intervention would be to change the way premium information is presented on the Medicare Plan
Finder website and plan promotional materials. For example, on the website the Part B premium
amount could be displayed side-by-side with the Parts C and D premium and other key plan
characteristics on the main plan comparison page. Alternatively, the tool could list only the total
premium amount (the sum of the Parts B, C, and D premiums). This would make the relevant total
premium most easily comparable across plans. CMS could also require plan promotional materials
and agents and brokers selling MA plans to quote the total premium to consumers, rather than just
the Parts C and D premium. These interventions should be relatively inexpensive to implement
and could lead to more premium competition in the MA market. An alternative intervention would
be for Part B premium buy-downs to be returned directly to consumers via premium rebate checks
for the amount of the buy-down, rather than decreasing the Part B premium that is deducted from
the Social Security check. Of course, the efficiency gains from this more far-reaching intervention
would have to be weighed against the administrative costs of implementation.24
We argue here that a lack of transparency causes consumers to under-respond to premium changes.
In the market for stand-alone Medicare Part D plans, which does not suffer from the same premium transparency issues, Abaluck and Gruber (2011) find that consumers tend to over-respond to
premiums relative to dimensions of financial generosity, leading to inefficient plan choices. If consumers in the MA market similarly under-value plan generosity, it’s possible that these two sources
of inefficiency may be at least partially offsetting. In that case, the welfare effects of increasing
premium transparency are unclear.
Since this study focuses on an insurance market, readers may wonder whether our results are
affected by heterogeneity in risk type and potential adverse or advantageous selection. Although
MA plans appear to have been benefiting from at least some favorable risk selection over the period
of our study (Newhouse and McGuire, 2014), selection-related incentives are unlikely to be behind
our results. The basic services-premium selection model implies that plans will set premium and
services too low in equilibrium attempting to attract the better risks (Rothschild and Stiglitz, 1976).
The comparative statics of such a model (corresponding to our empirical work), however, are not
generally signed, but depend on the joint distribution of preferences and risks in the population.
Furthermore, risk adjustment of plan premiums in MA can counteract selection incentives (Glazer
24
Eliminating auto-deduction of the Part B premium from Social Security checks entirely is an additional option
that would serve to make the Part B premium more salient to consumers. However, the administrative costs of such
an option would likely be large

24

and McGuire, 2000). In sensitivity analyses, controlling for the plan’s average enrollee risk score
had no material effect on our results. In sum, while we cannot rule out selection as at least a partial
explanation, we believe that the explanation we propose, that plans pass on higher subsidies by
offering more generous benefits because demand does not respond to premium reductions below
the Part B premium level, is simpler and more likely.

7

Conclusion

Given the size of the Medicare Advantage program, both in terms of expenditures and the number
of enrollees, understanding how the level of government subsidies affects the premiums and benefit
generosity of plans is an important policy question in and of itself. As a result of the Affordable Care
Act, benchmark payment rates now vary by plan quality rating and future benchmark payments are
scheduled to decline (Jacobson et al., 2011). In addition to these changes, policy makers continue
to discuss further changes to MA payments as a means to preserve Medicare’s fiscal stability and
bring costs in the MA market more in line with costs in FFS Medicare. Our estimates indicate
that nearly all of the marginal subsidy dollars that are passed onto consumers via the rebate go
toward making plans more generous, rather than reducing premiums. These findings suggest that
plans will respond to future benchmark payment changes primarily by adjusting benefit generosity
rather than premiums, at least for plans pricing at the kink.
We presented evidence that a kink in the demand curve at the FFS Part B premium level is an
important feature of this market and argued that a lack of premium transparency below this level
can explain our empirical results. To the extent that some of the additional benefits resulting from
increases in government subsidies are inefficiently high, as we have argued, increasing premium
transparency would improve consumer welfare in this market at no additional cost to the government. We discussed several simple policy interventions that should make the total premium, in
particular premiums below the FFS Medicare premium achieved via a “buy down” of the Part B
premium, more transparent and salient to consumers. Even if these interventions induce only small
changes in premiums and benefits, given the size of the MA market even modest efficiency gains
on a per person basis could produce sizable gains in aggregate.

25

Figure 1: Weighted Distribution of Total Plan Premiums in 2008

Source: 2008 Medicare Options Compare database. Weighted by plan enrollment. The total plan
premium is defined as the sum of the Parts B, C, and D plan premiums. See text for details.

26

Figure 2: Example of initial page of search results on Medicare Plan Finder website

27

Figure 3: Implications of Kinked Demand Curve for Equilibrium Premiums and Benefits
Premium for
MA Plan

p = b - rebate’

p = b - rebate’’

θ(b;u1)

p = b - rebate’’’

θ(b;u2)
θ(b;u3)
Medicare Part B
Premium

b*

Benefits for
MA Plan

welfare
loss

28

Table 1: Weighted Statistics: Analysis Sample
2006
2007
2008
Plan Benchmark
786.28 826.23 847.76
Plan Bid
648.31 704.30 709.66
Plan Rebate
88.79
87.91 100.11
Total Plan Premium
114.09 126.54 127.49
Pt C&D Premium
26.98
34.39
32.41
Plan Premium = Pt B Premium
0.55
0.53
0.52
Plan Premium < Pt B Premium
0.03
0.03
0.03
Plan Premium > Pt B Premium
0.42
0.44
0.45
HMO
0.95
0.95
0.91
PPO
0.05
0.05
0.09
OOPC
124.52
N
1085
1085
1461
Note: Subsetted to plans bidding below the benchmark. Weighted by

2009
878.69
727.74
110.35
126.53
32.13
0.52
0.05
0.42
0.88
0.12
118.91
1461
plan enrollment.

Table 2: Unweighted Summary Statistics: Analysis Sample
2006
2007
2008
2009
Plan Benchmark
764.22 799.16 822.58 853.17
Plan Bid
651.27 687.33 697.40 718.26
Plan Rebate
79.41
83.49
98.54 103.92
Total Plan Premium
121.52 126.34 125.25 126.69
Pt C&D Premium
37.67
36.26
33.31
34.78
Plan Premium = Pt B Premium
0.37
0.40
0.40
0.41
Plan Premium < Pt B Premium
0.06
0.05
0.09
0.08
Plan Premium > Pt B Premium
0.57
0.54
0.51
0.50
HMO
0.81
0.81
0.78
0.78
PPO
0.19
0.19
0.22
0.22
OOPC
131.70 129.37
N
1085
1085
1461
1461
Note: Subsetted to plans bidding below the benchmark.

29

Table 3: Rebate Results
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.388***
(0.076)

0.394***
(0.084)
0.014
(0.051)

0.385***
(0.085)
0.014
(0.051)

0.389***
(0.080)
0.019
(0.048)
-1.087
(1.522)

VARIABLES
BENCH
FFS SPENDING
INSURERS

Observations
R-squared

2,537
2,537
2,537
2,537
0.096
0.096
0.102
0.104
.
.
.
.
Year FE
YES
YES
YES
YES
Plan Type × Year FE
NO
NO
YES
YES
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Note: Regressions weighted by mean plan enrollment, standard errors clustered at the plan level.

Table 4: Total Premium (Parts B, C, and D) Results
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

-0.070
(0.048)

-0.063
(0.056)
0.017
(0.028)

-0.061
(0.057)
0.017
(0.028)

-0.062
(0.054)
0.016
(0.025)
0.208
(1.183)

VARIABLES
BENCH
FFS SPENDING
INSURERS

Observations
R-squared

2,537
2,537
2,537
2,537
0.083
0.084
0.084
0.085
.
.
.
.
Year FE
YES
YES
YES
YES
Plan Type × Year FE
NO
NO
YES
YES
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Note: Regressions weighted by mean plan enrollment, standard errors clustered at the plan level.

30

Table 5: Out-of-Pocket Costs (OOPC) Results (2008-2009 only)
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

-0.157*
(0.088)

-0.159*
(0.089)
-0.007
(0.045)

-0.150*
(0.090)
-0.007
(0.045)

-0.141
(0.089)
-0.002
(0.044)
0.686
(0.970)

VARIABLES
BENCH
FFS SPENDING
INSURERS

Observations
R-squared

1,461
1,461
1,461
1,461
0.042
0.042
0.055
0.056
.
.
.
.
Year FE
YES
YES
YES
YES
Plan Type × Year FE
NO
NO
YES
YES
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Note: Regressions weighted by mean plan enrollment, standard errors clustered at the plan level.
Table 6: Rebate Results by Non-Zero Premium Status
(1)

(2)

(3)
Drop Outliers

0.389***
(0.080)

0.346***
(0.086)
0.410**
(0.189)
-0.001
(0.048)
-1.316
(1.486)

0.343***
(0.086)
0.276
(0.180)
-0.003
(0.049)
-1.647
(1.387)

VARIABLES
BENCH
BENCH*NONZERO
FFS SPENDING

0.019
(0.048)
-1.087
(1.522)

INSURERS

Observations
R-squared

2,537
2,537
2,532
0.104
0.133
0.128
.
.
.
Year FE
YES
YES
YES
Plan Type × Year FE
YES
YES
YES
Plan Type × Year × NONZERO FE
NO
YES
YES
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Note: NONZERO indicates the plan had a positive Part C+Part D premium in the base year.

31

Table 7: Total Premium Results by Non-Zero Premium Status
(1)

(2)

(3)
Drop Outliers

-0.062
(0.054)

0.016
(0.038)
-0.625***
(0.202)
0.025
(0.026)
1.012
(1.149)

0.019
(0.037)
-0.451***
(0.164)
0.027
(0.026)
1.452
(1.008)

VARIABLES
BENCH
BENCH*NONZERO
FFS SPENDING

0.016
(0.025)
0.208
(1.183)

INSURERS

Observations
R-squared

2,537
2,537
2,532
0.085
0.127
0.147
.
.
.
Year FE
YES
YES
YES
Plan Type × Year FE
YES
YES
YES
Plan Type × Year × NONZERO FE
NO
YES
YES
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Note: NONZERO indicates the plan had a positive Part C+Part D premium in the base year.

32

Table 8: Rebate Results by Subsample
(1)

(2)

VARIABLES

2006-2007

2008-2009

(3)
2006-2007
2008-2009

BENCH

0.096
(0.148)
0.711***
(0.249)
0.040
(0.068)
-1.305
(1.324)

0.416***
(0.076)
-1.322
(0.841)
-0.039
(0.045)
-1.701
(1.085)

0.346***
(0.086)
0.410**
(0.189)
-0.001
(0.048)
-1.316
(1.486)

BENCH*NONZERO
FFS SPENDING
INSURERS

Observations
R-squared

1,076
1,461
0.082
0.223
.
.
Year FE
YES
YES
Plan Type × Year FE
YES
YES
Plan Type × Year × NONZERO FE
YES
YES
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Note: NONZERO indicates the plan had a positive Part C+Part D premium

33

2,537
0.133
.
YES
YES
YES

in the base year.

Table 9: Total Premium Results by Subsample
(1)

(2)

VARIABLES

2006-2007

2008-2009

(3)
2006-2007
2008-2009

BENCH

0.061
(0.096)
-0.670***
(0.222)
0.042
(0.041)
0.920
(1.015)

-0.003
(0.010)
-0.129
(0.370)
0.008
(0.015)
0.731
(0.580)

0.016
(0.038)
-0.625***
(0.202)
0.025
(0.026)
1.012
(1.149)

BENCH*NONZERO
FFS SPENDING
INSURERS

Observations
R-squared

1,076
1,461
0.150
0.033
.
.
Year FE
YES
YES
Plan Type × Year FE
YES
YES
Plan Type × Year × NONZERO FE
YES
YES
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Note: NONZERO indicates the plan had a positive Part C+Part D premium

34

2,537
0.127
.
YES
YES
YES

in the base year.

Table 10: Out-of-Pocket Costs (OOPC) Results by Non-Zero Premium Status (2008-2009 only)
(1)

(2)

-0.141
(0.089)

-0.133
(0.093)
0.871
(0.648)
-0.009
(0.046)
0.115
(1.000)

VARIABLES
BENCH
BENCH*NONZERO
FFS SPENDING

-0.002
(0.044)
0.686
(0.970)

INSURERS

Observations
R-squared

1,461
1,461
0.056
0.069
.
.
Year FE
YES
YES
Plan Type × Year FE
YES
YES
Plan Type × Year × NONZERO FE
NO
YES
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Note: NONZERO indicates the plan had a positive Part C+Part D premium in 2008.

35

References
Abaluck, Jason and Jonathan Gruber, “Choice Inconsistencies among the Elderly: Evidence
from Plan Choice in the Medicare Part D Program,” American Economic Review, 2011, 101 (4),
1180–1210.
Biles, Brian, Jonah Pozen, and Stuart Gutterman, “The Continuing Cost of Privatization:
Extra Payments to Medicare Advantage Plans Jump to $11.4 Billion in 2009,” Technical Report
pub. 1265, The Commonwealth Fund, www.commonwealthfund.org May 2009.
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, “FFS Data (2008-2010),” 2008-2009. Available
from

http://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Health-Plans/MedicareAdvtgSpecRateStats/FFS_

Data.html.
,

“Medicare

Available

Advantage/Part
from

D

Contract

and

Enrollment

Data,”

2008-2009.

http://www.cms.gov/Research-Statistics-Data-and-Systems/

Statistics-Trends-and-Reports/MCRAdvPartDEnrolData/index.html.
,

“Plan

Crosswalks,”

2008-2009.

Available

from

http://www.cms.gov/

Research-Statistics-Data-and-Systems/Statistics-Trends-and-Reports/
MCRAdvPartDEnrolData/Plan-Crosswalks.html.
, “Plan Payment Data,” 2008-2009.

Available from http://www.cms.gov/Medicare/

Medicare-Advantage/Plan-Payment/Plan-Payment-Data.html.
, “Ratebooks & Supporting Data,” 2008-2009. Available from http://www.cms.gov/Medicare/
Health-Plans/MedicareAdvtgSpecRateStats/Ratebooks-and-Supporting-Data.html.
Chernew, Michael E, Philip DeCicca, and Robert Town, “Managed Care and Medical
Expenditures of Medicare Beneficiaries,” Journal of Health Economics, 2008, 27 (6), 1451–1461.
Congressional Budget Office, “Medicare - May 2013 Baseline,” May 2013. Available from
http://www.cbo.gov/publication/44205.
Duggan, Mark, Amanda Starc, and Boris Vabson, “Who Benefits When the Government
Pays More? Pass-Through in the Medicare Advantage Program,” NBER working paper, March
2014.
Dunn, Abe, “The value of coverage in the medicare advantage insurance market,” Journal of
Health Economics, December 2010, 29 (6), 839–855.
Frakt, Austin B, Steven D Pizer, and Roger Feldman, “The Effects of Market Structure
and Payment Rate on the Entry of Private Health Plans into the Medicare Market,” Inquiry,
Spring 2012, 49 (1), 15–36.
36

Glazer, Jacob and Thomas G McGuire, “Optimal Risk Adjustment in Markets with Adverse
Selection: An Application to Managed Care,” American Economic Review, 2000, 90 (4), 1055–
1071.
Gold, Marsha, Gretchen Jacobson, Anthony Damico, and Tricia Neuman, “Medicare
Advantage 2012 Data Spotlight: Enrollment Market Update,” Technical Report, Kaiser Family
Foundation 2012.
,

,

, and

, “Medicare Advantage 2014 Spotlight: Plan Availability And Premiums,”

Technical Report, Kaiser Family Foundation 2013.
Jacobson, Gretchen, Tricia Neuman, Anthony Damico, and Jennifer Huang, “Medicare
Advantage Plan Star Ratings and Bonus Payments in 2012,” Technical Report, Kaiser Family
Foundation, publication 8257 November 2011.
McGuire, Thomas G, Joseph P Newhouse, and Anna D Sinaiko, “An Economic History
of Medicare Part C,” The Milbank Quarterly, 2011, 89 (2), 289–332.
McWilliams, J Michael, Christopher C Afendulis, Thomas G McGuire, and Bruce E
Landon, “Complex Medicare Advantage Choices May Overwhelm Seniors-Especially Those
With Impaired Decision Making,” Health Affairs, 2011, 30 (9), 1786–1794.
, John Hsu, and Joseph P Newhouse, “New Risk-Adjustment System Was Associated With
Reduced Favorable Selection In Medicare Advantage,” Health Affairs, 2012, 31 (12), 2630–2640.
Medicare Payment Advisory Commission, “Report to the Congress: Improving Risk Adjustment in Medicare,” November 2000.
, “Medicare Advantage Program Payment System,” October 2011. Available from www.medpac.
gov/documents/MedPAC_Payment_Basics_11_MA.pdf, accessed February 8, 2013.
, “Report to the Congress: Medicare Payment Policy,” March 2012. Available from www.medpac.
gov/chapters/Mar12_Ch12.pdf, accessed March 31, 2014.
Morgan, Robert O, Beth A Virnig, Carolee A DeVito, and Nancy A Persily, “The
Medicare-HMO Revolving Door — The Healthy Go in and the Sick Go Out,” New England
Journal of Medicine, 1997, 337 (3), 169–175.
Newhouse, Joseph P and Thomas G McGuire, “How Successful Is Medicare Advantage?,”
The Milbank Quarterly, 2014, forthcoming.
, Jie Huang, Richard J Brand, Vicki Fung, and John Hsu, “The Structure of Risk
Adjustment for Private Plans in Medicare,” American Journal of Managed Care, 2011, 17 (6),
e231–e240.

37

, Mary Price, Jie Huang, J Michael McWilliams, and John Hsu, “Steps To Reduce
Favorable Risk Selection In Medicare Advantage Largely Succeeded, Boding Well For Health
Insurance Exchanges,” Health Affairs, 2012, 31 (12), 2618–2628.
Pizer, Steven D, Austin B Frakt, and Roger Feldman, “Payment Policy and Inefficient
Benefits in the Medicare+Choice Program,” International Journal of Health Care Finance and
Economics, 2003, 3 (2), 79–93.
Rosen, Sherwin, “Hedonic Prices and Implicit Markets: Product Differentiation in Pure Competition,” Journal of Political Economy, 1974, 82 (1), 34–55.
Rothschild, Michael and Joseph Stiglitz, “Equilibrium in Competitive Insurance Markets:
An Essay on the Economics of Imperfect Information,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1976,
90 (4), 629–649.
Song, Zirui, Mary Beth Landrum, and Michael E Chernew, “Competitive Bidding in
Medicare: Who Benefits From Competition?,” American Journal of Managed Care, 2012, 18 (9),
546–552.
,

, and

, “Competitive bidding in Medicare Advantage: Effect of benchmark changes on

plan bids,” Journal of Health Economics, 2013, 32 (6), 1301–1312.

A

Additional Figures and Tables

38

Figure A.1: Relationship Between Changes in Plan Benchmarks and Changes in Realized FFS
Medicare Spending in the Plan’s Service Area

Source: Plan-level analysis sample of first-differenced 2007 and 2009 data, described in the text.

Table A.1: Number of Plans by Plan Type

HMO
PPO
PFFS
N
Note: Subsetted

2006 2007 2008
982 1,225 1,185
259
264
335
123
284
582
1364 1773 2102
to plans bidding below

2009
1,385
474
706
2565
the benchmark.

Table A.2: Unweighted Entry and Exit Rates by Plan Type
2006 2007 2008
Exit Entry Exit
HMO 0.07
0.22
0.03
PPO
0.09
0.14
0.03
PFFS 0.00
0.63
0.06
N
1364 1773 2102
Note: Subsetted to plans bidding below

39

2009
Entry
0.15
0.25
0.17
2565
the benchmark.

Table A.3: Weighted Entry and Exit Rates by Plan Type
2006
Exit
HMO 0.02
PPO
0.06
PFFS 0.00
N
1364
Note: Subsetted to plans bidding below

2007 2008 2009
Entry Exit Entry
0.03
0.00
0.02
0.08
0.00
0.08
0.38
0.12
0.04
1773 2102 2565
the benchmark. Weighted by plan enrollment.

Table A.4: Weighted Summary Statistics of Unrestricted Sample
2006
2007
2008
Plan Benchmark
785.36 825.36 847.61
Plan Bid
653.78 702.63 710.28
Plan Rebate
84.52
89.03
99.56
Total Plan Premium
117.64 125.79 128.00
Pt C&D Premium
31.33
33.70
32.90
Plan Premium = Pt B Premium
0.51
0.53
0.51
Plan Premium < Pt B Premium
0.03
0.03
0.03
Plan Premium > Pt B Premium
0.45
0.44
0.45
HMO
0.95
0.95
0.91
PPO
0.05
0.05
0.09
OOPC
124.74
N
1241
1489
1520
Note: Subsetted to plans bidding below the benchmark. Weighted by

40

2009
877.92
727.29
110.45
126.54
32.15
0.52
0.05
0.42
0.87
0.13
118.82
1859
plan enrollment.

