                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        BASES, BULLETS AND BALLOTS:
    THE EFFECT OF U.S. MILITARY AID ON POLITICAL CONFLICT IN COLOMBIA

                                           Oeindrila Dube
                                            Suresh Naidu

                                        Working Paper 20213
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20213


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2014




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Oeindrila Dube and Suresh Naidu. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Bases, Bullets and Ballots: the Effect of U.S. Military Aid on Political Conflict in Colombia
Oeindrila Dube and Suresh Naidu
NBER Working Paper No. 20213
June 2014
JEL No. H56,O54

                                             ABSTRACT

Does foreign military assistance strengthen or further weaken fragile states facing internal conflict?
Aid may strengthen the state by bolstering its repressive capacity vis-à-vis armed non-state actors,
or weaken it if resources are diverted to these very groups. We examine how U.S. military aid affects
political violence in Colombia. We exploit the allocation of U.S. military aid to Colombian military
bases, and compare how aid affects municipalities with and without bases. We use an instrument
based on worldwide increases in U.S. military aid (excluding Latin America). We find that U.S.
military assistance leads to differential increases in attacks by paramilitaries, but has no effect on
guerrilla attacks. Aid also results in more paramilitary (but not guerrilla) homicides during election
years, particularly in politically competitive municipalities. The findings suggest that foreign military
assistance may strengthen armed non-state actors, undermining domestic political institutions.


Oeindrila Dube
Assistant Professor of Politics and Economics
New York University
19 West 4th Street
New York, NY 10012-1119
odube@nyu.edu

Suresh Naidu
Columbia University
Assistant Professor of Economics & Public Affairs
Columbia University
420 West 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
sn2430@columbia.edu




An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w20213
       Each year, the world’s most powerful nations expend substantial resources on weak states with
the putative aim of shoring up governments facing internal strife.1 From Colombia to Iraq to the
Philippines, military aid is deployed with the view that it strengthens states against insurgents, drug
cartels and other armed, non-state actors. While weak states may bene…t from foreign military assis-
tance if it strengthens the state’s repressive capacity (Fearon and Laitin 2003), that same weakness
may also enable substantial capture or diversion of external resources by illicit armed groups (Besley
and Persson 2010). Yet, little attention has been devoted to how military aid can exacerbate con‡ict
when diverted to non-state armed actors.
       In‡uential examinations of military aid in the international relations literature have focused pri-
marily on the behavior of sovereign states (e.g., Carleton and Stohl 1985; Cingranelli and Pasquarello
1985; Carleton and Stohl 1987; McCormick and Mitchell 1988; Poe 1991; Poe and Meernik 1995).
However, a singular focus on the state may overlook an important link in the aid-con‡ict chain, given
the marked rise in armed non-state actors in the post-Cold War era (Pearlman and Cunningham
2011). Indeed, these very actors may bene…t from external resources if they are able to siphon aid
or if it is funneled toward them via collusive governments. Thus, to complement existing work, the
role of armed, non-state actors should be considered in evaluating how military aid a¤ects political
violence.
       Our paper uses this approach in examining the impact of U.S. military aid on political con‡ict
in Colombia between 1988 and 2005. Colombia serves as the ideal laboratory for this study as it
has been embroiled in a decades-old civil war enmeshed with the international drug trade, and the
United States has provided nearly $5 billion in military aid with the stated aim of supporting the
nation’s counter-narcotics and counter-insurgency e¤orts. The key actors in the con‡ict are left-wing
guerrillas, the state, and right-wing paramilitary groups, which have uno¢ cially been allied with the
government in countering the guerrillas.2 We use rich con‡ict data disaggregated across these three
   1
      Military aid from the advanced nations exceeds all other forms of aid. For example, in 2008, the United States
allocation for development aid, including o¢ cial development assistance, USAID administrative expenses and the State
Department Economic Support Fund, totalled $4.7 billion. In contrast, $5.2 billion was allocated for military aid to
other countries, including Foreign Military Financing, International Military Education and Training and the Andean
Counter-Drug Initiative (Congressional Budget Justi…cation 2008).
    2
      Realist scholars suggest aid operates in the interest of donors (e.g. Waltz 1979 pg. 159, Morgenthau 1962). Since
the paramilitaries and guerrillas do not directly threaten the U.S., from the realist view, we would expect aid to
primarily reduce narcotics activities and only secondarily suppress the guerrillas and paramilitaries (to the extent
that the U.S. would actually like to eliminate the latter group). Since idealists posit that aid may be given in the
interest of the receiving country, the emphasis here would be on suppressing both illegal armed groups, and only


                                                          2
actors to trace the role of armed non-state groups.
    An important feature of U.S. military aid is that it is disbursed to brigades of the Colombian
military, which operate out of bases located in particular municipalities. We …nd that increases in
U.S. military aid increase paramilitary violence di¤erentially in municipalities that have military
bases, while exerting no signi…cant e¤ects on guerrilla violence. To address potential endogeneity
in the timing of U.S. military aid we use an instrumental variables strategy which exploits general
increases in U.S. military spending around the world (excluding Latin America). The rise in global
U.S. military aid re‡ects the broad geopolitical outlook of the American government shaped by major
world events such as 9/11, and can thus be considered exogenous to the Colombian con‡ict.
    Consistent with paramilitary involvement in elections (Acemoglu et al. 2013), we also observe
disproportionate increases in paramilitary homicides in base regions during election years, again,
without equivalent increases in guerrilla homicides. In contrast to these e¤ects on killings, we …nd no
discernible impact of military aid on the cultivation of coca, the crop used to manufacture cocaine.
    We delineate three mechanisms through which foreign military aid can in‡uence paramilitary
violence: resource sharing between the government military and paramilitary groups; complemen-
tarity in tactics between the military and the paramilitaries; and the repression of guerrilla groups
by government forces. The pattern of our results strongly favor the resource sharing channel, as
opposed to the explanations that rest on strategic interactions among the armed actors. Our …ndings
and interpretation accord with qualitative work that has documented links between the Colombian
military and paramilitary groups (Dudley 2004; Hristov 2009; HRW 1996; HRW 2000).
    Perspectives on the potential consequences of aid strengthening paramilitary organizations could
di¤er. First, if these groups are seen as a necessary means of …ghting the guerrillas, then aid di-
version may be considered bene…cial if it enables the Colombian government to combat insurgents
with greater ‡exibility (Dasgupta 2009). The potential utility stemming from government use of
paramilitaries is also modeled in Mundler and Spagat (2005).
    On the other hand, the well-documented human rights abuses of the paramilitary groups, includ-
secondarily on narcotics, given the high cost of the war to Colombian citizens. Marxist or structuralist criticisms
(e.g. Stokes 2005), however, would point to the U.S. involvement on behalf of transnational imperial motivations, and
capital accumulation. Under this view, the U.S. interest would lie in securing property rights for both transnational
and domestic owners against guerrilla expropriation and violence. As it is di¢ cult to discern what is the "true" U.S.
interest in this context, we take the stated aim of the U.S. government and and evaluate military aid based on both
the repression of non-state armed actors as well as the elimination of narcotics production.


                                                          3
ing explicit assassination of civilians and political leaders, have led other authors to argue that the
Colombian government’s ties to these groups undermines the legitimacy of the state (Watson 2000);
and that …nancial support from the U.S. promotes political repression (Avilés 2001) and strengthens
undemocratic elements within Colombian society (Delacour 2000). In addition, paramilitary involve-
ment in the drug trade indicates that strengthening this group is at odds with the United State’s
counter-narcotics objective (Stokes 2001), while the very presence of a non-state armed group con-
trolling territory weakens the Colombian state’s monopoly on the legitimate use of violence. Through
this route, donor countries may …nd themselves fueling the very groups that military aid is designed
to suppress, prolonging con‡ict and further weakening the state. The breadth of potential conse-
quences underscores the importance of understanding how foreign aid in‡uences con‡ict dynamics
involving armed non-state actors.



Related Literature

Our paper is situated within the literature examining the impact of foreign military aid on political
outcomes, including human rights, democracy and con‡ict. Though the existing body of work encom-
passes a rich set of proposed theoretical channels, much of it is focused on the role of states, and very
little of it formalizes the role of illicit armed actors. For example, within the human rights literature,
it has been posited that security aid increases repression (Clark 1991; Danaher et al 1987; Meyer
1998) by enabling government elites to maintain power by suppressing the opposition (Callaway and
Matthews 2008). Correspondingly, cross-national evidence suggests a negative relationship between
military aid and human rights violations (ibid).
   A closely related literature seeks to understand determinants of foreign aid allocations of the
hegemonic United States. Meernik et al. (1998) show that in the post Cold-war era, U.S. foreign
aid is less driven by security considerations and more in‡uenced by statist ideological goals such as
promotion of democracy and human rights. In fact, a large volume of studies have sought to analyze
whether human rights conditions among recipient countries in‡uence the distribution of U.S. military
aid (Carleton and Stohl 1985; Cingranelli and Pasquarello 1985; Carleton and Stohl 1987; Poe 1991;
Abrams and Lewis 1993; Apodaca and Stohl 1999; Poe and Meernik 1995; Neumayer 2003). Overall,


                                                    4
these studies have found mixed e¤ects. Although assistance to repressive nations may exacerbate
state abuses, it is di¢ cult to infer the consequences of aid from analyzing its determinants, given the
selection problem that arises when it is targeted to certain types of political contexts.
       While little empirical work has identi…ed the speci…c impact of military aid on civil con‡ict, third-
party military interventions have been shown to lengthen con‡ict duration (Regan 2002). In fact,
sustained civil wars and political repression have long been held as persistent legacies of superpower
backing of armed groups (and states) in the Cold War era (Westad 2006, Easterly et al. 2008), with
Latin America being a regular recipient of U.S. military assistance (Smith 2000, Grandin 2007).3 Yet
intentional targeting by donors di¤ers from indirect diversion of aid through the state, which remains
largely unexamined.
       An older literature has explored the role of U.S. military aid on democratic institutions more
broadly, with some reporting insigni…cant relationships (Wolf 1969, Schmitter 1979) and others …nd-
ing evidence of institutional deterioration (Muller 1985). More recent cross-national work by Finkel
et al. (2007) also suggests an insigni…cant relationship between U.S. military aid and democracy.4
These mixed empirical estimates perhaps stem from di¤ering samples as well as reliance on endoge-
nous cross-country variation. In contrast, we use …ner-grained within-country variation covering
over 900 municipalities, and isolate exogenous variation in aid disbursement, which facilitate cleaner
identi…cation of the political consequences of military aid.5
       A larger body of work has examined the e¤ect of economic aid on civil con‡ict, spurred in part
by the theoretical notion that aid increases the value of capturing the state (Grossman 1992). Two
recent empirical analyses in this area are Crost et al. (forthcoming) and Nunn and Qian (forthcoming)
which examine the impact of development aid and food aid, respectively. Both …nd that aid promotes
con‡ict using explicit strategies to identify the causal relationship.6
   3
      More recently, scholars have analyzed the e¢ cacy of military assistance in pacifying insurgent populations (Branch
and Wood 2010).
    4
      Another branch of this literature has also examined the impact of U.S. military programs on militarism and
military coups (Baines 1972, Fitch 1979, Ruby and Gibler 2010).
    5
      Foreign aid more broadly de…ned has also been held to weaken democratic institutions by increasing the value
of the state as a prize, thereby generating a resource curse (Djankov et al. 2008). However, empirical assessments of
the aid-democracy relationship have yielded mixed results (Knack 2004; Wright 2009, Goldsmith 2001; Dunning 2004;
Morrison 2009).
    6
       Other studies, with less attention to the construction of control groups, have found di¤erent e¤ects. de Ree and
Nillesen (2009) …nd that o¢ cial development assistance reduces con‡ict cross-nationally, while Collier and Hoe- er
(2002) report insigni…cant e¤ects.



                                                           5
      Overall, there has been limited empirical work identifying the causal link between foreign military
aid and violence related to civil war. Our paper advances the literature by documenting this link
empirically, while highlighting aid diversion conceptually.



The Colombian Con‡ict

The Colombian civil war started with the launch of a communist insurgency in the 1960s. O¢ cially,
it is a three-sided con‡ict involving the government military, communist insurgents, and right-wing
paramilitary groups, though typically, the government and the paramilitary groups have been allied
against the guerrilla. The con‡ict remained low intensity throughout the 1980s, when it e¤ectively
served as a Cold War proxy, but escalated sharply during the 1990s for a number of di¤erent reasons,
including guerrilla defeat of the narcotra¢ ckers, and the emergence of paramilitary groups. This can
be seen in Figure I, which shows the average number of attacks in municipalities by each of the three
armed actors.
      Both the guerrillas and paramilitaries have sought territorial dominance via warfare and targeted
political killings. They are …nanced by kidnapping, extortion, and predation on natural resource rents,
and rely heavily on the cocaine trade for …nancing purposes. Thus the drug trade is inextricably
linked to the internal con‡ict.


Guerrilla Groups

The insurgency has been led by the Armed Revolutionary Forces of Colombia (FARC) and National
Liberation Army (ELN), which had 16,000-20,000 and 4,000-6,000 combatants respectively, during
the period of our analysis.7 Both groups …ght with the stated aim of overthrowing the government,
and also claim to represent the rural poor by supporting policies such as land redistribution. Despite
the stated ideological motivation, the guerrillas today are perceived to be economically motivated,
and pro…t from their involvement in the con‡ict (Richani 1997). These pro…ts, stemming largely
from the drug trade, …nance attacks against their opponents as well as physical infrastructure. In
comparison to the paramilitaries, these groups rely less on political assassinations, though they also
  7
      Both organizations have seen their membership fall in the post-2005 period.



                                                           6
pursue some targeted political killings.


Paramilitary Groups

Paramilitary organizations in their current form emerged in the 1980s, as private armies for drug
cartels and the rural elite who were targeted for extortion by the guerrillas. These were illegal armed
groups for most of the period we analyze: they were not formally a¢ liated with the government, and
received no o¢ cial state support in their formation.8 However, they did receive informal assistance
from military and police o¢ cers through uno¢ cial channels. A prominent example occurred in 1983,
when the defense minister in the Betancur administration launched a new military brigade in Puerto
Berrío. This unit and associated battalions "worked closely with the paramilitaries (Dudley 2004, p.
52)", and Puerto Berrío became a focal point for paramilitary repression. However, these ties were
not o¢ cially sanctioned and the judiciary subsequently prosecuted members of the brigade for their
involvement with the death squads (Dudley 2004).
    Independent paramilitary groups emerged separately across di¤erent regions of Colombia, but the
organizations shared the same underlying view of violently opposing the guerrillas, as well as left-
leaning politicians. As such, they began carrying out assassinations of political candidates during the
1980s (Dudley 2004). However, it was not until 1997 that the disparate groups became an organized
national political force, forming an umbrella organization called the United Self-Defense Forces of
Colombia (AUC), which had roughly 15; 000 members at peak strength. As shown in Figure I, the
1997 consolidation corresponded to a sharp rise in paramilitary violence, as the groups expanded
their activities nationally. It also marked the beginning of parapolitica— more direct paramilitary in-
tervention in electoral politics. Besides funding pro-paramilitary politicians, this has entailed killings
of civilians to coerce local populations into voting for such politicians, deterring would-be political
competitors from entering races, or simply assassinating candidates.9
    Around this time, the Judiciary started actively reigning in the paramilitary groups, e¤ectively
   8
     This is in contrast to historical phases in which the state provided o¢ cial support for civilian groups that served as
precursors of paramilitary organizations, or subsequently worked with paramilitary groups. This includes civil patrols
armed by the Defense Ministry in the 1960s (Hristov 2009), civilian networks created by the Colombian Central
Intelligence Agency in 1991 (HRW 1996) and the CONVIVIR in 1994 which resulted in the creation of rural security
cooperatives some of which subsequently joined paramilitary groups.
   9
     See Acemoglu et al. (2013) and the references therein for more details on paramilitary e¤ects on elections.



                                                             7
declaring them illegal. In part, this policy decision was a response to striking spikes in civilian
massacres, which was an explicit paramilitary strategy (Aranguren 2001). The policy also re‡ected
the paramilitaries’involvement with the drug trade. However, uno¢ cial collusion between the AUC
and military continued throughout the 1990s and 2000s, though the degree and form of this collusion
has been a point of debate.
       In 2003, the AUC declared a partial cease-…re, and some paramilitary blocks agreed to participate
in a demobilization program. However, the demobilization did not e¤ectively disarm all paramili-
tary units: human rights groups have documented continued paramilitary violence.10 Today, like
the guerrillas, Colombian paramilitary groups are on the U.S. government’s watchlist of terrorist
organizations.


De…nition of Political Con‡ict

Given these con‡ict dynamics, our de…nition of political con‡ict encompasses two forms of violence.
The …rst is unilateral attacks perpetrated by each of the armed actors as a part of the ongoing
civil war. The second is targeted political killings undertaken by the two illegal armed groups, the
guerrillas and paramilitaries.



U.S. Aid to Colombia

Owing to its position as the world’s largest producer of cocaine, Colombia became a major recipient of
U.S. military assistance after the "War on Drugs" was initiated during the late 1980s.11 As shown in
Figure II-Panel A, aid increased in 1990. This corresponded to the Andean Initiative which provided
the country with a $200 million aid package intended to combat drugs, but was comprised largely
of resources to train and equip the Colombian military (Isacson 2005). Aid increased again with
the 2000 launch of Plan Colombia, a $1.2 billion package aimed again at training and equipping the
Colombian military for counter-narcotics rather than counter-insurgency operations. However, given
  10
     See "Evaluation of the Paramilitary Demobilization in Colombia,"                       2006 conference pro-
ceedings from Corte a            Impunidad - Colombia en la Mira de la Corte Penal Internacional.
http://www.kolko.de/downloads/evaluation_demobilization.pdf.
  11
     Throughout the 1990s it was the third largest recipient after Israel and Egypt, and today, ranks …fth in the list
inclusive of Iraq and Afghanistan.



                                                          8
the guerrillas’involvement in the drug trade, the line between these two objectives is blurry, and it is
di¢ cult to distinguish the counter-narcotics and counter-insurgency components of U.S. aid (Stokes
2001). For this reason, our analysis aggregates these two aid categories.
       One important characteristic of U.S. military aid is that it is disbursed to particular Colombian
military brigades, each of which is attached to and operates out of a particular government military
base. This disbursement method generates spatial variation across Colombian municipalities, as aid
will be concentrated in municipalities with bases.



Mechanisms

Given the way in which U.S. military aid is disbursed, there are three potential channels through which
aid can serve to strengthen paramilitary capacity and thus result in greater con‡ict perpetrated by
paramilitary groups. The …rst involves aid diversion while the other two involve strategic interactions
among the armed groups, and each imply di¤erent empirically veri…able patterns of con‡ict.


Resource Sharing

Colombian military brigades may share resources such as arms and ammunition with paramilitary
groups, or provide other forms of logistical support funded out of military aid. Human rights orga-
nizations have provided extensive documentation of the military funneling weapons, uniforms, and
transport equipment; providing training and intelligence; and assisting in the conduct of paramil-
itary operations (Hristov 2009 pg. 82; HRW 2000). Interviews with former military intelligence
o¢ cials suggest that the sale of military arms to paramilitaries was common, and ex-paramilitary
members have also described using military helicopters, and being ‡own in to military bases.12 In ad-
dition, military intelligence has provided paramilitaries with lists of suspected insurgents or guerrilla
sympathizers, who were subsequently threatened or killed.
       Military support for paramilitary operations has taken both indirect and direct forms. On some
occasions, the military simply blockaded roads during paramilitary massacres. On other occasions,
  12
    La Semana, Nov. 18, 2008. “Former paramilitary leader Salvatore Mancuso said that AUC received help from the
police and the military in massacre."




                                                       9
joint operations have been alleged, including in connection with massacres in San José de Apartadó
in 2005,13 and El Aro in 1997 (HRW 2000).14;              15


       Charges of resource sharing have raised concern among American policymakers that some part
of U.S. aid may end up providing operational or material support to paramilitaries, through factors
such as weapons supply, or sharing of intelligence from either the deployment of military advisors
or technological assistance with surveillance.16 In 2000, a declassi…ed cable from Secretary of State
Albright to Ambassador Kammen indicated: "We note with concern persistent reports that the 24th
Brigade, and the 31st Counterguerrilla Battalion in particular, has been cooperating with illegal
paramilitary groups that have been increasingly active in Putumayo."17 A U.S. military Advisory
Group inquiry in 1995 also revealed that military brigades associated with human rights violations
that were conducted jointly with paramilitaries had received military assistance, including "vehi-
cles, M6 and M60E3 machine guns, pistols, grenade launchers, 7.62mm and 9mm ammunition, and
claymore mines’" (HRW 1996).18
       Partly in response to such documentation, in 1997 the United States Congress passed the "Leahy
Amendment," which required Colombian military brigades to be vetted for human rights abuses
before becoming eligible for U.S. assistance. However, the Colombian armed forces have largely
evaded these requirements.19 Moreover, Plan Colombia was speci…cally exempted from having to
  13
      El Espectador, Aug. 1 2008. "Verdades de la masacre de San José de Apartadó."
  14
      It has also been posited that overlaps in the networks of military and paramilitary groups have facilitated the
provision of this support. For instance, the Third Brigade o¢ cers helped to form the Calima Front, a paramilitary
groups, with former o¢ cers assuming leadership positions (HRW, 2000).
   15
      Allegations of resource sharing have led to the indictment of several high-level military o¢ cials, including General
Mario Montoya, commander and highest ranking o¢ cer of the Colombian army, who was charged with supplying
weapons to paramilitaries in Medellin in 2006. Six other high ranking o¢ cials were also indicted on similar charges
in 2008, including the former director and deputy director of the Administrative Security Department (a key secu-
rity agency). The list of accused is available at http://www.colombiasupport.net/news/2007/05/hundreds-of-public-
servants-implicated.htm, last accessed: 10/24/09.
   16
      For example, the U.S. provided $340 million to help updgrade radar facilities in Southern Colombia used for
gathering intelligence on guerrilla activity paramilitaries (Stokes 2005).
   17
      National Security Archive: http://www.gwu.edu/\symbol{126}nsarchiv/NSAEBB/NSAEBB69/col70.pdf, last ac-
cessed: 10/24/09
   18
      More recently, even direct examples of weapons supply have emerged. For example, in 2005, the Colombian
government arrested two U.S. army o¢ cers near Melgar, Tolima, the site of one of the largest bases in Colombia,
under charges of arming paramilitary groups with ammunition supplied by the U.S. government. (New York Times,
May 5, 2005, "Ammo Seized in Colombia; 2 G.I. Suspects Are Arrested.")
   19
      The mechanisms have included: reshu- ing individuals accused of human rights violations across brigades; forming
new brigades, which were subsequently vetted and "approved" by the U.S. State Department; and not cooperating in
handing over information about human rights violations to the U.S. government. (See the National Security Archives
Declassi…ed document http://www.gwu.edu/~nsarchiv/NSAEBB/NSAEBB69/col58.pdf, last accessed: 12/08/08).




                                                            10
abide by this clause.20 Since U.S. military aid is allocated to military brigades operating out of
Colombian government military bases, municipalities with bases were best positioned to serve as
physical points of di¤usion of resources to paramilitary groups.


Complementarity in Tactics

The second potential channel is via complementarity in tactics between the government and the
paramilitary groups. If the paramilitaries specialize in a form of …ghting that complements govern-
ment military e¤orts, then aid may lead to greater paramilitary violence in locations where the state
expands its attacks. For example, the military has a technological advantage over the guerrilla, but
the highly mobile paramilitary are relied on "as a rearguard that consolidates –with an antisubversive
program –the territories taken by the army" (Gutiérrez Sanin and Baron 2005, pg. 6).


Guerrilla Repression

The third potential mechanism arises through the e¤ect of aid on guerrilla repression. If foreign
military aid strengthens the government’s military capacity, this may facilitate more successful re-
pression or expulsion of the guerrillas from a given territory. This, in turn, may unleash paramilitary
violence if the guerrillas had previously held paramilitary aggression in check within these areas. It
is also conceptually possible that increases in guerrilla attacks are met with increases in paramilitary
attacks, as landowners and other pro-paramilitary constituencies react to left-wing violence. Indeed,
the origins of the paramilitary lie in the demand of landowners to protect themselves from the FARC.



In the Supporting Information (SI) Appendix, we present a simple model of three-way con‡ict
between paramilitaries, guerrillas, and the government that allows us to parametrize each of the
three channels above. Our empirical analysis also enables direct examination of these three
possibilities, as each of the potential channels implies a di¤erent pattern of results.


       We summarize the empirical consequences of our discussion of mechanisms below.
  20
    The Washington Post, Aug. 23, 2000, "Clinton Clears Aid Package For Colombia; Human Rights Waiver Allows
$1.3 Billion to Fight Drugs."



                                                    11
  1. If military brigades share resources with paramilitary groups, then an increase in U.S. military
     aid should lead to di¤erential increases in paramilitary attacks in municipalities with bases.

  2. If U.S. military aid leads to paramilitary violence via repression of the guerrillas, then increases
     in aid will also lead to di¤erential reductions in guerrilla violence in municipalities with bases.

  3. If U.S. military aid increases paramilitary violence owing to complementary tactics or govern-
     ment repression of the guerrilla, then aid increases should not lead to di¤erential increases in
     paramilitary violence in base municipalities once government attacks are controlled for.


   In addition, we consider the implications for violence during election years. Given the well doc-
umented electoral involvement of the paramilitary groups (Acemoglu et al. 2013), the e¤ect of aid
in times and places where electoral competition is salient may be qualitatively di¤erent. If resource
sharing serves as the primary mechanism, we expect targeted paramilitary killings stemming from aid
to change with the electoral objectives of paramilitary groups, rising di¤erentially in election years
and in politically competitive municipalities.
   In addition, we posit that political homicides are a type of violence without strong tactical com-
plementarities with government attacks, as they tend to target individual civilians and do not bene…t
as much from the operational support of the Colombian military as larger-scale attacks. In addition,
direct government involvement in assassinations could risk undermining the legitimacy of the state,
and so is likely to be restrained relative to attacks against the guerrillas. Thus, if complementarity
with government forces is the key mechanism, we should not observe paramilitary political killings
in response to aid to increase di¤erentially during election periods.



Empirical Strategy

Our empirical strategy uses the fact that U.S. military aid is allocated to brigades which are head-
quartered in military bases located in particular municipalities. This creates municipal-level variation
in the allocation of U.S. military aid. Importantly, we focus on the long-standing military bases that
precede the period of the analysis, which precludes the possibility that they have been constructed
as an endogenous response to con‡ict over this time.


                                                  12
       We implement a basic di¤erence-in-di¤erences estimator. We estimate:


                              yjt =   j   +   t   + (USmil t    Base j ) + Xjt + ! jt                              (1)

where yjt are con‡ict-related variables including the number of paramilitary attacks, government
attacks, or guerrilla attacks in municipality j and year t.          j   are municipality …xed e¤ects which con-
trol for all time-invariant municipality characteristics that may be correlated with con‡ict, including
geographic features such as rough terrain, the presence of the base itself, and historical municipal
conditions.      t   are year …xed e¤ects which also control for con‡ict levels that are common to all
Colombian municipalities in a given year.               Xjt is a vector of control variables that varies across
speci…cations but always includes the natural log of population, which accounts for the scale e¤ect
since our con‡ict-related dependent variables are the number of attacks. Base j is a dummy variable
which equals one if the municipality has a military base. USmil t is the natural log of U.S. military
and anti-narcotics aid to Colombia.21 The coe¢ cient                  captures the extent to which changes in
military assistance induce a di¤erential change in violence in municipalities that have bases, relative
to non-base municipalities. This approach enables us to examine the e¤ect of aid on con‡ict out-
comes, in the absence of data on how much aid is allocated to each of the bases individually. In our
main speci…cations, equation (1) is estimated using OLS, with all standard errors clustered at the
municipality level.
       One concern with this empirical strategy is potential endogeneity in the timing of U.S. funding.
Reverse causality could generate an upward bias on our estimates if U.S. military aid increases more
in response to violence growth in municipalities with bases. For instance, attacks in base regions
may be viewed as a strong threat to stability, and therefore galvanize more U.S. funding relative to
attacks in other regions. On the other hand, the estimates could be downward biased if aid increases
more in response to violence growth or other omitted variables correlated with violence in non-base
regions. As an example, since reducing narcotics production is a stated U.S. objective, military aid
may respond to trends in violence in the largest coca producing municipalities, which are non-base
municipalities.
  21
    Note that the j control for Basej and the t control for the overall level of U Smilt , which is why the constituent
terms of the interaction do not appear separately.



                                                           13
       To address this potential endogeneity, we use an instrumental variables (IV) strategy that exploits
changes in U.S. funding in countries outside of Latin America as an instrument for changes in U.S.
funding to Colombia. Since Colombia is one of the largest recipients of U.S. anti-narcotics assistance,
it is possible that the allocation of this line-item to Colombia determines the allocation of anti-
narcotics assistance to other countries. To avoid this concern, we instrument the sum of anti-narcotics
and military aid to Colombia solely with military aid to other nations. The instrument is valid since
U.S. funding to the rest of the world is determined by the broad geopolitical outlook of the American
government, re‡ecting factors such as the party of the president or other major world events, and can
thus be considered exogenous to the con‡ict in Colombia. For example, Figure II-Panel A shows
that there was a sharp increase in U.S. military assistance to countries outside of Latin America
after 2001. This re‡ects both the start of the Bush administration, and the events of 9/11, which
created an impetus to provide greater funding as a part of the "war on terror." This …gure also shows
that U.S. assistance to Colombia is positively correlated with military aid to non-Latin American
nations.      Indeed, a simple regression of these two time series con…rm that there is a signi…cant
positive relationship. (See the SI Appendix Table A.I).22 Since our treatment is the interaction
of U.S. military aid with the military base indicator, our instrument is aid to non-Latin nations
interacted with the base indicator. We conduct 2SLS estimation in which the …rst stage is given by:


                    USmil t    Base j =        j   +     t   + (USmilnonlac t   Base j ) + Xjt +   jt                (2)


where USmilnonlac t is the log of U.S. military aid to non-Latin American countries. The second
stage is given by:
                              yjt =    j   +       t   + (USmi l tdBase j ) + X    jt   + ! jt                       (3)

While our main speci…cations use …xed e¤ects least squares estimation, in the SI Appendix, we
also use a …xed e¤ects negative binomial estimator, implementing the IV strategy via a two-stage
procedure and bootstrapped standard errors (Cameron and Trivedi 2009).23
  22
     This table also shows that the relationship is robust to the inclusion of a linear time trend. However, we treat the
inclusion of the trend and its square as an auxiliary check since we have time series with just 18 years of data, and
this likely constitutes an over-control since these variables will be correlated with any e¤ect of Plan Colombia.
  23
     We opt for OLS as the primary estimator as there are both excess zeroes in our data as well as overdispersion,
which make it problematic to apply count models with …xed e¤ects (Allison and Waterman 2002, Guimàres 2008). In


                                                                  14
    Equations (1) and (3) serve as the key equations of the analysis.                   But we additionally assess
whether there are di¤erential e¤ects of military aid on homicides carried out by these groups during
election periods, to test for political motivations. To analyze this, we estimate:




 yjt =    j   +   t   + (USmil t   Base j   Ele t ) + (USmil t      Base j ) + (Ele t     Base j )# + Xjt + ! jt (4)


    where Ele t is a dummy which equals one during the years in which elections were held in Colombia:
1988, 1990, 1991, 1994, 1997, 1998, 2000, 2002 and 2003. The coe¢ cient                     captures the di¤erential
e¤ect of U.S. military spending in base regions during election years relative to non-election years.
The coe¢ cient # captures the di¤erential e¤ect of election periods on violence in base regions relative
to non-base regions. All other two-way sub-interactions are absorbed by the municipality or year
…xed e¤ects.



Data and Empirical Results

Our data on civil war violence comes from the Con‡ict Analysis Resource Center (CERAC). This
dataset is event-based, and includes over 21,000 war-related episodes in over 950 municipalities from
1988 to 2005. It is collected on the basis of 25 major newspapers and supplemented by oral reports
from members of Catholic priest networks who describe incidents of political violence in nearly every
municipality in the country. This expands the scope of data coverage to remote regions that may
otherwise lack media coverage. The priests are regarded as neutral actors in the con‡ict, and often
used as negotiators between the two sides. This minimizes potential over-reporting of violent events
perpetuated by one side over another. The data are also cross-checked against other o¢ cial sources,
including a dataset by the National Police and reports by HRW and Amnesty International. The
procedure used to collect the data is described more extensively in Restrepo et al. (2004).
    The CERAC data record the number of attacks that are undertaken by each major actor in the
particular, the paramilitary attacks variable is zero for 15746 out of 16848 municipal year observations, suggesting that
excess zeros are a problem. However, in the SI Appendix, we show that our results are robust to a variety of di¤erent
functional forms with OLS, as well as a "hybrid" …xed-e¤ects Negative Binomial estimator proposed by Allison (2005).
We focus on Negative Binomial estimation over Poisson estimation as our data are overdispersed.



                                                           15
con‡ict, including the government, the paramilitaries, the guerrillas, and these are the main depen-
dent variables of our analysis. The data are able to distinguish between unilateral attacks, which are
one-sided events carried out by a particular group, versus two-sided events involving an exchange of
…re among two or more groups. Attacks by the government primarily involve aerial bombardment, or
anti-kidnap and anti-narcotics operations. Attacks by the illegal armed groups also include incidents
such as village incursions; killing civilians; bombing pipelines and other infrastructure; destroying
police stations or military bases; and ambushing military convoys. Two examples convey the richness
of the underlying data.24



  1. January 12, 2004. Department: Antioquia –Municipality: Anza. Guerrillas from Front 34 of
     FARC-EP threw an explosive at a group of AUC paramilitaries, killing …ve and injuring seven
     of them.

  2. December 24, 1999. Department: Valle –Municipality: Tulua. Between 30 to 40 heavily armed
     AUC paramilitaries arrived in the zone of Alta‡or. Holding a list, they pulled …ve peasants out
     of their houses and executed them.


      We also employ a number of con‡ict-related variables from a Center for Study of Economic
Development (CEDE) dataset, which was collected from the Observatory of Human Rights of the
Vice-Presidency of Colombia and is based on reports from the Colombian security agency, the Ad-
ministrative Department of Security. This includes municipality-year level data on the number of
paramilitary and guerrilla homicides, as well as killings of elected o¢ cials, candidates running for
o¢ ce, and community leaders, which we refer to as assassinations. The data also include several
other measures including: paramilitary and guerrilla activity such as population displacement and
theft; government military actions, such as rescue of kidnaps, seizure of arms and captives, and anti-
narcotics operations such as dismantling of narcotics laboratories. We de…ne our core sample based
on the number of municipalities which include both the CERAC and CEDE con‡ict data, which
yields a sample of 936 municipalities.
      We construct an indicator of whether a municipality has a military base from two sources. We
begin with the base locations reported in globalsecurity.org, which gives us a list of 37 municipalities
with military bases. We cross-check each of these bases against information from the Colombian army,
 24
      We translate the events which are originally recorded in Spanish.


                                                           16
navy and airforce websites to determine which bases were newly built over our sample period.25 We
…nd and exclude new bases from the sample, since it is possible that these bases were built as an
endogenous response to ongoing con‡ict.26 This leaves us with 34 municipalities with military bases,
of which 32 appear in the sample for which the con‡ict data is available. Map 1 in the SI Appendix
shows the location of these bases.
      We obtain data on municipal population from DANE, the Colombian statistical agency, and
municipal geographic characteristics from CEDE. In addition, data on coca cultivation comes from
two sources.      Dirección Nacional de Estupefacientes (DNE) has a measure of land used for coca
cultivation in each municipality in 1994. An equivalent measure for 1999 to 2004 comes from the
United Nations O¢ ce of Drug Control (UNODC), which collects this data based on satellite imagery.
      Data from the Registraduría Nacional De Colombia is also used to generate the Golosov index
of political competitiveness (Golosov 2010). Data on vote shares disaggregated by party needed
to create this index are only available after 1997 for mayoral elections and after 2000 for the local
councils. We create separate indices for mayors and councils for each election year, and average
these over the common election year sample (2000 and 2003). Our competitiveness indicator equals
one if both the average mayoral index and average council index exceed the median values of these
measures.
      Finally, data on U.S. aid is from the USAID Greenbook. We use disbursements, which is money
and resources spent that year, rather than commitments of future aid. Since much of U.S. assistance
to Colombia, including the provision of training and equipment, falls under the category of anti-
narcotics assistance, we look at the combined categories of military and anti-narcotics assistance. We
also use data on Colombian military expenditures from the World Bank.
      Table A.II in the Appendix shows the descriptive statistics of key variables, in municipalities with
and without military bases. The means indicate that paramilitary, guerrilla and government attacks,
as well as paramilitary and guerrilla political assassinations, tend to be higher in base municipalities
relative to non-base municipalities. In addition, paramilitary assassinations exceed guerrilla assas-
sinations, on average, in both types of regions. There are also di¤erences in the population size,
 25
    The army website (last accessed 4/10/09): http://www.ejercito.mil.co/?idcategoria=69
 The navy website (last accessed 4/10/09): http://www.armada.mil.co/
 The air forces website (last accessed 4/10/09): http://www.fac.mil.co/?idcategoria=39l
 26
    See SI Appendix for further information on new bases.


                                                      17
ruggedness, coca cultivation, and oil presence across these regions. As such, we control for these
municipal characteristics interacted with year e¤ects in the analysis below.


U.S. Military Aid and Violence in Base Municipalities

We …rst present visual evidence. We interact our base indicator with year dummy variables, and
regress paramilitary attacks on these interaction terms, controlling for municipality and year …xed
e¤ects and the log of population. In Figure II-Panel B, we graph these interactions along with U.S.
military and anti-narcotics aid to Colombia. The aid time series move in tandem during most years.
In particular, di¤erential attacks increased in 2000 when Plan Colombia was launched, fall in 2001
when military aid was scaled down and rise again in 2002 when aid started increasing.27
    Table I con…rms this visual evidence. Columns (1)-(3) presents the OLS estimates of equation (1) :
The coe¢ cients show that an increase in military assistance signi…cantly increases paramilitary at-
tacks as well as government attacks in base regions relative to non-base regions, but has no signi…cant
e¤ect on guerrilla attacks. This result is consistent with our prediction that paramilitary violence will
increase in response to aid. Moreover, the insigni…cant e¤ect on guerrilla violence presents evidence
against the notion that paramilitary attacks increase owing to successful government repression of the
communist insurgents. Together this provides evidence for our …rst mechanism of resource sharing
and against the second mechanism of government repression of guerillas.28
    The OLS estimates imply substantial e¤ects: the coe¢ cient of .15 in column (1) suggests that a 1%
increase in U.S. aid increases paramilitary attacks by approximately .0015 more in base municipalities,
or by 1.5% more above the mean paramilitary attacks of .103 over the sample period.                         Similarly,
column (2) implies that 1.2% more aid increases government attacks by approximately 1% more in
base versus non-base areas. U.S. aid to Colombia increased by an average of 92% per year over
1988-2005. Thus the coe¢ cients imply an associated di¤erential increase of 138% in paramilitary
  27
     We posit that di¤erential attacks fell in 2004 due to the paramilitary demobilization of 2003, which drastically
reduced attacks by the AUC. This nation-wide reduction should also have reduced the di¤erential number of attacks
in base municipalities since the AUC is the most politically connected faction of the paramilitary groups with most
direct links to the military. As discussed previously, the demobilization resulted in a temporary hiatus of attacks, and
paramilitary violence (including by the AUC) resumed in 2005. This account is corroborated in Figure II-B, as the
number of attacks spiked upward this year after falling in 2003 and 2004.
  28
     The non-e¤ect additionally indicates that aid is not targeted to regions that have high overall levels of civil war
violence.



                                                          18
attacks and 110% in government military attacks.
       Given the sizable spike in military aid in 2000 (Figure II-A), we additionally verify that the
estimates are robust to excluding this year from the sample.29 In Appendix Table A.III, we also
disaggregate narcotics and military aid, and show that the e¤ects are driven by narcotics assistance.
This likely re‡ects the fact that on average, narcotics assistance was nearly six times larger than
military assistance over this period, and became a larger portion of overall security assistance with
the advent of Plan Colombia.30
       Columns (4)-(6) in Table I present the IV estimates of equation (3), while columns (7)-(9) show
the reduced form.31       The IV estimates are larger than the OLS estimates. They imply that a 1%
increase in aid translates into 3% more paramilitary attacks and 2.6% more government attacks
in base municipalities versus non-base municipalities. This is consistent with the idea that OLS
downward biases the estimates since U.S. funding responds to di¤erential increases in violence in
non-base areas, such as the largest coca municipalities. It could also re‡ect heterogeneity in the
e¤ect of aid on paramilitary attacks. For example the aid that comes to Colombia as part of general
U.S. aid increases may be less well-targeted to Colombian military troops facing the guerrilla, and
thus more likely to be captured by paramilitaries or their sympathizers.
       An important conceptual point is to discern the resource sharing channel from the use of comple-
mentary tactics between the government and the paramilitaries. As indicated by the third implication
of our theoretical framework, if the e¤ect on paramilitary attacks is driven primarily by comple-
mentarity, then the impact of aid on paramilitary attacks should be rendered small and insigni…cant
when we control for government attacks. Yet doing so in Table II-Column (1) doesn’t signi…cantly
a¤ect the estimated coe¢ cients, in both the OLS (Panel A) and IV (Panel B). In fact, the coe¢ cients
lie within the …ve percent con…dence interval of the corresponding coe¢ cients in Columns (1) and
  29
      The coe¢ cient (standard error) on our treatment variable is 0.17(0.06) in the model of paramilitary attacks when
the year 2000 is excluded.
   30
      In Table A.III, we also test for dynamic e¤ects by interacting the base indicator with lag of the aggregate aid
measure. The e¤ect of lagged aid is smaller and less precise relative to the contemporaneous e¤ect for both paramilitary
and government attacks. We thus use the contemporaneous aid interactions in the remainder of the analysis.
   31
      The …rst-stage F-statistic will be mechanically very large because the bases variable is interacted with the en-
dogenous time series variable, the U.S. military aid to Colombia, and the instrument, U.S. military aid to non-Latin
American nations. Since our IV strategy is designed to address endogeneity in the aid component, the strength of the
…rst-stage is better re‡ected in the signi…cant relationship between the two military aid time series (shown in Figure
II-A and Table A.I). The reduced form estimates presented in Table I also show that the signi…cant second-stage
relationships are not driven by inclusion of interaction terms with the bases variable in the …rst stage.



                                                          19
(4) Table I.32 Thus, paramilitary attacks appear not to be driven purely by complementarities with
government attacks.
       In the remaining columns of Table II, we show that our results are robust to including a number
of additional important controls. First, it is possible that other types of aid or security policy are
set in particular department-years in a manner that is correlated with violence levels as well as
military aid.33 To account for this, Columns (3)-(5) control for department by year …xed e¤ects,
meaning we compare only municipalities within the same department within the same year. Since
U.S. military assistance and di¤erential paramilitary attacks in base areas increased in the post-2001
era (Figure II-B), columns (6)-(8) include separate linear time trends by base and non-base regions,
and a post-2001 indicator variable interacted with the base variable. This allows the level e¤ect of
U.S. assistance on violence in base and non-base regions to vary for the period before and after 2001.
       In columns (9)-(11), we also control for a number of other geographic and economic characteris-
tics, all interacted with year dummies, including: a 1988 urban indicator (measured as population
over 10,000), since bases tend to be located in larger cities; the standard deviation of height, since
ruggedness may di¤er across base and non-base regions; whether municipalities produce or transport
oil, since oil is Colombia’s largest export and armed groups may …ght to predate on resource rents
(Dube and Vargas 2013); as well as coca cultivation in 2000 (when Plan Colombia was launched), as
11 of the base municipalities produce this drug crop over the sample period.34
       We …nd that the estimated e¤ects on paramilitary attacks remain signi…cant across the speci…ca-
tions in Table II, though several display insigni…cant impacts on government attacks. This further
suggests that increased government attacks is not a prerequisite for greater paramilitary violence in
response to aid increases, casting further evidence against the complementarity channel.
       In Table III, we address the possibility that bases may have been built in regions with high levels
of past violence, which creates the concern that they may respond more to any shock including aid
‡ows, for reasons that have little to do with resource sharing. In columns (1)-(3), we add in controls
for year dummies interacted with aggregate historical violence levels, measured as total war-related
  32
     Since contemporaneous government attacks is endogenous, we verify that these results are the same if we control
instead for lag government attacks. These results are available upon request.
  33
     There are 32 departments in Colombia and these are analogous to U.S. states. Governors of departments have the
power to set state-wide policies, and may do so on security matters or with the aim of attracting aid.
  34
     The results are also robust to controlling for interactions with coca cultivation in 1994, the earliest year for which
coca data is available.


                                                            20
casualties over 1975-1987 (scaled by municipal population in the beginning of the sample period).
Columns (4)-(6) control for year dummies interacted with population scaled guerrilla attacks over
1975-1987.   The results are robust to the inclusion of these additional controls in both the OLS
and IV speci…cations. This suggests that base location in regions with high levels of past violence,
including high levels of past insurgency, cannot account for the estimated e¤ects.
   We also conduct a number of additional robustness checks in the SI Appendix. Leave-one-out
estimation shows that the e¤ects are not driven by any one base (Figure A.I). Estimates using
discrete versions of the attacks variables in Table A.III show insensitivity to functional form, while
Table A.IV demonstrates robustness to Negative Binomial estimation. Table A.V also addresses
the concern that non-base regions may not serve as good controls for base regions by partitioning
the sample on paramilitary presence in the beginning of the sample period, whether a municipality
borders a base municipality, and whether it is recorded as growing coca. Table A.VI indicates that
the results are robust to instrumenting base location with the average slope of the municipality, as
military bases cannot be built in excessively steep regions. Finally, Table A.VII demonstrates that
neither the emergence of new base locations over our sample period, nor the expansion of two base
facilities in the post Plan Colombia period a¤ect our estimates. These additional checks provide
further evidence that our results are not driven by endogeneity in the spatial location of bases.


Aid, State Strength and Coca Cultivation

A core issue of importance to our analysis is the role of the state. Clearly, military e¤orts by the
Colombian government will in‡uence violence outcomes. Moreover, U.S. military aid allocation may
be correlated with state strength if the Colombian government receives more aid when it spends more
domestic resources on the con‡ict, and concentrates its …ghting e¤orts in the base regions.
   To account for this potential e¤ect, columns (1)-(6) of Table IV present estimates controlling for
(log) government military expenditures interacted with the base variable. In columns (7)-(12), we
control for its interaction with various presidential administrations, which have di¤ered in the degree
to which they prioritized defense. For example, the hallmark of the Uribe administration (2002-2010)
was allocating greater resources toward suppressing the guerrillas. The omitted category is President
Virgilio Barco of the Liberal party, who served from 1986-1990.       The IV estimates are larger in

                                                  21
magnitude after we include the administration controls, and these results indicate that most of the
later administrations witnessed relatively fewer paramilitary attacks in the base regions.35 These
results establish that our …ndings are not driven by a Uribe e¤ect.36
       The stated aim of U.S. military assistance to Colombia has been promoting counter-narcotics
e¤orts and lowering drug crop production. However, after 2001, the U.S. government authorized the
use of military assistance for counter-insurgency purposes in this country. To investigate what types
of activity U.S. aid in‡uences, we analyze the e¤ect of military aid on di¤erent types of operations
undertaken by the Colombian military, as well as overall levels of municipal coca cultivation. Table
V presents these estimates.37 Columns (1)-(3) examine counter-insurgency operations –the number
of armed group captives taken by the Colombian military, the number of weapons seized (including
recaptured arms and deactivated explosives), and the number of kidnap victims rescued from the
illegal armed groups. In addition, columns (4)-(5) examine municipal coca cultivation and the number
of counter-narcotics operations undertaken by the Colombian military.
       To see which type of aid in‡uences these outcomes, we also disaggregate the combined military
and narcotics aid into each component. For the IV estimates in Panel B, narcotics (military) aid
from the U.S. to Colombia is instrumented by narcotics (military) aid from the U.S. to all other non-
Latin American nations. The results indicate that the in‡ux of security assistance does signi…cantly
increase some types of government military operations, with the impact of narcotics aid on weapons
seizures displaying greatest robustness across OLS and IV. The coe¢ cient of 1.169 in Column (2) of
Panel B implies that a 1% increase in U.S. aid increases arms seizures by 2.8% more in base regions.
       In contrast, the coe¢ cient on the aid interaction is close to zero and statistically insigni…cant for
the coca outcome, suggesting aid does not have a disproportionate e¤ect on drug crop production
  35
     The earlier administrations were those of Presidents Gaviria and Samper, both of the Liberal Party. President
Pastrana (in o¢ ce over 1998-2002) was from the Conservative Party. President Uribe was an Independent who had
helped to form the National Unity Party.
  36
     The OLS results appear to suggest that military aid does not a¤ect government attacks signi…cantly when military
expenditure is accounted for, or any of the dependent variables when administration dummies are included. However,
this is likely to re‡ect overcontrolling: U.S. military aid varies with idiosyncratic relationships among various Colombian
presidents and the United States, and controlling for unrestricted presidential e¤ects thus eliminates a lot of this
variation in aid. If presidents are also pursuing base-speci…c counterinsurgency strategies that a¤ect paramilitary
groups, then including the presidential controls would confound the OLS estimates. However, we circumvent this
potential bias with the IV strategy. Since endogenous time-varying U.S. military aid is exactly the type of problem
that the IV estimate solves, the robustness of the results to the IV strategy in Table III helps ensure that this potential
over-controlling bias does not invalidate our account.
  37
     Because we look at the coca outcome, we restrict the sample to the set of municipal year observations for which
the coca variable is available, but the results do not change if we analyze the military operations for the full sample.


                                                            22
in base regions (even though they have higher coca cultivation on average, relative to non-base
regions). Moreover, there is a signi…cant negative e¤ect on anti-narcotics operations, across both
the OLS and IV speci…cations, which is in‡uenced by both military and narcotics aid. These e¤ects
are substantial: for example, the coe¢ cient in Column (5) of Table V-Panel B implies that a 1%
increase in aid implies that anti-narcotics operations fall by 7% more in base municipalities. In other
words, when U.S. military aid increases, there is a decrease in counter-narcotics operations in base
regions relative to non-base areas. One interpretation of this e¤ect is that it re‡ects a shift from
counter-narcotics to counter-insurgency in the use of U.S. military aid. In column (6) we re-analyze
the anti-narcotics operations for the set of municipalities that have been known to produce coca at
some point, which includes 11 military base municipalities. The results remain e¤ectively unchanged
with this sample restriction.


Aid, Assassinations and Elections

If the leakage of resources from the military strengthens paramilitary organizations, this should
boost their capacity to undertake a range of activities, including attacks that are politically targeted.
To test this idea, we next analyze whether military aid has di¤erential e¤ects on paramilitary and
guerrilla killings during election periods. We look at total homicides and political assassinations, a
sub-category that includes the killing of elected o¢ cials, candidates and community leaders, and thus
re‡ects political targeting.
   Columns (1)-(4) of Panel A in Table VI presents the estimates for total homicides in all sample
municipalities. While military aid has no signi…cant e¤ect on homicides during non-election years, it
leads to a signi…cant di¤erential increase in homicides conducted by paramilitaries in election years
relative to non-election years. Adding the coe¢ cients together in the …rst two rows gives the total
e¤ect of military aid on homicides in election years. While positive, the noisiness of the coe¢ cient
in the second row does not allow us to rule out a zero total e¤ect in the OLS estimates. However,
the e¤ect is positive, signi…cant and larger in the IV, indicating that military aid leads to signi…cant
increases in homicides during election years. As in previous tables, there is no e¤ect on homicides
committed by guerrillas, either in election or non-election years.
   Columns (5)-(8) in Panel A looks speci…cally at assassinations in the full sample. The positive

                                                   23
estimate on the three-way interaction in the …rst row again shows that there is a di¤erential e¤ect
of military aid on paramilitary assassinations in election years. However, the estimate in the second
row indicates that military aid has a negative e¤ect on assassinations in non-election years, and the
sum is also negative. In other words, military aid reduces paramilitary political assassinations in
base regions, but this reduction is smaller during election periods.
       Overall, these results suggest that the in‡ux of U.S. military aid has a composition e¤ect on
the type of violence employed by paramilitary groups. During election years, there is a net increase
in total paramilitary homicides, but a substitution away from assassinations, which are the highest
pro…le killings. Moreover, this "security e¤ect" of U.S. aid is attenuated during election years, when
the net political returns to violence against political candidates and leaders is arguably the highest.
       Columns (6) and (8) also show that there is no di¤erential e¤ect on guerrilla assassinations
during election periods. Thus the compositional change in killings induced by U.S. military aid solely
in‡uences killings by paramilitaries, not the guerrillas. These e¤ects are unlikely to be arising via
complementary tactics since targeted killings don’t require large-scale operations and the Colombian
military is not tasked with carrying out political homicides. As such these homicide e¤ects point to
the importance of the resource sharing channel.
       These di¤erential impacts in election years also suggest that paramilitary behavior responds to
political incentives, which is consistent with evidence of electoral manipulation by paramilitaries
presented in Acemoglu et al. (2013). To provide further support for the idea of political targeting,
we examine whether e¤ects are larger in the most politically competitive municipalities, where there
are greatest potential gains from carrying out this type of elections-related violence.                We use the
Golosov index38 of the e¤ective number of political parties for candidates competing in the mayoral
and local council elections, averaged over the set of years for which this data is available for both
o¢ ces, 2000 and 2003. We split the sample based on whether the municipality lies above or below
the median of this competitiveness measure for both types of elections. Panels B and C in Table
VI present the OLS and IV estimates, respectively. The results show that paramilitary homicide
e¤ects are signi…cant only in the politically competitive sample (even though the sample size is much
smaller for this group).      For targeted political assassinations, the magnitude of the coe¢ cient on
  38
    See Golosov (2011) for a description of this measure and arguments for why it is preferred over other measures of
party competition in multiparty environments.

                                                         24
the three-way interaction is also larger in the competitive sample in both the OLS and IV estimates.
These results further con…rm political incentives as a determinant of paramilitary violence.



Conclusion

Although substantial amounts of military assistance have been disbursed to countries facing internal
con‡ict, little work has evaluated the impact of military aid on political violence. This paper has
examined the e¤ect of U.S. military assistance on con‡ict in Colombia, a country embroiled in civil
war over the past four decades.
   We …nd evidence that increases in U.S. military aid lead to higher levels of paramilitary attacks,
even after controlling for government attacks. There are also no corresponding reductions in guerrilla
violence. As such, neither tactical complementarities with government forces nor indirect repression
of the insurgency can account for this e¤ect. Instead, our results are consistent with the diversion of
foreign military aid from the Colombian military to illicit paramilitary groups, which accords with
extensive qualitative documentation of collusive resource sharing between these entities.
   Turning to the implications for Colombian politics, we …nd that there are di¤erential paramilitary
killings in election periods, with largest e¤ects emerging in competitive municipalities. These results
point to a political cycle of paramilitary violence that is exacerbated by U.S. military aid. Finally,
we …nd no evidence of aid increasing counter-narcotics activities, which is one of the stated goals of
U.S. assistance to Colombia.
   Though we focus on Colombia, our results speak to broad questions in political development
and international assistance. Military aid is sometimes proposed as a cure for weak states, as it
is presumed to enhance the government’s repressive capacity, and facilitate its ability to secure a
"monopoly on the legitimate use of violence." Yet our results suggest that, in environments such
as Colombia, international military assistance can strengthen armed non-state actors, who rival the
government over the use of violence.
   As such, our …ndings hold obvious relevance for several other major recipients of U.S. military aid,
including Iraq, Afghanistan, Mexico, and Indonesia. In these nations, links between the military and
informal armed militias have led to the use of foreign military resources by illegitimate armed groups,


                                                  25
and sometimes been accompanied by severe human rights abuses. Massacres in East Timor preceding
the 1999 referendum on independence from Indonesia were led by militias tightly connected to the
Indonesian military, which has been a large recipient of U.S. military assistance. In recently occupied
Iraq, informal Shiite militias conducted joint operations with the U.S. backed Iraqi army against
suspected insurgents, despite accusations of torture and other human rights violations.39 Over 2008-
2012, the United States disbursed nearly $2 billion to Mexico as a part of the Mérida Initiative to
assist in combating the well-armed private armies of drug cartels. However, a 2001 Global Exchange
report notes that "the Mexican army has been in…ltrated by narcotics tra¢ ckers at the highest ranks,
and is increasingly dependent on U.S. weapons, training, and ideology" (p. 46). The results in this
paper suggest that informal links between a state’s armed forces and armed non-state actors need to
be taken into account for the e¤ective deployment of military aid to con‡ict-torn societies.




References
 [1] Abrams, Burton, and Kenneth A. Lewis. 1993. “Human Rights and the Distribution of US
     Foreign Aid.”Public Choice 77: 815–21.

 [2] Acemoglu, Daron, James Robinson and Rafael J. Santos-Villagran. 2013. "The Monopoly of
     Violence: Evidence from Colombia." Journal of the European Economic Association 11(s1):
     5-44.

 [3] Aranguren, Mauricio. 2001. Mi confesión, Carlos Castaño Revela sus Secretos. Bogotá: Editorial
     Oveja Negra.

 [4] Apodaca, Clair, and Michael Stohl. 1999. “United States human rights policy and foreign assis-
     tance.”International Studies Quarterly 43(1): 185-198.

 [5] Avilés, William. 2001. "Institutions, Military Policy, and Human Rights in Colombia: The
     Forgotten War." Latin American Perspectives 28(1): 31-55.

 [6] Baines, John M. 1972. "US Military Assistance to Latin America: An Assessment." Journal of
     Inter-American Studies and World A¤airs 14(4): 469-487.

 [7] Besley, Timothy and Torsten Persson. 2010. "State Capacity, Con‡ict and Development." Econo-
     metrica 78(1): 1-34.

 [8] Branch, Daniel and Elisabeth Wood. 2010. "Revisiting Counterinsurgency." Politics and Society
     38(2): 3-14.
 39
      Los Angeles Times. November 29, 2005, "Killings Linked to Shiite Squads in Iraqi Police Force."




                                                          26
 [9] Callaway, Rhonda and Elizabeth Matthews. 2008. Strategic U.S. Foreign Assistance: The Battle
     Between Human Rights and National Security. Aldershot: Ashgate.
[10] Cameron, Colin and Pravin K. Trivedi. 2009. Microeconometrics using Stata. Stata Press.
[11] Carleton, David, and Michael Stohl. 1985. "The Foreign Policy of Human Rights: Rhetoric and
     Reality from Jimmy Carter to Ronald Reagan." Human Rights Quarterly 7(2): 205-229.
[12] Carleton, David, and Michael Stohl. 1987. “The Role of Human Rights in US Foreign Assistance
     Policy: A Critique and Reappraisal.”American Journal of Political Science 31:1002–18.
[13] Cingranelli, David L. and Thomas E. Pasquarello. 1985. "Human Rights Practices and the
     Distribution of U.S. Foreign Aid to Latin American Countries." American Journal of Political
     Science 29(3): 539-563.
[14] Clark, Barry. 1991. Political Economy: A Comparative Approach. New York: Praeger.
[15] Collier, Paul and Anke Hoe- er. 2002. "Aid, Policy and Peace: Reducing The Risks of Civil
     Con‡ict." Defence and Peace Economics 13(6): 435-450.
[16] Congressional Budget Justi…cation for Foreign Operations. 2008. Joint Document of the State
     Department and USAID.
[17] Crost, Benjamin, Joseph Felter and Patrick Johnston. forthcoming. "Aid Under Fire: Develop-
     ment Projects and Civil Con‡ict." American Economic Review.
[18] Danaher, Kevin, Phillip Berryman, and Medea Benjamin. 1987. Help or Hindrance? United
     States Economic Aid in Central America, San Francisco, CA: Institute for Food and Development
     Policy.
[19] Dasgupta, Sunil. 2009. "Paramilitary Groups: Local Alliances in Counterinsurgency Opera-
     tions." Brookings Counterinsurgency and Pakistan Series Paper No. 6.
[20] De Ree, Joppe and Eleonora Nillesen. 2009. "Aiding Violence Or Peace? The Impact of Foreign
     Aid on The Risk of Civil Con‡ict In Sub-Saharan Africa." Journal of Development Economics,
     88(2): 301-313.
[21] Delacour, Justin. 2000. "Plan Colombia: Rhetoric, Reality and the Press." Social Justice 27(4):
     63-75.
[22] Djankov, Simeon, Jose Montalvo, and Marta Reynal-Querol. 2008. "The Curse of Aid." Journal
     of Economic Growth, 13(3): 169-194.
[23] Dube, Oeindrila and Juan Vargas. 2013. "Commodity Price Shocks and Civil Con‡ict: Evidence
     from Colombia.”Review of Economic Studies 80(4): 1384-1421.
[24] Dudley, Steven S. 2004. Walking Ghosts: Murder and Guerrilla Politics in Colombia. New York:
     Routledge.
[25] Dunning, Thad. 2004. "Conditioning the E¤ects of Aid: Cold War Politics, Donor Credibility,
     and Democracy in Africa." International Organization 58(2): 409-123.
[26] Easterly, William, Daniel Berger, and Shanker Satyanath. 2008. "Superpower Interventions and
     Their Consequences For Democracy: An Empirical Inquiry." NBER Working Paper No. 13992.

                                                27
[27] Fearon, James D., and David Laitin. 2003. "Ethnicity, Insurgency, and Civil War." American
     Political Science Review 97(1): 75-90.
[28] Finkel, Steven, Aníbal Pérez-Liñn, and Mitchell Seligson. 2007. “The E¤ects of US Foreign
     Assistance on Democracy Building, 1990-2003.”World Politics 59(3): 404-439.
[29] Fitch, John S. 1979. “The Political Impact of U.S. Military Aid to Latin America: Institutional
     and Individual E¤ects.”Armed Forces & Society 5: 360-386.
[30] Francisco et al Gallardo, Jose. 2001. Always Near, Always Far: The Armed Forces in Mexico.
     Mexico, D.F.: Global Exchange.
[31] Goldsmith, Arthur A. 2001. "Foreign Aid and Statehood in Africa." International Organization
     55(1): 123-148.
[32] Golosov, Grigorii. 2010. "The E¤ective Number of Parties: A New Approach." Party Politics
     16: 171-92.
[33] Grandin, Greg. 2007. Empire’s Workshop: Latin America, the United States, and the New Im-
     perialism. Holt Publishers.
[34] Grossman, Herschel. 1992. "Foreign Aid and Insurrection." Defence and Peace Economics 3(4):
     275-288.
[35] Guess, George. 1987. The Politics of United States Foreign Aid. New York, NY: Routledge.
[36] Guimaràes, Paulo. 2008. The …xed e¤ects negative binomial model revisited. Economics Letters
     99: 63-66.
[37] Gutiérrez Sanin, Francisco and Mauricio Baron. 2005. “Re-stating the State: Paramilitary Ter-
     ritorial Control and Political Order in Colombia.” London School of Economics Crisis States
     Programme Working Paper No. 1.
[38] Hristov, Jasmin. 2009. Blood and Capital: The Paramilitarization of Colombia. Ohio: University
     Center For International Studies.
[39] Human Rights Watch (HRW). 1996. “Colombia’s Killer Networks: The Military-Paramilitary
     Partnership and the U.S.”
[40] Human Rights Watch (HRW). 2000. “The Ties That Bind: Colombia and Military-Paramilitary
     Links.”
[41] Isacson, Adam. 2005. "The U.S. military in the war on drugs." In C. Youngers and E. Rosin,
     editors, Drugs and Democracy in Latin America: The Impact of US Policy. Lynne Rienner
     Publishers, 15-61.
[42] Knack, Stephen. 2004. "Does Foreign Aid Promote Democracy?" International Studies Quarterly
     48: 251-266.
[43] McCormick, James and Neil Mitchell. 1988. "Is U.S. Aid Really Linked to Human Rights in
     Latin America?" American Journal of Political Science 32(1): 231-239.
[44] Meernik, James, Eric L. Kruger, and Steven C. Poe. 1998. "Testing models of US foreign policy:
     Foreign aid during and after the Cold War." Journal of Politics 60(1): 63-85.

                                                28
[45] Meyer, William H. 1998. Human Rights and International Political Economy in Third World
     Nations: Multinational Corporations, Foreign Aid and Repression. Westport, CT: Praeger.

[46] Morgenthau, Hans. 1962. "A Political Theory of Foreign Aid." The American Political Science
     Review 56(2): 301-309.

[47] Morrison, Kevin. 2009. "Oil, Nontax Revenue, and the Redistributional Foundations of Regime
     Stability." International Organization 63: 107-138.

[48] Muller, Edward N. 1985. "Dependent Economic Development, Aid Dependence on the United
     States, and Democratic Breakdown in the Third World." International Studies Quarterly 29(4):
     445-469.

[49] Mandler, Michael and Michael Spagat. 2005. "Human Rights Conditions on Foreign Aid Can
     Back…re." Working Paper.

[50] Neumayer, Eric. 2003. “Do Human Rights Matter in Bilateral Aid Allocation? A Quantitative
     Analysis of 21 Donor Countries.”Social Science Quarterly 84(3): 650-666.

[51] Nunn, Nathan and Nancy Qian. Forthcoming. “Aiding Con‡ict: The Impact of U.S. Food Aid
     on Civil War.”American Economic Review.

[52] Pearlman, Wendy and Kathleen Cunningham. "Nonstate Actors, Fragmentation, and Con‡ict
     Processes." Journal of Con‡ict Resolution 56(1): 3-15.

[53] Poe, Steven C. 1991. "Human Rights and the Allocation of US Military Assistance." Journal of
     Peace Research 28(2): 205-216.

[54] Poe, Steven C. and James Meernik. 1995. "US Military Aid in the 1980s: A Global Analysis."
     Journal of Peace Research 32(4): 399-411.

[55] Regan, Patrick. 2002. "Third-party Interventions and the Duration of Intrastate Con‡icts."
     Journal of Con‡ict Resolution 46(1): 55-73.

[56] Restrepo, Jorge, Michael Spagat, and Juan Vargas. 2004. "The Dynamics of the Colombian Civil
     Con‡ict: A New Data Set." Homo Economicus 21(2): 396-428.

[57] Ruby, Tomislav, and Douglas Gibler. 2010. "US professional military education and democrati-
     zation abroad" European Journal of International Relations. 16(3): 339-364.

[58] Schmitter, Philippe. 1973. "Foreign Military Assistance, National Military Spending, and Mil-
     itary Rule in Latin America, 1945-61, 1962-70," in Military Rule in Latin America: Function,
     Consequences and Perspectives, ed. Philippe Schmitter (Beverly Hills, Ca: Sage Publications).

[59] Smith, Peter. 1996. Talons of the Eagle: Dynamics of U.S.-Latin American Relations. Oxford
     University Press.

[60] Stokes, Doug. 2001. "Better Lead than Bread? A Critical Analysis of the US’s Plan Colombia."
     Civil Wars 2: 59-78.

[61] Stokes, Doug. 2005. America’s Other War. Terrorizing Colombia. ZED Books.

[62] Waltz, Kenneth. 1979. Theory of International Politics. Addison-Wesley Publishing Corporation.

                                                29
[63] Watson, Cynthia. 2000. "Civil-Military Relations in Colombia: A Workable Relationship or a
     Case for Fundamental Reform?" Third World Quarterly 21(3): 529-548.

[64] Westad, Odd Arne. 2005. The Global Cold War: Third World Interventions and The Making of
     Our Times. Cambridge University Press.

[65] Wolf, Charles. "The Political E¤ects of Military Programs: Some Indications from Latin Amer-
     ica." Orbis 8. 1969: 877-85.

[66] Wright, Joseph. 2009. "How Foreign Aid Can Foster Democratization in Authoritarian Regimes."
     American Journal of Political Science 53(3): 552-571.




                                               30
                                                                                           Table I
                                                                      U.S. Military Aid and Violence: Baseline Estimates

                                                        (1)          (2)                 (3)                   (4)          (5)                (6)                   (7)          (8)                (9)
                                                    Paramilitary Government           Guerrilla            Paramilitary Government          Guerrilla            Paramilitary Government          Guerrilla
                                                      attacks      attacks             attacks               attacks      attacks            attacks               attacks      attacks            attacks
U.S. Mil and Narc Aid X Base                          0.150**         0.133**         -0.078                 0.315**         0.297**         -0.274                     -              -               -
                                                      [0.060]         [0.060]         [0.112]                [0.121]         [0.102]         [0.249]                    -              -               -

U.S. Non-Latin American Mil Aid X Base                     -               -              -                      -               -               -                1.116***        1.052***         -0.971
                                                           -               -              -                      -               -               -                 [0.429]         [0.361]         [0.883]

                                                                                                                                                                  Reduced         Reduced         Reduced
Estimator                                               OLS             OLS             OLS                     IV              IV              IV
                                                                                                                                                                    Form            Form            Form
Observations                                           16,606          16,606          16,606                16,606          16,606          16,606                16,606          16,606          16,606
Number of municipalities                                936             936             936                   936             936             936                    936             936             936
Notes. Variables not shown include municipality and year fixed effects and log of population. Robust standard errors clustered at the municipality level are shown in parentheses. U.S. Mil and Narc Aid is the
(log) sum of U.S. military and narcotics aid to Colombia. U.S. Non-Latin American Mil Aid is the (log) U.S. military aid to countries outside of Latin America. *** is significant at the 1% level, ** is
significant at the 5% level, * is significant at the 10% level.
                                                                                                       Table II
                                                                          U.S. Military Aid and Violence: OLS and IV Estimates with Controls

                                                          (1)             (2)                 (3)             (4)             (5)                 (6)             (7)             (8)                (9)             (10)            (11)

                                                     Paramilitary      Guerrilla         Paramilitary Government           Guerrilla         Paramilitary Government          Guerrilla         Paramilitary Government           Guerrilla
                                                       attacks          attacks            attacks      attacks             attacks            attacks      attacks            attacks            attacks      attacks             attacks

                                                                                                                                     Panel A: OLS Estimates
U.S. Mil and Narc Aid X Base                           0.129**           -0.133            0.134**          0.082           -0.094            0.090**        0.060              0.136             0.148**         0.136**           -0.067
                                                        [0.053]         [0.110]            [0.061]         [0.056]         [0.107]            [0.045]       [0.045]            [0.123]            [0.059]         [0.059]          [0.112]
Government Attacks                                     0.157***        0.414***               -               -                -                 -             -                  -                    -               -               -
                                                        [0.046]         [0.106]               -               -                -                 -             -                  -                    -               -               -

                                                                                                                                       Panel B: IV Esimates
U.S. Mil and Narc Aid X Base                           0.269**           -0.399            0.235**         0.198**          -0.327              0.295*      0.321***            -0.106            0.305**        0.301***           -0.266
                                                        [0.109]         [0.263]            [0.098]         [0.090]         [0.243]             [0.157]       [0.045]           [0.299]            [0.121]         [0.102]          [0.250]
Government Attacks                                     0.154***        0.420***               -               -                -                   -            -                  -                   -               -               -
                                                        [0.045]         [0.106]               -               -                -                   -            -                  -                   -               -               -

Department X Year FE                                                                           Y               Y               Y
Year X Base                                                                                                                                       Y               Y               Y
Post-2001 X Base                                                                                                                                  Y               Y               Y
Other time-Varying Controls                                                                                                                                                                           Y               Y               Y
Observations                                            16,606          16,606              16,606          16,606          16,606              16,606          16,606          16,606             16,588          16,588          16,588
Number of municipalities                                 936             936                 936             936             936                 936             936             936                935             935             935
Notes. See Table I. In addition, columns 3-5 include department X year fixed effects. Columns 6-8 include a separate trend as well as a differential post-2001 level for base municipalities. Columns 9-11 include time-varying effects of 1988
urbanization, coca production, oil, and the standard deviation of height.*** is significant at the 1% level, ** is significant at the 5% level, * is significant at the 10% level.
                                                                           Table III
                                                               Accounting for Historical Violence

                                                           (1)               (2)                (3)                    (4)               (5)                (6)
                                                       Paramilitary      Government          Guerrilla             Paramilitary      Government          Guerrilla
                                                         attacks           attacks            attacks                attacks           attacks            attacks

                                                                                                 Panel A: OLS Estimates
U.S. Mil and Narc Aid X Base                             0.147**           0.136**             -0.067              0.147**              0.136**            -0.072
                                                         [0.059]           [0.059]            [0.112]              [0.059]              [0.059]           [0.112]

                                                                                                  Panel B: IV Estimates
U.S. Mil and Narc Aid X Base                             0.305**           0.304***            -0.262              0.305**             0.304***            -0.264
                                                         [0.121]            [0.103]           [0.249]              [0.121]              [0.103]           [0.250]
Historical Casualties Control                               Y                  Y                 Y
Historical Guerrilla Attacks Control                                                                                  Y                   Y                 Y
Other time-Varying Controls                                 Y                 Y                  Y                    Y                   Y                 Y
Observations                                              16,457            16,457            16,457                16,457              16,457            16,457
Number of municipalities                                   921               921                921                  921                 921               921
Notes. See Table I. In addition, all columns include time-varying effects of 1988 urbanization, coca production, oil, and the standard deviation of height. Columns 1-3
also control for the time varying effects of total casualties 1975-1987 scaled by population in 1988, and columns 4-6 control for the time varying effects of total
guerrilla attacks 1975-1987 scaled by population in 1988. *** is significant at the 1% level, ** is significant at the 5% level, * is significant at the 10% level.
                                                                                                             Table IV
                                                                                                    Accounting for State Strength

                                                       (1)            (2)             (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)                 (7)            (8)             (9)           (10)            (11)           (12)
                                                  Paramilitary Government          Guerrilla    Paramilitary Government         Guerrilla         Paramilitary Government          Guerrilla    Paramilitary Government          Guerrilla
                                                    attacks      attacks            attacks       attacks      attacks           attacks            attacks      attacks            attacks       attacks      attacks            attacks

U.S. Mil and Narc Aid X Base                        0.116**         0.105**         0.045         0.337**        0.321***         -0.267              0.055          0.046          0.170        0.514***        0.350***          0.449
                                                    [0.046]         [0.053]        [0.110]        [0.137]         [0.109]        [0.277]             [0.045]        [0.033]        [0.157]        [0.185]         [0.118]        [0.302]
Col. Mil Expenditure X Base                          -0.106          -0.085         0.382          0.135         0.151**          0.041                  -             -              -               -               -              -
                                                    [0.071]         [0.056]        [0.277]        [0.137]         [0.066]        [0.299]                 -             -              -               -               -              -
Gaviria X Base                                          -               -             -               -              -               -                -0.023         0.098        2.406***       -0.224**          -0.034        2.283**
                                                        -               -             -               -              -               -               [0.068]        [0.095]        [0.882]        [0.106]         [0.091]        [0.945]
Samper X Base                                           -               -             -               -              -               -                -0.008         0.121        0.728**          -0.110           0.054        0.666*
                                                        -               -             -               -              -               -               [0.073]        [0.079]        [0.341]        [0.086]         [0.074]        [0.345]
Pastrana X Base                                         -               -             -               -              -               -                 0.121         0.104          0.580        -0.711**        -0.446**          0.073
                                                        -               -             -               -              -               -               [0.167]        [0.127]        [0.544]        [0.342]         [0.196]        [0.715]
Uribe X Base                                            -               -             -               -              -               -               0.392*        0.502***        -0.140        -0.753**         -0.255          -0.837
                                                        -               -             -               -              -               -               [0.208]        [0.194]        [0.437]        [0.351]         [0.213]        [0.753]
Estimator                                             OLS             OLS           OLS              IV             IV              IV                 OLS           OLS            OLS              IV              IV             IV
Observations                                        16,606          16,606         16,606         16,606          16,606         16,606              16,606         16,606         16,606         16,606          16,606         16,606
Number of municipalities                              936             936            936            936             936            936                  936           936            936            936              936            936
Notes. See Table I. In addition, Columns 1-6 control for the (log) Colombian government military expenditures interacted with Base. Columns 7-12 control for each Colombian presidential administration interacted with Base, where the Barco
administration of the Liberal Party is the omitted category. *** is significant at the 1% level, ** is significant at the 5% level, * is significant at the 10% level.
                                                                             Table V
                                             U.S. Military Aid, Coca Cultivation and Colombian Military Operations

                                                       (1)                    (2)                     (3)                     (4)                     (5)                    (6)
                                                                                                                                               Antinarcotics           Antinarcotics
                                               Captives Taken         Weapons Seized           Freed Kidnaps                Coca                Operations              Operations

                                                                                                    Panel A: OLS Estimates
U.S. Mil and Narc Aid X Base                       2.164**                 0.566**                0.411***           -0.007                      -0.462***                -0.702**
                                                   [0.940]                 [0.236]                 [0.150]           [0.016]                      [0.142]                  [0.281]

U.S. Narc Aid X Base                               2.431***                0.587**                 0.333**                 -0.006                -0.465***                -0.682**
                                                    [0.926]                [0.234]                 [0.133]                 [0.016]                [0.143]                  [0.278]

U.S. Mil Aid X Base                                -3.055**                 -0.075                  0.068                  -0.014                 -0.132**               -0.317***
                                                    [1.304]                 [0.143]                [0.110]                 [0.015]                 [0.062]                [0.115]

                                                                                                     Panel B: IV Estimates
U.S. Mil and Narc Aid X Base                        -5.542                  1.169*                  0.037             -0.002                     -1.372***               -1.569***
                                                    [4.369]                 [0.612]                [0.211]           [0.029]                      [0.338]                 [0.552]

U.S. Narc Aid X Base                                -1.450                 1.154**                 -0.179                  -0.010                -1.140***               -1.552***
                                                    [2.934]                [0.537]                 [0.253]                 [0.021]                [0.304]                 [0.545]

U.S. Mil Aid X Base                                 -4.377                  0.924*                  0.029                  -0.002                -1.083***               -1.251***
                                                    [3.452]                 [0.484]                [0.166]                 [0.023]                [0.267]                 [0.440]

Observations                                         7,454                   7,454                  7,454                   7,454                   7,454                   2,003
Number of municipalities                              936                     936                    936                     936                     936                     252
Notes. Each cell represents a different regression. Variables not shown include municipality and year fixed effects and log of population. Coca years sample refers to years in which there
is data on coca production:1994, 2000-2005. Coca region refers to municipalities that were recorded as having grown coca at any point in the sample period. Dependent variables are
discussed in the text. Robust standard errors clustered at the municipality level are shown in parentheses. *** is significant at the 1% level, ** is significant at the 5% level, * is
significant at the 10% level.
                                                                                        Table VI
                                                                    U.S. Military Aid, Homicides and Assassinations

                                                                    (1)             (2)         (3)                    (4)                  (5)            (6)            (7)                   (8)
                                                                                      Homicides                                                              Assassinations
                                                              Paramilitary      Guerrilla  Paramilitary             Guerrilla         Paramilitary       Guerrilla   Paramilitary           Guerrilla
                                                                                                   Panel A: OLS and IV Estimates in all Municipalities
U.S. Mil and Narc Aid X Base X Election Year                     2.178**           0.053            7.066***      0.141         0.312*        0.029                         0.272***          0.053
                                                                 [0.888]         [0.056]             [2.349]    [0.111]         [0.167]      [0.023]                         [0.095]         [0.033]
U.S. Mil and Narc Aid X Base                                      -0.861          -0.054              -1.534     -0.044       -0.741*** -0.035**                           -0.445***          -0.017
                                                                 [1.337]         [0.066]             [1.297]    [0.092]         [0.284]      [0.016]                         [0.151]         [0.012]
Election Year X Base                                            7.904***           0.158           18.323***      0.342        0.801***       0.040                         0.667***          0.089
                                                                 [2.842]         [0.149]             [5.859]    [0.275]         [0.297]      [0.039]                         [0.254]         [0.070]
Estimator                                                          OLS             OLS                  IV         IV             OLS          OLS                             IV               IV
Observations                                                     16,606          16,606              16,606     16,606          16,606       16,606                          16,606          16,606
Number of municipalities                                           936              936                936         936            936          936                             936             936
                                                                     Above median                       Below median                         Above median                       Below median
                                                                      competition                        competition                          competition                        competition
                                                                                       Panel B: OLS Estimates Disaggregated by Competitive Municipalities
U.S. Mil and Narc Aid X Base X Election Year                     2.181**          0.052           2.205      0.041         0.434**       0.039          0.027                                 0.004
                                                                 [0.879]         [0.067]         [2.255]    [0.108]         [0.211]     [0.026]        [0.223]                               [0.049]
U.S. Mil and Narc Aid X Base                                      -1.178          -0.051          -0.678     -0.058        -0.850**     -0.035*         -0.391                                -0.028
                                                                 [1.829]         [0.091]         [0.805]    [0.056]         [0.378]     [0.018]        [0.249]                               [0.033]
Election Year X Base                                            7.311***           0.139           9.381      0.185         0.925**      0.041          0.443                                 0.035
                                                                 [2.827]         [0.187]         [7.116]    [0.253]         [0.379]     [0.049]        [0.395]                               [0.062]
Observations                                                       5,335         11,271            5,335     11,271          5,335       11,271          5,335                               11,271
Number of municipalities                                            297             639             297        639            297         639             297                                  639
                                                                                        Panel C: IV Estimates Disaggregated by Competitive Municipalities
U.S. Mil and Narc Aid X Base X Election Year                   6.881***           0.128           6.596       0.207         0.295**       0.047           0.194                               0.078
                                                                [2.298]          [0.143]         [5.932]     [0.154]         [0.120]     [0.041]        [0.144]                              [0.053]
U.S. Mil and Narc Aid X Base                                     -1.708           -0.012          -1.522      -0.127       -0.533***      -0.015         -0.178                               -0.026
                                                                [1.766]          [0.125]         [1.028]     [0.094]         [0.199]     [0.011]        [0.133]                              [0.031]
Election Year X Base                                           17.338***           0.294         18.708        0.545         0.579*        0.053         0.754*                              0.188*
                                                                [5.757]          [0.360]        [14.696]     [0.356]         [0.313]     [0.086]        [0.438]                              [0.110]
Observations                                                      5,335          11,271            5,335      11,271          5,335      11,271           5,335                              11,271
Number of municipalities                                           297              639             297         639            297          639            297                                 639
Notes . See Table I. In addition, the dependent variables in 1-4 are homicides, and in 5-8 are homicides of candidates, elected officials and community leaders. Regressions in Panel A include all sample
municipalities. Panels B and C disaggregate the sample based on political competition. The above median competitition sample is comprised of municipalities where the Golosov index for mayoral and
local council elections in 2000 and 2003 exceeds the median values of these measures. *** is significant at the 1% level, ** is significant at the 5% level, * is significant at the 10% level.
                   Figure I
Attacks by Armed Actors in the Colombian Conflict
                                        Figure II
         U.S. Military Assistance and Differential Attacks in Base Municipalities

     Panel A: U.S. Military Assistance to Colombia and Non-Latin American Countries




Panel B: U.S. Military Assistance and Differential Paramilitary Attacks in Base Municipalities
