                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        INTENSIVE MATH INSTRUCTION AND EDUCATIONAL ATTAINMENT:
                LONG-RUN IMPACTS OF DOUBLE-DOSE ALGEBRA

                                          Kalena Cortes
                                         Joshua Goodman
                                           Takako Nomi

                                       Working Paper 20211
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w20211


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2014




We are indebted to Chicago Public Schools for sharing their data with us and to Sue Sporte, Director
of Research Operations, Consortium on Chicago School Research (CCSR) for facilitating this sharing.
Special thanks for helpful comments from Richard Murnane, Bridget Terry Long, Jeffrey D. Kubik,
Lori Taylor, Jacob Vigdor, Caroline Hoxby, Martin West, Kevin Stange, and Nora Gordon, as well
as seminar and conference participants at Harvard’s Program on Education Policy and Governance,
the State of Texas Education Research Center at Texas A&M University, the Association for Education
Finance and Policy, the NBER Economics of Education Program, UT-Austin’s Economics Department
and the Stanford Graduate School of Education. Colin Sullivan, Heather Sarsons and Shelby Lin provided
outstanding research assistance. This research was funded by the Institute of Education Sciences under
award R305A120466. Institutional support from Texas A&M University and Harvard’s Taubman
Center for State and Local Government are also gratefully acknowledged. Research results, conclusions
and all errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Kalena Cortes, Joshua Goodman, and Takako Nomi. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Intensive Math Instruction and Educational Attainment: Long-Run Impacts of Double-Dose
Algebra
Kalena Cortes, Joshua Goodman, and Takako Nomi
NBER Working Paper No. 20211
June 2014
JEL No. I20,I21,I24,J15,J24

                                            ABSTRACT

We study an intensive math instruction policy that assigned low-skilled 9th graders to an algebra
course that doubled instructional time, altered peer composition and emphasized problem solving
skills. A regression discontinuity design shows substantial positive impacts of double-dose algebra
on credits earned, test scores, high school graduation and college enrollment rates. Test score effects
under-predict attainment effects, highlighting the importance of long-run evaluation of such a policy.
Perhaps because the intervention focused on verbal exposition of mathematical concepts, the impact
was largest for students with below average reading skills, emphasizing the need to target interventions
toward appropriately skilled students.


Kalena Cortes                                      Takako Nomi
The Bush School                                    St. Louis University
Texas A&M University                               3500 Lindell Boulevard
4220 Tamu                                          Fitzgerald Hall Ste. 114
1049 Allen Building                                St. Louis, MO 63103
College Station, TX 77843                          tnomi@slu.edu
and NBER
kcortes@tamu.edu

Joshua Goodman
Harvard Kennedy School
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
joshua_goodman@hks.harvard.edu
1     Introduction

The high school graduation rate for American students has declined since the 1970s to about 75
percent, with black and Hispanic graduation rates hovering around 65 percent (Heckman and La-
Fontaine 2010). Poor academic preparation of students entering high school is often cited as a
major source of such high dropout rates. Results from the 2011 National Assessment of Educa-
tional Progress suggest that only 35 percent of students enter high school with math skills that are
considered proficient. Black and Hispanic students’ proficiency rates are even lower, at 13 and 20
percent, respectively.1 These low academic skills may explain observed high failure rates in 9th
grade coursework, particularly in algebra (Herlihy 2007, Horwitz and Snipes 2008).
    Such high failure rates are particularly worrying because of their close association with dropout
rates in later grades. Early course failures prevent students from progressing to more advanced
coursework and from earning the credits needed to graduate (Allensworth and Easton 2007). In
the Chicago Public Schools (CPS), the focus of this study, roughly half of high school freshmen fail
at least one course, with the highest failure rates in math courses (Allensworth and Easton 2005).
Concern about this fact and the apparent failure of remediating students before entering high school
led CPS to implement a double-dose algebra policy starting with students entering high school in
the fall of 2003. Under this policy, students scoring below the national median on an 8th grade
math test were subsequently assigned to two periods of freshman algebra rather than the usual
one period. CPS hoped that this doubling of instructional time, along with an increased emphasis
on problem solving skills and increased instructional support for teachers, would improve algebra
passing rates in the short-run and high school graduation rates in the long-run.
    To analyze the effect of the double-dose policy, we employ a regression discontinuity design
comparing students just above and below the threshold for assignment to additional instructional
    1
      Similarly large skill gaps by income are also apparent. Students poor enough to qualify for free lunch under
the National School Lunch Program have a proficiency rate of 17 percent, compared to a 47 percent proficiency rate
among students who do not qualify for such subsidies. See “The Nations Report Card: Mathematics 2011” published
by the National Center for Education Statistics.



                                                        1
time. Using longitudinal data that tracks students from 8th grade through college, we first show that
the treatment doubled instructional time in math, replaced largely elective courses, such as music
and art, so that total coursework was unchanged, increased the homogeneity of algebra classrooms,
and exposed students to lower-skilled peers in algebra class. We then show positive and substantial
long-run impacts of double-dose algebra on credits earned, test scores, high school graduation and
college enrollment rates. Attainment effects were larger than test score effects would predict, high-
lighting the importance of evaluating educational interventions on longer-run outcomes. Perhaps
because the intervention focused on verbal exposition of mathematical concepts, the impact was
largest for students with below average reading skills, emphasizing the need to target interventions
toward appropriately skilled students. This is the first evidence we know of demonstrating the
long-run impacts of such intensive math instruction.
   Our study contributes to four strands of the research literature. First, given that the intervention
studied here doubled the amount of time students were exposed to 9th grade algebra, our study adds
to the literature on the importance of instructional time to student achievement. Some education
reformers have pushed U.S. schools to lengthen school days and years, noting that students in many
academically successful nations, particularly in Asia, spend substantially more time in school than
do American students. Proponents of this view point to evidence on summer learning loss (Cooper
et al. 1996), the impact of snow days (Marcotte and Hemelt 2008), the association between charter
school effectiveness and instructional time (Dobbie and Fryer 2013, Hoxby and Murarka 2009,
Angrist et al. 2013), and other such patterns linking student achievement to hours spent learning
(Lavy 2010, Fitzpatrick et al. 2011). Another set of studies suggests this evidence is weaker than
it first appears, with Fryer and Levitt (2004) observing little differential summer learning loss,
Goodman (2012a) showing little impact of snow days on achievement, and Checkoway et al. (2011)
showing little effect of an intervention that substantially increased schools’ instructional times.
The emerging consensus from this literature is that increasing instructional time is no guarantee of
better student outcomes if such time is not well spent in the classroom.


                                                  2
       Second, this study adds to the literature concerning the short-run impact of curricular inter-
ventions, particularly for students struggling in mathematics. Recent years have seen three main
curriculum approaches tried by American schools. Remediation, which diverts students into ba-
sic courses prior to taking regular courses, has generally had little discernible impact on student
achievement, particularly at the college level where it has most often been studied (Jacob and
Lefgren 2004, Lavy and Schlosser 2005, Calcagno and Long 2008, Bettinger and Long 2009,
Martorell and McFarlin 2011, Boatman and Long 2010, Scott-Clayton and Rodriguez 2012). Al-
gebra “for all”, which pushes students to take algebra courses in earlier grades than they otherwise
would have, actually harms student achievement by forcing students into subjects for which they
are not sufficiently prepared (Clotfelter et al. 2012, Allensworth et al. 2009). Double-dosing,
which places students in regular courses but supplements those courses with additional instruc-
tional time, has generated short-run gains similar to the ones we estimate here in some settings
(Nomi and Allensworth 2009, Nomi and Allensworth 2010, Taylor 2012, Dougherty 2013) and
no gains in others (Fryer 2011). Perhaps because of perceived effectiveness at raising short-run
achievement levels, the double-dose strategy has become increasingly common, with half of large
urban districts reporting it as their most common form of support for struggling students.2
       Third, we contribute to the literature on the long-run impacts of curriculum on student out-
comes. Nearly all such research points to a close association between coursework completed in
high school and later outcomes such as college enrollment and labor market earnings (Altonji
1995, Levine and Zimmerman 1995, Rose and Betts 2004, Attewell and Domina 2008, Long et al.
2009, Long et al. 2012). Most such papers attempt to deal with the bias generated by selection
into coursework by controlling for a rich set of covariates, either through OLS or propensity score
matching. Such methods leave open, however, the possibility that the remaining unobservables are
still important factors. The few papers that use quasi-experimental methods to convincingly elimi-
   2
    See “Urban Indicator: High School Reform Survey, School Year 2006-2007”, by the Council of Great City
Schools, 2009.




                                                   3
nate such selection bias also find strong associations between completed coursework and long-run
outcomes, suggesting that such selection bias is not generating the central findings (Joensen and
Nielsen 2009, Goodman 2012b). Our paper is one of the better identified links between high school
coursework and educational attainment.
    Fourth, and finally, our results align with recent evidence that peer effects may matter less
than earlier research had suggested and that tracking may have substantial benefits. We will show
that double-dosed students are exposed to a much lower-skilled group of peers in their algebra
classes but nonetheless benefit substantially from the additional instructional time and improved
pedagogy. Recent papers on elite exam schools in the U.S. (Abdulkadiroglu et al. 2011, Dobbie
and Fryer 2011) and Kenya (Lucas and Mbiti 2013), as well as gifted and talented programs (Bui
et al. 2011), all find surprisingly few positive impacts of being exposed to a very different set of
peers because of discontinuities in admissions processes. Our results are also consistent with the
findings of Duflo et al. (2011) that the benefits of tracking and the better-targeted pedagogy that
results from it may outweigh the impact of being exposed to lower-skilled classmates.
    The structure of our paper is as follows. In section 2, we describe in detail the double-dose
algebra policy. In section 3, we describe the data and offer descriptive statistics about students
in our sample. In section 4, we explain the regression discontinuity underlying our identification
strategy. In sections 5 and 6, we describe the impact of double-dosing on students’ educational
experiences, coursework, test scores and educational attainment. In section 7, we discuss the
extent to which the policy’s impacts varied by student characteristics or schools’ adherence to
implementation guidelines. In section 8, we conclude.



2    Implementing Double-Dose Algebra

Since the late 1990s, Chicago Public Schools (CPS) have been at the forefront of curriculum re-
form designed to increase the rigor of student coursework and prepare students for college en-


                                                 4
trance. Starting with students entering high school in the fall of 1997, CPS raised its graduation
requirements to align with the New Basics Curriculum.3 CPS eliminated lower-level and remedial
courses so that all first-time freshmen would enroll in algebra in 9th grade, geometry in 10th grade
and algebra II or trigonometry in 11th grade. Soon after these reforms, CPS officials realized that
students were unable to master the new college-prep curriculum. Passing rates in 9th grade algebra
were quite low, largely because students entered high school with such poor math skills (Roderick
and Camburn 1999).
    In response to these low passing rates in 9th grade algebra, CPS launched the double-dose
algebra policy for students entering high school in the fall of 2003. Instead of reinstating the tra-
ditional remedial courses from previous years, CPS required enrollment in two periods of algebra
coursework for all first-time 9th graders testing below the national median on the math portion of
the 8th grade Iowa Tests of Basic Skills (ITBS). Such students enrolled for two math credits, a full-
year regular algebra class plus a full-year algebra support class. Double-dose algebra students thus
received 90 minutes of math class time every day for a full academic year. The first math course,
regular algebra, consisted mostly of class lectures. The second math course, algebra with support
or algebra problem solving, focused on building math skills that students lacked. Extended instruc-
tional time allowed flexibility in instructional activities for double-dose teachers. For example, the
teachers covered materials in a different order than the textbook and used various instructional
activities, such as working in small groups, asking probing and open-ended questions, and using
board work (Wenzel et al. 2005, Starkel et al. 2006). Our analysis focuses on the first two cohorts
of students because the test score-based assignment rule was not followed closely after the second
year. We will refer to these as the 2003 and 2004 cohorts.
    Prior to the double-dose policy, algebra curricula had varied considerably across CPS high
    3
      The New Basics Curriculum was a minimum curriculum recommended by the National Commission of Excellence
in Education in 1983, which consists of four years of English, three years each of mathematics, science, and social
studies, and one-half year of computer science. CPS has more requirements than the New Basics Curriculum, including
two years of a foreign language and specific courses in mathematics (i.e., algebra, geometry, advanced algebra and
trigonometry).



                                                        5
schools due to the fairly decentralized nature of the district. Conversely, CPS offered teachers
of double-dose algebra two specific curricula called Agile Mind and Cognitive Tutor, stand-alone
lesson plans they could use, and thrice annual professional development workshops where teachers
were given suggestions about how to use the extra instructional time.4 Though it is difficult to know
precisely what occurred in these extra classes, Nomi and Allensworth (2010) analyzed survey data
to learn more about the classroom learning environment. They found that students assigned to
double-dose algebra reported much more frequently: writing sentences to explain how they solved
a math problem; explaining how they solved a problem to the class; writing math problems for
other students to solve; discussing possible solutions with other students; and applying math to
situations in life outside of school. Thus, the additional time thus focused on building verbal and
analytical skills in the context of learning algebra, and may have conferred benefits in subjects
other than math.
    In order to provide coherent instruction to students, CPS also strongly advised schools to sched-
ule their algebra support courses in three specific ways. First, double-dose algebra students should
have the same teacher for their two periods of algebra. Second, the two algebra periods should
be offered consecutively. Third, double-dose students should take their algebra support class with
the same students who are in their regular algebra class. Most CPS schools followed these rec-
ommendations in the initial year (Nomi and Allensworth 2009). For the 2003 cohort, 80 percent
of double-dose students had the same teacher for both courses, 72 percent took the two courses
consecutively, and rates of overlap between the two classes’ rosters exceeded 90 percent. By 2004,
    4
      The district made the new double-dose curricula and professional development available only to teachers teaching
double-dose algebra courses, but there was a possibility of spillover effects for teachers in regular algebra. However,
the professional development was geared towards helping teachers structure two periods of algebra instruction. More-
over, based on CPS officials and staff members’ observations of double-dose classrooms, they found that even teachers
who taught both single-period and double-dose algebra tended to differentiate their instruction between the two types
of classes. Specifically, teachers tended to use new practices with the double-period class, but continued to use tradi-
tional methods with the single-period class. Teachers said that they did not feel they needed to change methods with
the advanced students (i.e., non double-dose students), and that they were hesitant to try new practices that may be
more time-consuming with just a single period. The double period of algebra allowed these teachers to feel like they
had the time to try new practices (e.g., cooperative groups).




                                                           6
schools began to object to the scheduling difficulties of assigning the same teacher to both peri-
ods, so CPS removed that recommendation. For the 2004 cohort, only 54 percent of double-dose
students had the same teacher for both courses and only 48 percent took the two courses consec-
utively. Overlap between the rosters remained, however, close to 90 percent. Near the end of our
analysis, we also explore whether the program’s impacts vary by cohort in part because of this
variation in implementation.
    The treatment under consideration here therefore had multiple components. Assignment to
double-dose algebra doubled the amount of instructional time and exposed students to the curricula
and activities discussed above. As we will show, the recommendation that students take the two
classes with the same set of peers caused tracking by skill to increase, thus reducing classroom
heterogeneity. All of these factors were likely to, if anything, improve student outcomes (Duflo
et al. 2011). We will also show, however, that the increased tracking by skill placed double-dosed
students among substantially lower skilled peers than non-double-dosed students. This factor is
likely to, if anything, hurt student outcomes. Our estimates capture the net impact of all of these
components.



3    Data and Descriptive Statistics

We use longitudinal data from CPS that tracks students from 8th grade through college enrollment.
These data include demographic information, detailed high school transcripts, numerous standard-
ized test scores, and graduation and college enrollment information. Our main sample consists of
students entering 9th grade for the first time in the fall of 2003 and 2004. We include only students
who have valid 8th grade math scores and who enroll in freshman algebra. We include only high
schools in which at least one classroom of students was assigned to double-dose algebra. We ex-
clude a small number of selective magnet schools, alternative schools, special education schools
and those for older students, as a result of which the final sample includes 73 high schools. For


                                                 7
continuous outcomes such as test scores, students leaving CPS are missing those values and are
excluded from the relevant regressions.5 For binary outcomes, students who leave the CPS school
system for any reason are coded as zeroes in some specifications and treated as missing in oth-
ers. CPS attempts to track students’ reasons for leaving though the accuracy of such measures is
unclear. In our sample, students who leave CPS are about evenly divided between those who are
known dropouts, those who leave for other schools (private schools or public schools outside of
Chicago), and those whose reasons for leaving are unknown. For many of the later outcomes, we
will estimate impacts of the policy conditional on students still being present in the school system,
in order to test the sensitivity of those estimates to potentially selective attrition.
       The summary statistics of the analytic sample are shown in Table 1. The first two columns
include the entire sample and the last two include only students in our default regression disconti-
nuity sample, construction of which we detail further below. Panel A shows the full set of available
demographic controls, which we include in later regressions. Over 90 percent of CPS students are
black or Hispanic and a similar proportion are low income as indicated by participation in the
federal subsidized lunch program. Continuous and standardized measures of socioeconomic and
poverty status are constructed based on each student’s residential block group from the 2000 Cen-
sus. Only 8 percent of students in the RD sample are in special education because such students
tend to score far below the 50th percentile in 8th grade math. The average CPS student is nearly
15 years old on September 1 of the first year of high school. The sample is evenly split between
students entering high school in fall of 2003 and fall of 2004. Finally, the average CPS student
scores around the 43rd percentile on the 8th grade ITBS reading exam, or the 46th percentile for
students in the RD sample.
       The first row of panel B shows our running variable, each student’s 8th grade score on the math
portion of the ITBS, which all CPS 8th graders are required to take. We use each student’s first
score on the exam to avoid possible endogeneity of scores due to re-testing behavior. Re-testing
   5
       We do, however, test the sensitivity of our test score estimates to imputing values for those with missing outcomes.



                                                             8
is, however, unlikely to be problematic as re-testing occurred only for students scoring below the
35th percentile, a threshold for grade promotion.6 We also note here that the ITBS exam was taken
in April, months after decisions about which Chicago high school to attend are made. The mean
CPS 8th grade student scores around the 45th percentile on this nationally normed exam. About
56 percent of CPS students score below the 50th percentile and are thus double-dose eligible.
The transcript data reveal, however, that only 45 percent enroll in double-dose algebra, suggesting
imperfect compliance with the rule. As a result of double-dosing, the average CPS freshman in our
sample takes 1.4 math courses freshman year.
      The transcript data also allow for detailed exploration of the treatment itself. We construct
variables, shown in the last three rows of panel B, showing the extent to which schools were
complying with CPS’ guidelines for implementing double-dose algebra. Of double-dosed students,
62 percent had their two algebra courses during consecutive periods and 66 percent had the same
teacher for both courses, with 92 percent of double-dosed students’ regular algebra classmates
themselves in double-dose algebra. Though not shown here, compliance with those guidelines was
substantially lower in 2004 than in 2003, consistent with schools’ complaints about the difficulty
of scheduling double-dose algebra for consecutive periods and with the same teacher.
      We focus on two primary sets of outcomes. In panel C, we measure students’ academic achieve-
ment by constructing a variety of variables measuring grades and standardized test scores. Only
62 percent of the sample receive a D or higher and thus pass algebra freshman year. A similar
proportion pass geometry in their second year of high school. Only 50 percent pass trigonometry
by their third year of high school. This drop-off is due both to the fact that freshman algebra is a
prerequisite for such courses and that substantial numbers of students drop out between freshman
and junior years. We also use a variety of test scores standardized by cohort to measure students’
mathematical knowledge, including the PLAN exam, which all CPS students take in September of
  6
   For more information on this promotion policy, see page 14 of http://ccsr.uchicago.edu/sites/
default/files/publications/p70.pdf.




                                                  9
both 10th and 11th grade, and the ACT exam, which all CPS students take in April of 11th grade
and is commonly used in the Midwest for college applications.
        In panel D, we measure educational attainment by constructing measures of high school grad-
uation and college enrollment rates. Students are coded as high school graduates if they received
a CPS diploma within four or five years of starting high school. Only 48 percent of CPS students
in our sample graduate high school within four years, with another five percent graduating in their
fifth year. CPS has matched its data on high school graduates with the National Student Clearing-
house (NSC) data on college enrollment, allowing us to observe initial college enrollment for any
CPS student with a high school diploma. The match quality is very high because the vast majority
of CPS students who attend college do so at colleges covered by the NSC database. Only 3 percent
of CPS high school graduates who enroll in college do so at institutions not covered by NSC.7
We construct indicators for enrollment in college by October 1 of the fifth year after starting high
school. Only 28 percent of the sample both graduate from a CPS high school and enroll in college
within this time frame, more than half of whom enroll in two-year colleges. We cannot explore
college completion rates because many of the two-year colleges CPS students attend report only
enrollment and not graduation information to NSC.



4        Empirical Strategy

Comparison of the outcomes of students who are and are not assigned to double-dose algebra
would yield biased estimates of the policy’s impacts given large differences in unobserved charac-
teristics between the two groups of students. To eliminate this potential bias, we exploit the fact
that students scoring below the 50th percentile on the 8th grade ITBS math test were required to
enroll in double-dose algebra. This rule allows us to identify the impact of double-dose algebra
    7
    See p. 15 of the Consortium on Chicago School Research’s April 2006 publication “From High School
to the Future”, available at http://ccsr.uchicago.edu/sites/default/files/publications/
Postsecondary.pdf.



                                                  10
using a regression discontinuity design applied to the treated cohorts. We use the assignment rule
as an exogenous source of variation in the probability that a given student will be double-dosed.
   Our empirical specification implements the regression discontinuity approach using the follow-
ing student-level equations:


              Yit = α0 + α1 LowScoringit + α2 M ath8it + α3 LowScoringit ∗ M ath8it + it (1)

 DoubleDoseit = γ0 + γ1 LowScoringit + γ2 M ath8it + γ3 LowScoringit ∗ M ath8it + ηit             (2)

              Yit = β0 + β1 DoubleDoseit + β2 M ath8it + β3 LowScoringit ∗ M ath8it + µit (3)


where Y represents an outcome of interest for student i in cohort t and DoubleDose is an indicator
for assignment to the extra algebra period. Our running variable is M ath8, each student’s 8th
grade math score re-centered around the eligibility threshold. Because 8th grade math scores
are measured by thirds of a percentile, we actually re-center the running variable around 49.5,
the midway point between the highest-scoring eligibles and the lowest-scoring ineligibles. Our
instrument is LowScoring, an indicator for an 8th grade math score below the 50th percentile.
   In equation (1), the LowScoring coefficient (α1 ) estimates the reduced form impact of double-
dose eligibility on outcomes. Equation (2) represents a first-stage regression in which the LowScoring
coefficient (γ1 ) estimates the impact of double-dose eligibility on the probability of being assigned
to the extra algebra period. Though we present a number of graphical versions of the reduced form
equations, our tables focus on estimates of the DoubleDose coefficient (β1 ) from equation (3), in
which assignment to double-dose algebra has been instrumented with eligibility. This approach
estimates a local average treatment effect, the impact of double-dose algebra on those students
treated as a result of the assignment rule. The validity of these estimates depends in part on the
assumption that assignment to the treatment or control group affects only compliers, those whose
participation is affected by the assignment rule. This assumption would be violated if, for example,
the signal of a low 8th grade math score had stigmatizing or other effects on never-takers, those


                                                 11
who would not enroll in double-dose algebra regardless of the assignment rule. We do not think
this is a substantial concern in this context and later placebo tests on untreated cohorts confirm this.
       Our default specification runs local linear regressions on either side of the eligibility threshold,
as suggested by Imbens and Lemieux (2008). We use an edge kernel of bandwidth determined
by the cross-validation method described in Ludwig and Miller (2007). The bandwidth gener-
ated by this method for the first stage equation is nine percentiles, which is always lower than the
bandwidth generated by the reduced form equations. We thus use nine percentiles as our default
bandwidth in instrumental variable specifications, but show that our results are robust to other
choices of bandwidth, including the slightly larger optimal bandwidth of 12.7 generated by the
method described in Imbens and Kalyanaraman (2012).8 We include controls for gender, race, free
and reduced price lunch status, special education status, the Census block poverty and socioeco-
nomic status measures described above, 8th grade reading score and cohort, and show later that
our results are robust to exclusion of such controls. We show results for the full sample and also
explore heterogeneity by reading skill. To do so, we separately analyze impacts on poor and good
readers, defined as those whose 8th grade reading scores are below and above the 50th percentile.
Finally, heteroskedasticity robust standard errors are clustered by value of the running variable to
account for its coarse nature, as suggested by Lee and Card (2008).
       Before moving onto our main analysis, we perform checks of the validity of the regression
discontinuity strategy, as shown in Table 2. In column 1, we check whether the double-dose
eligibility threshold is associated with a change in the probability that a given student appears in
our main analysis sample. To do so, we construct for all students with valid 8th grade math scores
an indicator for appearing in the sample we will use in subsequent analysis. Near the double-dose
threshold, 85 percent of students with valid 8th grade math scores appear in our main analysis
sample. The remaining 15 percent consist of students who are held back in 8th grade, who leave
   8
    The optimal bandwidth generated by the method recently proposed by Calonico et al. (2012) is just under 10, so
we do not bother to show it separately.




                                                       12
the CPS system for private schools or other jurisdictions, and who enter the small number of high
schools excluded from the sample. The estimates in column 1 suggest little relationship between
double-dose eligibility and the probability of appearing in our main analysis sample, implying that
eligibility did not impact student decisions about when and where to attend high school. In column
2, we check that the density of 8th grade math scores is smooth around the eligibility threshold, as
suggested by McCrary (2008). To do so, we estimate discontinuities in the frequency of 8th grade
math scores near the threshold in our main analysis sample. The coefficient estimates suggest
the density is quite smooth, providing further evidence both that the eligibility threshold does not
affect decisions about high school attendance and that there is no observable manipulation of these
test scores by students, teachers or schools. A graphical version of the raw data and regressions
predictions corresponding to these two columns can be seen in Figure A.1.
       The remaining columns of Table 2 test for discontinuities in any of the observed student-level
covariates, to explore whether the eligibility threshold affected the characteristics of students ap-
pearing in the main analysis sample. Figure 1 graphs these covariates as a function of 8th grade
math scores. The regression estimates and the figures suggest no clear differences across the
threshold for students’ race/ethnicity, poverty status, special education status or high school start-
ing age.9 Barely eligible students are, however, 4.6 percentage points less likely to be female and
score 1.2 percentiles lower in 8th grade reading than do barely ineligible students. We use the
untreated 2001 and 2002 cohorts to estimate the relationship between all of these covariates and
high school graduation within five years, then use these estimates to generate a predicted proba-
bility of high school graduation for the treated cohorts. Column 10 of Table 2 and the last panel
of Figure 1 show a marginally significant discontinuity in this predicted outcome, suggesting that
the treatment group is slightly more disadvantaged than their 8th grade math scores alone would
predict. This is partially an artifact of the bandwidth being used, with larger bandwidths showing
   9
     For brevity, we omit from this table a few covariates that show no discontinuity, including reduced price lunch
status, Census block poverty and socioeconomic status measures, and cohort indicators.




                                                        13
no statistically significant covariate imbalance. Because of this slight imbalance, which would
cause slight underestimation of any positive impacts of double-dosing, we choose to include the
demographic controls described above in our default regression specification. We show later that
our main results are robust to this choice.



5         The Treatment

We first explore the treatment itself to learn more about how the double-dose algebra policy
changed students’ freshman year experiences. Panel A of Figure 2 shows the first-stage relationship
between 8th grade math scores, the running variable, and the probability of being double-dosed,
the endogenous treatment. We see a large but fuzzy discontinuity, suggesting strong but imperfect
compliance, with assignment rates reaching a maximum of about 80 percent for students in the 20-
40th percentiles. Students in the lowest percentiles had lower double-dose rates because they were
more likely to be supported through other, special education programs.10 Students in the 40-49th
percentiles had slightly lower compliance rates, likely because some were determined to be close
enough to the threshold as to not require such intervention. Some students above the threshold
were double-dosed, likely because teachers thought they would benefit from the course or because
schools could not perfectly divide students into appropriately sized classes by the assignment rule.
         Column 1 of Table 3 shows the regression estimate of that first-stage discontinuity, with a
graphical version in panel B of Figure 2. Students just below the eligibility threshold are 38.4
percentage points more likely to be double-dosed than students just above the threshold. The F-test
of the excluded instrument exceeds 250, well above the threshold needed for a strong instrument.
The magnitude of the discontinuity is nearly identical for poor and good readers.11
    10
      Our central results are unchanged if special education students are excluded from the regression discontinuity
analysis, in part because such students tend to be far below the eligibility threshold.
   11
      Table A.1 shows first-stage results for various sub-samples of students. The discontinuity in assignment to double-
dose algebra is 50.8 percentage points in fall 2003, about twice as large as the 25.8 percentage point discontinuity in
fall 2004, suggesting that the assignment rule was followed more strictly in the first year of the policy than in the
second. The remainder of the table shows no apparent first-stage heterogeneity by gender or income. Black and


                                                          14
    The remaining columns of the Table 3 show instrumental variables estimates of various aspects
of the double-dose treatment itself. Column 2 shows the most obvious impact, namely that double-
dosed students took one additional math course as a result of the policy.12 Columns 3-8 show that
this additional course came at the expense of other coursework. Relatively few of those replaced
courses were in the core subjects of science, English and social studies. Many more were music
and art courses and, to a lesser extent, vocational education and foreign language courses. Double-
dose algebra did not replace physical education or health courses. As a result, double-dosing did
not significantly change the total number of courses taken by students. Columns 9 and 10, as well
as Figure 3, show how the requirement that double-dosed students have the same classmates in
both their double-dose and regular algebra periods substantially increased tracking by math skill,
where skill is measured by peers’ 8th grade math scores. Double-dosing lowered the mean math
skill of students’ regular algebra peers by nearly 20 percentiles and reduced the standard deviation
of peers’ math skills by over 3 percentiles. These changes in peer composition were quite similar
for poor and good readers.
    In summary, double-dosing doubled instructional time in math, replaced largely elective courses,
so that total coursework was unchanged, increased the homogeneity of algebra classrooms, and
exposed students to lower-skilled peers in algebra class. The net effect of these changes is theo-
retically unclear, given prior evidence that increased instructional time and peer homogeneity may
be helpful while decreased peer quality may be harmful. Students may also be discouraged by
the replacement of elective courses that some enjoy more than traditional academic courses. We
now turn to empirical analysis of the overall impact of these various channels on coursework, test
scores and educational attainment.
Hispanic students show similar first stages, though the small number of white students in CPS are about half as likely
to be double-dosed as a result of the assignment rule. We later show that, though the first-stage estimates vary by
cohort and for white students, instrumental variables estimates of the program’s effect on various outcomes do not.
   12
      These estimates would be exactly equal to one if not for a small number of students who complete only a semester
of double-dose algebra, rather than a full year.




                                                         15
6     Educational Outcomes

6.1    Coursework

The theory behind the double-dose policy is that additional instructional time and other aspects
of the treatment should improve students’ performance in their freshman algebra classes, with
the hope that such improvement leads to success in later coursework. We explore this in Table
4, which presents estimates of the impact of double-dosing on a variety of freshman coursework
measures. The estimates from column 1 suggest that double-dosing improved students’ grades in
their regular freshman algebra classes by over 0.4 points on a 4.0 scale. Nearly all of this im-
provement was driven by poor readers, who experienced more than 0.6 point rise in algebra GPA.
The reduced form versions of these estimates are presented graphically in Figure 4. This improve-
ment in algebra grades occurred across the grade distribution, as shown in columns 2-5. Perhaps
most importantly, double-dosed students were a marginally significant 9.3 percentage points more
likely to pass freshman algebra. Poor readers’ pass rates increased by an even larger and statisti-
cally significant 13.2 percentage points. The reduced form versions of these estimates are presented
graphically in Figure 5. Given an overall 62 percent algebra pass rate for barely ineligible students,
these estimates suggest that double-dosing reduced failure rates by about one-fourth (9.3/38), or
more than one-third among poor readers (13.2/36). Double-dosing also substantially improved the
fraction of students receiving B’s and C’s, though had little effect on the receipt of A’s.
    Though it is difficult to measure spillover effects onto other subjects because the composition
of non-math coursework changed as a result of the policy, columns 6 and 7 show little evidence that
assignment to double-dose algebra either increased or decreased grade point averages in other types
of classes. Perhaps most relevant to the ultimate outcome of high school graduation is the number
of credits students earned, shown in columns 8 and 9. Double-dosed students, unsurprisingly,
earned nearly a full additional math credit, most of which is due to the additional double-dose
period and some of which is due to the increased pass rates in regular algebra. Poor readers’ math


                                                  16
credits increased more than did good readers’, in part because good readers’ pass rates in regular
algebra were not improved by the intervention and because good readers were more likely than
poor readers to have earned credits in the classes replaced by double-dose algebra. The net result
is that poor readers earned a marginally significant additional 0.6 total credits during freshman
year, while good readers earned 0.4 fewer credits.
       Because of the tracking induced by this policy, these RD estimates compare barely eligible
students, who on average are high-skilled relative to their algebra peers, to barely ineligible stu-
dents, who on average are low-skilled relative to their algebra peers. That double-dosing improved
freshman algebra grades may thus reflect actual performance in class or may reflect teachers’ use
of a grading curve. To distinguish these explanations, we turn to course performance in subsequent
years of high school, when the tracking induced by the policy was no longer a factor in classroom
assignment. Table 5 examines outcomes in the second year of high school. In column 1, we see no
evidence that double-dosing changed the probability that a student would be present in the second
year of high school, where presence is defined by enrolling in at least one credit of coursework.13
Columns 2 and 3 estimate the impact of double-dosing on the probability of taking geometry in the
second year, which indicates a student is on track to graduate. Column 2 assigns zeroes to students
no longer present in CPS, whereas column 3 conditions the sample on being present. Both sets of
estimates tell a consistent story that double-dosed students were 7-9 percentage points more likely
to take geometry in their second year of high school, a result driven entirely by a 13-16 percentage
point increase for poor readers. These magnitudes are nearly identical to the improved pass rates
in freshman algebra, suggesting that students prevented from freshman failure by the double-dose
policy continued to be on track to graduate in their second year of high school.
       Columns 4-6 estimate the impact of double-dosing on the probability of passing geometry in a
student’s second year of high school. We assign zeroes to all students not present in CPS or who are
in CPS but not taking geometry, usually because they are being required to repeat algebra. Column
  13
       The reduced form versions of these estimates are presented graphically in Figure A.2.



                                                           17
4 thus includes all students, column 5 conditions the sample on being present in CPS, and column
6 conditions the sample on being present in CPS and taking geometry. The first two columns
indicate the double-dosing increased the geometry pass rate by a substantial and significant 12-14
percentage points, driven largely by an 18-21 percentage point increase for poor readers. Figure
6 shows this clear discontinuity, graphing the reduced form version of column 4. The estimates
in column 6 are roughly two-thirds that size, suggesting that about one-third of the improvement
is due to the increase in the fraction of students taking geometry, while the remaining two-thirds
comes from students who would, in the absence of the double-dose policy, have taken but failed
geometry.
       As a result of these increased geometry pass rates, students who were double-dosed in their
first year of high school earn 0.07-0.09 additional math credits in their second year, as seen in
columns 7 and 8. All of this increase is driven by poor readers, who earned 0.15-0.18 additional
second-year math credits as a result of double-dosing. There also seem to be positive spillovers into
non-math subjects. Columns 9 and 10 suggest that double-dosed students earn a total of 0.43-0.57
additional total credits, all of which is driven by poor readers earning more than one full additional
second-year credit. These magnitudes are roughly six times the size of the impacts on math credits,
suggesting that double-dosing had substantial positive spillover effects onto other subjects.
       Table 6 summarizes the impact of double-dosing in the third and fourth years of high school.
Double-dosing increases the probability of being present in the third year by a large but statisti-
cally insignificant 5.9 percentage points, or 7.9 percentage points for poor readers.14 There is no
statistically significant indication of increased math credit earning, though the magnitude of the
impact on poor readers is a fairly large 0.65 credits. Fourth year results are similar, with double-
dosing increasing the probability of being present in the fourth year by 6.8 percentage points, or
10.3 percentage points for poor readers.15 Double-dosed students earn a marginally significant 0.6
  14
       The reduced form versions of these estimates are presented graphically in Figure A.3.
  15
       The reduced form versions of these estimates are presented graphically in Figure A.4.




                                                           18
more credits in their fourth year, or a significant 0.78 credits for poor readers, relatively little of
which consists of additional math credits. In both the third and the fourth years, roughly half of
the increase in credits earned stems from the increased probability of being present at all, as can
been by comparing column 4 to column 5 and column 9 to column 10.
       In summary, double-dose algebra had large and positive impacts on a variety of coursework
measures. Double-dosed students, and particularly poor readers, performed substantially better in
freshman algebra and were more likely to pass that course. There is little evidence that the policy
affected performance in freshman non-math courses. Second-year performance also improved
substantially, with double-dosed students more likely to take and pass geometry, as well as earn
more total credits. The magnitude of the estimates also suggests that double-dosing increased the
probability that a student was present in CPS in their third and fourth year of high school, though
those estimates are not statistically significant.


6.2       Test Scores

Further evidence of the benefits of the treatment comes from Table 7, which explores the impact
of double-dosing on math test scores, as measured by the PLAN exams taken in October of 10th
and 11th grades and the ACT exam taken in April of 11th grade. Each of these exams test a variety
of algebra and geometry concepts. For each exam, we explore three outcomes, the probability
that a student took the math portion of the exam (a noisy indicator of being on track to graduate),
standardized exam scores conditional on taking the exam, and standardized scores on the verbal
portion of the exam. Column 1 shows that double-dosed students were a statistically insignificant
4.5 percentage points more likely to take the fall 10th grade exam, driven by a marginally signifi-
cant 10.2 percentage point increase for poor readers. For those who took the exam, double-dosing
raised math scores by a statistically insignificant 0.09 standard deviations, driven by a marginally
significant 0.18 standard deviation increase for poor readers.16 Verbal scores rose by a statistically
  16
       The reduced form versions of these estimates are presented graphically in Figure A.5.


                                                           19
insignificant 0.11 standard deviations.
       Larger positive impacts are seen in the fall 11th grade and spring 11th grade exams, perhaps
consistent with the dramatically improved second-year coursework performance previously dis-
cussed. Double-dosed students were a marginally significant 6.5 percentage points more likely to
take the fall 11th grade exam (consistent with the magnitude of the increased probability of being
present in the third year), and those who took the exam improved by a significant 0.24 standard
deviations. Poor readers improved by 0.32 standard deviations. The reduced form versions of
these estimates are presented graphically in Figure 7. ACT math scores improved by a similar and
highly significant 0.18 standard deviations.17 Interestingly, improvements on the ACT math exam
were quite similar for poor and good readers. ACT verbal scores increased by a highly significant
0.27 standard deviations, driven largely by a 0.45 standard deviation improvement for good read-
ers. The ACT exam is one measure of achievement that, unlike coursework, double-dosing greatly
improved for good readers.
       One potential concern with these estimates is that differential selection into test-taking caused
by double-dosing might generate bias in these results. We check this possibility in Table A.2 by
re-estimating the effects of double-dose algebra on all three math scores, under three different
assumptions about attrition. Under the first assumption, we assign each student missing a test
score to the z-score equivalent of their 8th grade math percentile score, assuming no change in
their overall place in the distribution. Under the second assumption, we assign those missing
scores a 40th percentile score, equivalent to the bottom end of the RD sample used here. Under the
third assumption, we assign those missing scores a 60th percentile score, equivalent to the top end
of the RD sample used here. We thus test the sensitivity of our estimates to different assumptions
about the achievement of attriting students. These assumptions tend to lower the magnitude of the
estimated impacts. The fall 11th grade PLAN and ACT exam scores improvements, for example,
now fall into the 0.08-0.14 range, about half of the previous estimates. Nonetheless, all but one of
  17
       The reduced form version of this estimate is presented graphically in Figure A.6.



                                                           20
these estimates is statistically significant, which we take as strong evidence of small improvements
in math achievement as measured by these exams.


6.3    Educational Attainment

We have seen clear evidence that double-dosing substantially improves freshman and sophomore
course performance and credits earned, and has small positive effects on standardized exam per-
formance. We have also seen suggestive evidence that double-dosing increases the probability
of students being present in their third and fourth years of high school, as measured by rates of
credit-taking and test-taking. We now turn to evidence about the impact of double-dose algebra on
educational attainment.
   Table 8 explores the impact of double-dosing on high school graduation rates. The first three
columns estimate credit accumulation over the first four years of high school, with dropouts coded
as earning zero credits in years when they are not present in high school. The estimates in column 1
suggest that double-dosing increased by one the total number of math credits students earned in the
first four years of high school. Much of this increase was due to the double-dose period itself but
poor readers, whose credits increased by 1.25, also benefited from increased passing rates in alge-
bra and geometry. In total, double-dosing raised total credits earned by a statistically insignificant
1.47, driven by poor readers earning a significant three additional credits. The reduced form ver-
sions of these estimates are presented graphically in Figure 8. Measured differently, double-dosing
increased by a highly significant 8.5 percentage points the probability that a student completed at
least 24 credits, the minimum necessary to graduate from a CPS high school. This was driven by a
12.9 percentage point rise for poor readers.
   The last three columns of Table 8 estimate impacts on high school graduation within four or
five years of entering high school. The first two of these columns code as zeroes any student who
fails to graduate from CPS, including those who may have attrited to other school districts. The
last columns limit the sample to students present in their fourth year of high school. Double-

                                                 21
dosing raises the four-year graduation rates by 9.8 percentage points, driven largely by a 13.7
percentage point increases for poor readers. These magnitudes are quite similar to those in column
3, suggesting that the extent of increased credit accumulation is comparable to the high school
graduation effect. Five-year graduation rates increase even more than do four-year rates, suggesting
that some of the marginal students affected by double-dosing use a fifth year to earn their final
credits. The reduced form versions of these estimates are presented graphically in Figure 9. Finally,
estimates in column 6 are about one-third the magnitude of those in column 5. This suggests that
most of the impact on high school graduation comes not from helping fourth-year students earn
their final credits but instead from helping students reach their third and fourth year at all.
       Because CPS has linked its high school graduates with records from the National Student
Clearinghouse, we can also observe the impact of double-dose algebra on college enrollment. The
first four columns of the table treat any student not enrolling in college as a zero, including students
who fail to graduate from CPS and are thus not linked to NSC records. Double-dosing increases
by 10.8 percentage points the probability that students enroll in any type of college within five
years of starting high school (i.e. within one year of on-time high school graduation). The reduced
form version of this estimate is presented graphically in Figure 10. Columns 2 and 3 show that
most of this effect comes from enrollment in two-year community colleges, particularly part-time
enrollment, an expected result given the relatively low academic skills and high poverty rates of
CPS students near the double-dose threshold. Within eight years of entering high school (that
is, within four years of on-time high school graduation), double-dosing increases by a marginally
significant 0.63 the number of semesters students have been enrolled in college.18
       This observed college enrollment increase is, unlike most of the prior credit-earning measures,
driven fairly equally by both poor and good readers. If anything, good readers’ college enrollment
is more dramatically affected, with double-dosing increasing the number of semesters enrolled by
  18
     Technically, the NSC allows measurement of enrollment spells, not semesters. Here we weight such spells by 0.5
for half-time enrollment and 0.25 for less than half-time enrollment.




                                                        22
nearly one. This may be related to the observed increase in good readers’ ACT scores. Double-
dose algebra may have helped poor readers largely through the credit-earning and high school
graduation channel, while good readers’ benefited more through the achievement channel. Condi-
tioning the sample on high school graduation in columns 5-8, rather than assigning zeroes to those
who fail to graduate, has relatively little effect on the overall point estimates, with those of poor
readers falling but those of good readers rising.


6.4    Heterogeneity, Robustness and Implementation

Our primary results suggest that double-dose algebra improved a variety of student outcomes. Most
of this improvement was driven by the sub-group of students we have identified as poor readers,
perhaps because of the emphasis on building verbal and analytical skills in the context of learning
freshman algebra. We focus on this particular dimension of heterogeneity in part because we find
little evidence that other dimensions are interesting. In Table A.3, we explore heterogeneity by
other student characteristics by taking our default specification and interacting both the instrument
(double-dose eligibility) and the endogenous regressor (double-dose assignment) with indicators
for three types of students. The top panel divides students by gender, the second divides them by
those living above and below the median Census block poverty level within CPS, and the third
divides students by race, with the white category including a small number of Asian students
and those listing race as “other”. At the bottom of each column is a p-value from a test of the
equality of the coefficients. There is no evidence of heterogeneity by gender or income across
any of the six major outcomes examined here, nor across many other outcomes explored but not
shown here. There is no evidence of differential effects on algebra passing rates by race, with
nearly identical point estimates for black, Hispanic and white students. There is evidence that
black students’ geometry pass rates increased more than those of Hispanic and white students,
though no evidence that total credits earned were differentially affected by race. Double-dosing
improved black students’ high school graduation rates by 12.6 percentage points, a magnitude

                                                    23
marginally significantly different from the 7.6 percentage point increase seen for Hispanic students.
Black students’ college enrollment rates increased by a highly significant 15.3 percentage points,
a magnitude significantly different from Hispanic students, who saw no increase, but statistically
indistinguishable from white students. Overall, these results suggest that black students benefited
more from double-dosing than did other students, but only with respect to some outcomes.
   Table A.4 tests the robustness of our main results to a variety of changes in regression specifi-
cation, with panel A showing results for all students and panel B focusing on poor readers. The top
row of each panel repeats our estimates from the default specification using the cross-validation
(CV) bandwidth of nine percentiles and including demographic controls. The second row uses the
same specification but removes the demographic controls. The third row repeats the default speci-
fication but expands the bandwidth to 12.7, that suggested as optimal by the Imbens-Kalyanaraman
(IK) procedure applied to the first stage. The fourth row shows a bandwidth of 5, roughly 50% of
the cross-validation bandwidth. The magnitude and statistical significance of our main results is
largely robust to this variety of specifications. The fifth and final row of each panel shows reduced
form versions of our default specification using the untreated 2001 and 2002 cohorts who entered
CPS prior the double-dose policy’s enactment. None of those estimates are statistically significant.
This placebo test reassures us that the observed discontinuities in outcomes start appearing only in
the years after the policy was enacted.
   Finally, Table A.5 explores how the impact of double-dose algebra varied by the extent to
which schools adhered to CPS’ recommendation that schools schedule the two periods consecu-
tively, with the same teacher and with the same students in each class. We construct a compliance
measure that represents a school-level average of the fraction of double-dosed students with the
same teacher for both algebra periods, the fraction with the two periods consecutive, and the frac-
tion of peers in algebra who were also double-dosed. The measure thus takes a value of one
in schools with perfect compliance and less than one otherwise, though we re-center the measure
around the average compliance level. We then interact that re-centered measure with the instrument


                                                 24
and the endogenous regressor in panel A to produce two estimates. The main coefficient estimates
the impact of double-dose algebra on students in a school with an average compliance level. The
interaction coefficient measures the extent to which the treatment effects varies in schools with
higher compliance rates. We see no clear evidence of differential effectiveness in schools with
higher compliance rates. In panel B, we interact the instrument and endogenous regressor with an
indicator for being in the 2004 cohort, so that the main coefficient estimates impacts on the 2003
cohort and the interaction estimates differences between the two cohorts. We see no clear evidence
of differential impact by cohort. Given that schools in 2004 were much less likely to adhere to the
implementation guidelines, these panels together tell a consistent story that such guidelines were
not particularly important to the policy’s success.



7    Conclusion

The double-dose strategy has become an increasingly popular way to aid students struggling in
mathematics. Today, nearly half of large urban districts report doubled math instruction as the
most common form of support for students with lower skills (Council of Great City Schools 2009).
The central concern of urban school districts is that algebra may be a gateway for later academic
success, so that early high school failure in math may have large effects on subsequent academic
achievement and graduation rates. As the current policy environment calls for algebra for all in
9th grade or earlier grades, providing an effective and proactive intervention is particularly critical
for those who lack foundational mathematical skills. A successful early intervention may have the
greatest chance of having long-term effects on students’ academic outcomes.
    We provide evidence of positive and substantial long-run impacts of one particular form of
intensive math instruction on credits earned, test scores, high school graduation and college en-
rollment rates. We show that this intensive math instruction was more successful for students with
relatively low reading skills. There are two potential explanations for this. First, the intervention’s


                                                  25
focus on verbal exposition of mathematical concepts may have been particularly important for poor
readers. Second, the intervention may have been more effective for those with poorer underlying
math skills. Our regression discontinuity coefficients estimate a local average treatment effect for
students near the 50th percentile of math skill as measured by their 8th grade math exam. That
single measure is necessarily a noisy measure of true math skill, so that a low reading score may
signal that a student is weaker in math than his math score suggests. Either way, these results
highlight the importance of carefully targeting such interventions to students most likely to benefit
from them.
   Also, like other recent studies, we find that the test score impacts of this policy dramatically
understate its long-run benefits as measured by educational attainment (Deming 2009, Chetty et al.
2011). In our sample, OLS estimates suggest that a 0.2 standard deviation increase in fall grade
11 math scores, the upper end of our estimated treatment effect, is associated with a 2 percentage
point increase in college enrollment rates. We observe college enrollment effects roughly four
times that size, highlighting the fact that long-run analyses of such interventions may yield very
different conclusions than short-run analyses.
   Finally, our finding that the policy’s effectiveness is not associated with the adherence to the
implementation guidelines encouraged by CPS suggests that these impacts could be replicated in
other urban school districts across the United States. Districts looking to adopt the double-dose
strategy could likely reap its benefits without needing to radically restructure their school days,
a welcome fact given the need to boost math performance in an environment with substantial
resource constraints.




                                                 26
References
Abdulkadiroglu, A., J. D. Angrist, and P. A. Pathak (2011). The elite illusion: Achievement effects
  at Boston and New York exam schools. Working Paper 17264, National Bureau of Economic
  Research.

Allensworth, E. and J. Q. Easton (2005). The On-Track Indicator as a Predictor of High School
  Graduation. Chicago: University of Chicago Consortium on Chicago School Research.

Allensworth, E. and J. Q. Easton (2007). What Matters for Staying on Track and Graduating
  in Chicago Public High Schools, Volume 17. Chicago: University of Chicago Consortium on
  Chicago School Research.

Allensworth, E., T. Nomi, N. Montgomery, and V. E. Lee (2009). College preparatory curriculum
  for all: Academic consequences of requiring algebra and English I for ninth graders in Chicago.
  Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis 31(4), 367–391.

Altonji, J. G. (1995). The effects of high school curriculum on education and labor market out-
  comes. The Journal of Human Resources 30(3), 409–438.

Angrist, J. D., P. A. Pathak, and C. R. Walters (2013). Explaining charter school effectiveness.
  American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, forthcoming.

Attewell, P. and T. Domina (2008). Raising the bar: Curricular intensity and academic perfor-
  mance. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis 30(1), 51–71.

Bettinger, E. P. and B. T. Long (2009). Addressing the needs of underprepared students in higher
  education. The Journal of Human Resources 44(3), 736–771.

Boatman, A. and B. T. Long (2010). Does remediation work for all students? How the effects
  of postsecondary remedial and developmental courses vary by level of academic preparation.
  Working paper, National Center for Postsecondary Research.

Bui, S. A., S. G. Craig, and S. A. Imberman (2011). Is gifted education a bright idea? Assessing
  the impact of gifted and talented programs on achievement. Working Paper 17089, National
  Bureau of Economic Research.

Calcagno, J. C. and B. T. Long (2008). The impact of postsecondary remediation using a regression
  discontinuity approach: Addressing endogenous sorting and noncompliance. Working Paper
  14194, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Calonico, S., M. D. Cattaneo, and R. Titiunik (2012). Robust nonparametric bias-corrected in-
  ference in the regression discontinuity design. Technical report, Working paper, University of
  Michigan.




                                                27
Checkoway, A., B. Boulay, B. Gamse, M. Caven, L. Fox, K. Kliorys, R. Luck, K. Maree, M. Velez,
  and M. Woodford (2011). Evaluation of the expanded learning time initiative year four integrated
  report: 2009-10. Annual report, Abt Associates Inc., Cambridge, Mass.

Chetty, R., J. N. Friedman, N. Hilger, E. Saez, D. Schanzenbach, and D. Yagan (2011). How does
  your kindergarten classroom affect your earnings? Evidence from project STAR. The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 126(4), 1593–1660.

Clotfelter, C. T., H. F. Ladd, and J. L. Vigdor (2012). The aftermath of accelerating algebra:
  Evidence from a district policy initiative. Working Paper 18161, National Bureau of Economic
  Research.

Cooper, H., B. Nye, K. Charlton, J. Lindsay, and S. Greathouse (1996). The effects of summer
  vacation on achievement test scores: A narrative and meta-analytic review. The Review of Edu-
  cational Research 66(3), 227–268.

Deming, D. (2009). Early childhood intervention and life-cycle skill development: Evidence from
  head start. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 1(3), 111–134.

Dobbie, W. and R. G. Fryer (2011). Exam high schools and academic achievement: Evidence from
  New York City. Working Paper 17286, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Dobbie, W. and R. G. Fryer (2013). Getting beneath the veil of effective schools: Evidence from
  New York City. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, forthcoming.

Dougherty, S. M. (2013). Bridging the discontinuity in adolescent literacy: Evidence of an effective
  middle grades intervention. Education Finance and Policy, forthcoming.

Duflo, E., P. Dupas, and M. Kremer (2011). Peer effects, teacher incentives, and the impact
  of tracking: Evidence from a randomized evaluation in Kenya. The American Economic Re-
  view 101, 1739–1774.

Fitzpatrick, M., D. Grissmer, and S. Hastedt (2011). What a difference a day makes: Estimating
   daily learning gains during kindergarten and first grade using a natural experiment. Economics
   of Education Review 30(2), 269–279.

Fryer, R. G. (2011). Injecting successful charter school strategies into traditional public schools:
  Early results from an experiment in Houston. Working Paper 17494, National Bureau of Eco-
  nomic Research.

Fryer, R. G. and S. D. Levitt (2004). Understanding the black-white test score gap in the first two
  years of school. The Review of Economics and Statistics 86(2), 447–464.

Goodman, J. (2012a). Flaking out: Snowfall, disruptions of instructional time, and student achieve-
  ment. Working paper, HKS Faculty Research Working Paper Series.



                                                28
Goodman, J. (2012b). The labor of division: Returns to compulsory math coursework. Working
  paper, HKS Faculty Research Working Paper Series.

Heckman, J. J. and P. A. LaFontaine (2010). The American high school graduation rate: Trends
  and levels. The Review of Economics and Statistics 92(2), 244–262.

Herlihy, C. (2007). State and district-level support for successful transitions into high school.
  Policy brief, National High School Center.

Horwitz, A. and J. Snipes (2008). Supporting Successful Transitions to High School. Washington,
  DC: Council of Great City Schools.

Hoxby, C. M. and S. Murarka (2009). Charter schools in New York City: Who enrolls and how
  they affect their students’ achievement. Working Paper 14852, National Bureau of Economic
  Research.

Imbens, G. and K. Kalyanaraman (2012). Optimal bandwidth choice for the regression disconti-
  nuity estimator. The Review of Economic Studies 79(3), 933–959.

Imbens, G. W. and T. Lemieux (2008). Regression discontinuity designs: A guide to practice.
  Journal of Econometrics 142(2), 615–635.

Jacob, B. A. and L. Lefgren (2004). Remedial education and student achievement: A regression-
  discontinuity analysis. The Review of Economics and Statistics 86(1), 226–244.

Joensen, J. S. and H. S. Nielsen (2009). Is there a causal effect of high school math on labor market
  outcomes? The Journal of Human Resources 44(1), 171–198.

Lavy, V. (2010). Do differences in school’s instruction time explain international achievement gaps
  in math, science, and reading? Evidence from developed and developing countries. Working
  Paper 16227, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Lavy, V. and A. Schlosser (2005). Targeted remedial education for underperforming teenagers:
  Costs and benefits. Journal of Labor Economics 23(4), pp. 839–874.

Lee, D. S. and D. Card (2008). Regression discontinuity inference with specification error. Journal
  of Econometrics 142(2), 655–674.

Levine, P. B. and D. J. Zimmerman (1995). The benefit of additional high-school math and science
  classes for young men and women. Journal of Business & Economic Statistics 13(2), 137–149.

Long, M. C., D. Conger, and P. Iatarola (2012). Effects of high school course-taking on secondary
  and postsecondary success. American Educational Research Journal 49(2), 285–322.

Long, M. C., P. Iatarola, and D. Conger (2009). Explaining gaps in readiness for college-level
  math: The role of high school courses. Education Finance and Policy 4(1), 1–33.



                                                 29
Lucas, A. M. and I. M. Mbiti (2013). Effects of school quality on student achievement: Disconti-
  nuity evidence from Kenya. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, forthcoming.

Ludwig, J. and D. L. Miller (2007). Does head start improve children’s life chances? evidence
  from a regression discontinuity design. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 122(1), 159–208.

Marcotte, D. E. and S. W. Hemelt (2008). Unscheduled school closings and student performance.
 Education Finance and Policy 3(3), 316–338.

Martorell, P. and I. McFarlin (2011). Help or hindrance? The effects of college remediation on
 academic and labor market outcomes. The Review of Economics and Statistics 93(2), 436–454.

McCrary, J. (2008). Manipulation of the running variable in the regression discontinuity design:
 A density test. Journal of Econometrics 142(2), 698–714.

Nomi, T. and E. Allensworth (2009). Double-Dose algebra as an alternative strategy to remedia-
  tion: Effects on students’ academic outcomes. Journal of Research on Educational Effective-
  ness 2(2), 111–148.

Nomi, T. and E. Allensworth (2010). The effects of tracking with supports on instructional climate
  and student outcomes in high school algebra. Working paper, University of Chicago Consortium
  on Chicago School Research.

Roderick, M. and E. Camburn (1999). Risk and recovery from course failure in the early years of
  high school. American Educational Research Journal 36(2), 303–343.

Rose, H. and J. R. Betts (2004). The effect of high school courses on earnings. The Review of
  Economics and Statistics 86(2), 497–513.

Scott-Clayton, J. and O. Rodriguez (2012). Development, diversion, or discouragement? A new
  framework and new evidence on the effects of college remediation. Working Paper 18328,
  National Bureau of Economic Research.

Starkel, R., J. Martinez, and K. Price (2006). Two-Period Algebra in the 05-06 School Year:
  Implementation Report. Chicago: Chicago Public Schools.

Taylor, E. (2012). Allocating more of the school day to math: Regression-discontinuity estimates
  of returns and costs. Working paper, Stanford University.

Wenzel, S. A., K. Lawal, B. Conway, C. R. Fendt, and S. R. Stoelinga (2005). Algebra problem
 solving teachers talk about their experiences, december 2004. Data brief, UIC CMSI Evaluation
 Project.




                                               30
                                 Figure 1: Covariates as a Function of 8th Grade Math Scores



                     0.63




                                                                                     0.42
                                                                         Hispanic
         Black
                     0.50




                                                                                     0.32
                                40            49.5             60                                40            49.5             60
                                     8th grade math percentile                                        8th grade math percentile
                         0.83




                                                                                        0.13
                                                                          Special education
           Free price lunch
         0.79




                                                                         0.04
                                40            49.5             60                                40            49.5             60
                                     8th grade math percentile                                        8th grade math percentile
                        14.78




                                                                                         53.19
                                                                           8th grade reading
             HS start age
         14.61




                                                                         40.14




                                40            49.5             60                                40            49.5             60
                                     8th grade math percentile                                        8th grade math percentile
                     0.57




                                                                                         0.59
                                                                          Predicted HS grad.
         Female
                     0.50




                                                                         0.54




                                40            49.5             60                                40            49.5             60
                                     8th grade math percentile                                        8th grade math percentile


Notes: Each panel shows mean value of a given covariate by 8th grade math score, as well as the
predicted values generated by the default regression specification described in the text.



                                                                    31
                                       Figure 2: The Probability of Being Double-Dosed




                     .8                                   (A) Full sample
          Fraction double-dosed
           .2       .4
                     0     .6




                                  0                             49.5                     100

                                                     8th grade math percentile


                                                    (B) Near eligibility threshold
                     .8
          Fraction double-dosed
           .2       .4
                     0      .6




                                  40                          49.5                       60

                                                     8th grade math percentile


Notes: Panel A shows the fraction of students double-dosed by 8th grade math score for the full
sample. Panel B limits the sample to students near the eligibility threshold and shows predicted
values generated by the default regression specification described in the text.


                                                              32
                                         Figure 3: Peer Composition of Freshman Algebra Class




                       60 55                                (A) Mean peer skill
          Mean peer skill
          45    50     40




                                    40                            49.5                          60
                                                          8th grade math percentile


                                                            (B) SD of peer skill
                       16    15.5
              SD of peer skill
          14.5      15 14




                                    40                            49.5                          60
                                                          8th grade math percentile


Notes: Panel A shows the mean 8th grade math percentile of each student’s freshman algebra
peers, by each student’s own 8th grade math score. Panel B shows the standard deviation of each
student’s freshman algebra peers’ 8th grade math percentiles. Both panels show predicted values
generated by the default regression specification described in the text.

                                                                 33
                                  Figure 4: Freshman Algebra GPA




                   1.8 1.7                  (A) All students
           Algebra GPA
          1.5    1.6
                   1.4




                             40                 49.5                               60
                                        8th grade math percentile


                                           (B) Poor readers
                   1.8 1.7
           Algebra GPA
          1.5    1.6
                   1.4




                             40                 49.5                               60
                                        8th grade math percentile


Notes: Panel A shows the mean freshman algebra GPA by 8th grade math score for all students.
Panel B limits the sample to students with 8th grade reading scores below the 50th percentile.
Both panels show predicted values generated by the default regression specification described in
the text.

                                               34
                                Figure 5: Freshman Algebra Pass Rates




                  .7                         (A) All students
          Passed algebra
           .6     .55.65




                           40                    49.5                              60
                                         8th grade math percentile


                                             (B) Poor readers
                  .7
          Passed algebra
           .6     .55.65




                           40                    49.5                              60
                                         8th grade math percentile


Notes: Panel A shows the mean rate of passing freshman algebra by 8th grade math score for
all students. Panel B limits the sample to students with 8th grade reading scores below the 50th
percentile. Both panels show predicted values generated by the default regression specification
described in the text.

                                                 35
                                     Figure 6: Second-Year Geometry Pass Rates




                    .75    .7                       (A) All students
            Passed geometry
          .6      .65
                    .55




                                40                      49.5                       60
                                                8th grade math percentile


                                                    (B) Poor readers
                    .75    .7
            Passed geometry
          .6      .65
                    .55




                                40                      49.5                       60
                                                8th grade math percentile


Notes: Panel A shows the mean rate of passing second-year geometry by 8th grade math score for
all students. Panel B limits the sample to students with 8th grade reading scores below the 50th
percentile. Both panels show predicted values generated by the default regression specification
described in the text.

                                                        36
                                         Figure 7: Math Test Scores, Fall 11th Grade




                       .2      .1                        (A) All students
            Fall 11 math z-score
          -.2     -.1   0
                       -.3




                                    40                       49.5                      60
                                                     8th grade math percentile


                                                        (B) Poor readers
                       .2      .1
            Fall 11 math z-score
          -.2     -.1   0
                       -.3




                                    40                       49.5                      60
                                                     8th grade math percentile


Notes: Panel A shows the mean fall 11th grade math score by 8th grade math score for all stu-
dents who took the exam. Panel B limits the sample to students with 8th grade reading scores
below the 50th percentile. Both panels show predicted values generated by the default regression
specification described in the text.

                                                             37
                                      Figure 8: Credits Earned through Fourth Year of High School




                        20                                    (A) All students
          Credits earned, years 1-4
            17       18 16    19




                                      40                          49.5                              60
                                                          8th grade math percentile


                                                              (B) Poor readers
                        20
          Credits earned, years 1-4
            17       18 16    19




                                      40                          49.5                              60
                                                          8th grade math percentile


Notes: Panel A shows the mean number of credits earned through the fourth year of high school
by 8th grade math score for all students. Panel B limits the sample to students with 8th grade
reading scores below the 50th percentile. Both panels show predicted values generated by the
default regression specification described in the text.

                                                                  38
                                         Figure 9: High School Graduation, within Five Years




                       .65                                   (A) All students
          Graduated HS in 5 years
            .5     .55 .45   .6




                                    40                           49.5                          60
                                                         8th grade math percentile


                                                             (B) Poor readers
                       .65
          Graduated HS in 5 years
            .5     .55 .45   .6




                                    40                           49.5                          60
                                                         8th grade math percentile


Notes: Panel A shows the probability of graduating high school within five years by 8th grade
math score for all students. Panel B limits the sample to students with 8th grade reading scores
below the 50th percentile. Both panels show predicted values generated by the default regression
specification described in the text.

                                                                 39
                Figure 10: College Enrollment, within Five Years of Starting High School




                       .4                      (A) All students
          Enrolled in any college
           .25       .3.2     .35




                                    40            49.5                                 60
                                          8th grade math percentile


                                              (B) Poor readers
                       .4
          Enrolled in any college
           .25       .3.2     .35




                                    40            49.5                                 60
                                          8th grade math percentile


Notes: Panel A shows the probability of enrolling in any college within five years of starting high
school by 8th grade math score for all students. Panel B limits the sample to students with 8th
grade reading scores below the 50th percentile. Both panels show predicted values generated by
the default regression specification described in the text.

                                                  40
                                         Table 1: Summary Statistics

                                                    Full sample                              RD sample
                                                Mean                      N              Mean           N
                                                 (1)                     (2)              (3)          (4)
(A) Demographics
Female                                           0.50               40,151                0.54              9,700
Black                                            0.58               40,151                0.57              9,700
Hispanic                                         0.34               40,151                0.36              9,700
Free price lunch                                 0.81               40,151                0.82              9,700
Reduced price lunch                              0.09               40,151                0.10              9,700
Missing lunch status                             0.03               40,151                0.03              9,700
Census block poverty measure                     0.00               40,151               -0.02              9,700
Census block SES measure                        -0.00               40,151               -0.01              9,700
Special education                                0.20               40,151                0.08              9,700
High school start age                           14.73               40,151               14.69              9,700
2003 cohort                                      0.49               40,151                0.50              9,700
2004 cohort                                      0.51               40,151                0.50              9,700
8th grade reading percentile                    42.69               40,151               46.14              9,700
(B) Double-dose variables
8th grade math percentile                       45.06               40,151               49.45              9,700
Double-dose eligible                             0.56               40,151                0.50              9,700
Double-dosed                                     0.45               40,151                0.44              9,700
Freshman math courses                            1.40               40,151                1.40              9,700
Consecutive periods                              0.62               17,432                0.64              4,096
Same teacher                                     0.66               17,432                0.70              4,096
Extent of tracking                               0.92               17,432                0.92              4,096
(C) Achievement
Passed algebra                                    0.62              40,151                0.63              9,700
Passed geometry                                   0.61              40,151                0.64              9,700
Passed trigonometry                               0.50              40,151                0.54              9,700
Fall 10 math z-score                             -0.00              27,110               -0.02              6,865
Fall 11 math z-score                             -0.00              24,698               -0.04              6,209
ACT math z-score                                 -0.00              22,001               -0.20              5,590
(D) Attainment
Graduated HS in 4 years                           0.48              40,151                0.51              9,700
Graduated HS in 5 years                           0.53              40,151                0.56              9,700
Enrolled in any college                           0.28              40,151                0.30              9,700
Enrolled in 2-year college                        0.16              40,151                0.17              9,700
 Notes: Odd-numbered columns show mean values of each variable for the given sample. Even-numbered columns
 show sample sizes. Columns (1) and (2) contain all students from the 2003 and 2004 cohorts. Columns (3) and (4)
                                                         41 9 percentiles of the eligibility threshold, the default
 limit the sample to students whose 8th grade scores are within
 regression discontinuity sample.
                                                     Table 2: Distribution of Covariates at Threshold

                              In HS        Score                                     Free      Special     Age at                     Reading      Predicted
                             sample      frequency       Black      Hispanic        lunch        ed.       HS start      Female        %ile        HS grad.
                                (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)             (5)        (6)         (7)           (8)          (9)          (10)
     (A) Full sample
     Eligible               -0.006        -3.336         -0.020       0.022         0.012       0.014        0.003      -0.046∗∗      -1.181∗        -0.008∗
                            (0.011)       (6.502)       (0.015)      (0.016)       (0.010)     (0.010)      (0.020)      (0.020)      (0.600)        (0.004)
     Ȳ at threshold         0.85         178.00          0.58         0.35         0.82         0.06        14.67         0.55        47.02           0.58
     N                      11,421           54          9,700        9,700         9,700       9,700        9,700        9,700        9,700          9,700
     (B) Poor readers
     Eligible                0.007         0.854         -0.034       0.016         0.008       0.016        -0.007      -0.063∗        -0.749        -0.005
                            (0.011)       (4.142)       (0.023)      (0.031)       (0.016)     (0.018)      (0.024)      (0.036)       (0.548)       (0.008)




42
     Ȳ at threshold         0.88         101.33          0.58         0.39         0.84         0.09        14.70         0.60         34.71          0.55
     N                       6,465           54          5,625        5,625         5,625       5,625        5,625        5,625         5,625         5,625
     (C) Good readers
     Eligible               -0.024        -4.190         0.004        0.025         0.017       0.009        0.014       -0.028         -0.808       -0.010
                            (0.023)       (4.187)       (0.049)      (0.030)       (0.016)     (0.014)      (0.026)      (0.042)       (0.606)       (0.008)
     Ȳ at threshold         0.82          76.67          0.58         0.30         0.80         0.03        14.61         0.49         63.29         0.61
     N                       4,956           54          4,075        4,075         4,075       4,075        4,075        4,075         4,075         4,075
      Notes: Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered by 8th grade math score are in parentheses (* p<.10 ** p<.05 *** p<.01). Each coefficient
      presents an estimate of the discontinuity in the listed variable at the double-dose eligibility threshold. The estimates are generated by local linear
      regression weighted with an edge kernel using the first-stage Ludwig-Miller cross-validation bandwidth of 9. Panel A uses the full sample while panels
      B and C split the sample into students whose 8th grade reading scores are below and above the 50th percentile. Column 1 uses as an outcome an indicator
      for appearing in the high school sample, using all students with valid 8th grade math scores. Column 2 implements McCrary’s test to check for discrete
      changes in the density of math scores near at the threshold. Column 10 uses as an outcome a predicted probability of high school graduation, as described
      in the text. Below each estimate is the mean value of each outcome just above the eligibility threshold, as well as the sample size.
                                          Table 3: Double-Dose Algebra, Freshman Course-Taking and Peers

                                                         Other         Music,         Voc.          Foreign       Gym,                       Mean            S.D.
                              First        Math          core            art           ed.           lang.        health      Total          peer            peer
                              stage       courses       courses        courses       courses        courses      courses     courses         skill           skill
                               (1)          (2)           (3)            (4)           (5)            (6)          (7)         (8)            (9)            (10)
     (A) Full sample
     Double-dosed           0.384∗∗∗      0.961∗∗∗      -0.141∗∗      -0.415∗∗∗     -0.205∗∗∗      -0.090∗∗       -0.006       0.143      -19.230∗∗∗      -3.381∗∗∗
                            (0.024)       (0.027)        (0.064)       (0.046)       (0.062)        (0.035)      (0.026)      (0.096)       (0.904)        (0.428)
     Ȳ at threshold          0.24          1.21          3.51           0.54          0.52           0.20         0.95         6.98         51.48          15.73
     N                       9,700         9,700          9,700         9,700         9,700          9,700        9,700        9,700         9,700          9,700
     (B) Poor readers
     Double-dosed           0.389∗∗∗      0.968∗∗∗     -0.309∗∗∗      -0.335∗∗∗      -0.194∗∗        -0.032       0.000        0.156      -20.229∗∗∗      -3.342∗∗∗
                            (0.026)       (0.028)       (0.074)        (0.057)        (0.086)       (0.046)      (0.037)      (0.118)       (1.124)        (0.598)




43
     Ȳ at threshold          0.30          1.26          3.68           0.49          0.43           0.14         0.94         6.95         49.47          15.79
     N                       5,625         5,625         5,625          5,625          5,625         5,625        5,625        5,625         5,625          5,625
     (C) Good readers
     Double-dosed           0.371∗∗∗      0.944∗∗∗       0.102        -0.549∗∗∗     -0.221∗∗∗      -0.172∗∗∗      -0.017       0.106      -18.153∗∗∗      -3.284∗∗∗
                            (0.029)       (0.037)       (0.080)        (0.094)       (0.069)        (0.054)      (0.022)      (0.114)       (1.612)        (0.533)
     Ȳ at threshold          0.17          1.16         3.30            0.62          0.64           0.29         0.97         7.01         54.13          15.64
     N                       4,075         4,075         4,075          4,075         4,075          4,075        4,075        4,075         4,075          4,075
      Notes: Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered by 8th grade math score are in parentheses (* p<.10 ** p<.05 *** p<.01). Each coefficient
      in column 1 is a first-stage estimate of eligibility on the probability of being double-dosed. Each coefficient in columns 2-10 is an instrumental variables
      estimate of the impact of double-dose algebra on the given outcome, with treatment instrumented by eligibility. The estimates are generated by local
      linear regression weighted with an edge kernel using the first-stage Ludwig-Miller cross-validation bandwidth of 9. Included are controls for cohort,
      gender, race, subsidized lunch status, special education status, Census block poverty and SES measures, and 8th grade reading scores. Panel A uses
      the full sample while panels B and C split the sample into students whose 8th grade reading scores are below and above the 50th percentile. Columns
      2-8 measure the number of freshman courses taken in various subjects. Columns 9 and 10 measure the mean and standard deviation of each student’s
      freshman algebra peers’ 8th grade math percentile. Below each estimate is the mean value of each outcome just above the eligibility threshold, as well
      as the sample size.
                                                      Table 4: First Year Grades and Credits Earned

                            Freshman          Passed         Earned         Earned          Earned         Other                       Math          Total
                             algebra        freshman       at least C     at least B           A           core       Non-core        credits       credits
                              GPA            algebra       in algebra     in algebra      in algebra       GPA         GPA            earned        earned
                               (1)              (2)            (3)            (4)             (5)           (6)         (7)             (8)           (9)
     (A) Full sample
     Double-dosed            0.434∗∗∗        0.093∗         0.121∗∗∗       0.125∗∗∗          0.033        -0.038        0.025        0.848∗∗∗        0.204
                             (0.079)         (0.050)        (0.038)        (0.031)          (0.021)       (0.095)      (0.080)       (0.041)        (0.218)
     Ȳ at threshold           1.51            0.62           0.35           0.14            0.05           1.82         2.10          0.92          5.62
     N                        9,700           9,700          9,700          9,700            9,700         9,698        9,690         9,700          9,700
     (B) Poor readers
     Double-dosed            0.648∗∗∗        0.132∗∗        0.185∗∗∗       0.165∗∗∗         0.048∗         0.022        0.176        0.994∗∗∗       0.590∗
                             (0.148)         (0.066)        (0.058)        (0.045)          (0.029)       (0.130)      (0.139)       (0.074)        (0.340)




44
     Ȳ at threshold           1.53            0.64           0.35           0.16            0.05           1.80         2.08          0.95          5.51
     N                        5,625           5,625          5,625          5,625            5,625         5,624        5,618         5,625          5,625
     (C) Good readers
     Double-dosed              0.116          0.028          0.027           0.063           0.015        -0.122        -0.200       0.626∗∗∗      -0.375∗∗
                              (0.120)        (0.068)        (0.055)         (0.053)         (0.028)       (0.115)      (0.162)       (0.065)        (0.189)
     Ȳ at threshold           1.48            0.60          0.35            0.11            0.05           1.86         2.13          0.88          5.77
     N                         4,075          4,075          4,075           4,075           4,075         4,074        4,072         4,075          4,075
      Notes: Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered by 8th grade math score are in parentheses (* p<.10 ** p<.05 *** p<.01). Each coefficient is
      an instrumental variables estimate of the impact of double-dose algebra on the given outcome, with treatment instrumented by eligibility. The estimates
      are generated by local linear regression weighted with an edge kernel using the first-stage Ludwig-Miller cross-validation bandwidth of 9. Included
      are controls for cohort, gender, race, subsidized lunch status, special education status, Census block poverty and SES measures, and 8th grade reading
      scores. Panel A uses the full sample while panels B and C split the sample into students whose 8th grade reading scores are below and above the 50th
      percentile. Columns 1-5 measure grades in freshman algebra. Column 6 measures GPA across all science, English and social studies courses. Column 7
      measures GPA across all non-core courses. Columns 8 and 9 measures the number of credits earned freshman year in math and all courses. Below each
      estimate is the mean value of each outcome just above the eligibility threshold, as well as the sample size.
                                                           Table 5: Second Year Credits Earned

                            Present      Took          Took         Passed        Passed       Passed       Math          Math         Total         Total
                            second       geom.        geom.,        geom.         geom.,       geom.,      credits      credits,      credits      credits,
                             year                   if present                  if present    if taken     earned      if present     earned      if present
                              (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)           (5)          (6)         (7)           (8)          (9)          (10)
     (A) Full sample
     Double-dosed            -0.015      0.072       0.091∗∗       0.117∗∗       0.140∗∗       0.084∗      0.070∗       0.088∗∗       0.428∗       0.566∗∗
                            (0.026)     (0.050)      (0.045)       (0.052)       (0.055)       (0.045)     (0.041)      (0.043)       (0.255)      (0.222)
     Ȳ at threshold          0.91        0.74         0.82          0.62          0.68          0.81        0.61         0.68         5.20         5.74
     N                       9,700       9,700        8,719         9,700         8,719         7,231       9,700        8,719         9,700        8,719
     (B) Poor readers
     Double-dosed            -0.008     0.133∗       0.155∗∗       0.183∗∗∗     0.208∗∗∗      0.123∗∗      0.154∗∗      0.179∗∗∗     1.052∗∗      1.239∗∗∗
                            (0.039)     (0.078)      (0.072)       (0.069)      (0.075)       (0.055)      (0.062)      (0.058)      (0.439)      (0.381)
     Ȳ at threshold          0.90        0.71         0.79          0.61         0.67          0.81         0.60         0.66        4.89          5.45




45
     N                       5,625       5,625        5,036         5,625        5,036         4,138        5,625        5,036        5,625        5,036
     (C) Good readers
     Double-dosed            -0.025      -0.015       -0.001        0.036         0.057         0.049       -0.043       -0.034        -0.441      -0.370
                            (0.036)     (0.064)      (0.069)       (0.072)       (0.084)       (0.068)     (0.047)      (0.062)       (0.283)      (0.347)
     Ȳ at threshold          0.92        0.77         0.84          0.64          0.70          0.80        0.64         0.70          5.61        6.11
     N                       4,075        4,075       3,683         4,075         3,683         3,093       4,075        3,683         4,075        3,683
      Notes: Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered by 8th grade math score are in parentheses (* p<.10 ** p<.05 *** p<.01). Each coefficient is
      an instrumental variables estimate of the impact of double-dose algebra on the given outcome, with treatment instrumented by eligibility. The estimates
      are generated by local linear regression weighted with an edge kernel using the first-stage Ludwig-Miller cross-validation bandwidth of 9. Included
      are controls for cohort, gender, race, subsidized lunch status, special education status, Census block poverty and SES measures, and 8th grade reading
      scores. Panel A uses the full sample while panels B and C split the sample into students whose 8th grade reading scores are below and above the 50th
      percentile. Column 1 indicates whether a student was present in the second year of high school. Column 2 indicates whether a student took geometry
      that year, counting those not present as zeroes. Column 3 indicates whether a student took geometry that year, conditional on being present. Columns
      4-6 indicate whether a student passed geometry that year, unconditionally, conditional on being present, and conditional on taking geometry. Columns
      7-10 measure the number of credits earned that year in math and all courses, unconditionally and conditional on being present. Below each estimate is
      the mean value of each outcome just above the eligibility threshold, as well as the sample size.
                                                      Table 6: Third and Fourth Year Credits Earned

                                           Third Year of High School                                           Fourth Year of High School
                            Present,      Math          Math         Total        Total          Present,      Math          Math         Total        Total
                             taking      credits      credits,      credits     credits,          taking      credits      credits,      credits     credits,
                            credits      earned      if present     earned     if present        credits      earned      if present     earned     if present
                               (1)         (2)           (3)          (4)          (5)              (6)         (7)           (8)          (9)         (10)
     (A) Full sample
     Double-dosed             0.059       0.044        0.001        0.242        -0.088           0.068        0.061        0.057       0.600∗         0.319
                             (0.038)     (0.045)      (0.061)      (0.275)       (0.214)         (0.052)      (0.047)      (0.072)      (0.317)       (0.250)
     Ȳ at threshold          0.76         0.61         0.79        4.09          5.36            0.63          0.23        0.37         3.61          5.77
     N                        9,700       9,700        7,441        9,700         7,441           9,700        9,700        6,251        9,700         6,251
     (B) Poor readers
     Double-dosed             0.079       0.011       -0.059        0.649         0.336           0.103        0.088        0.081       0.780∗∗        0.318
                             (0.054)     (0.076)      (0.086)      (0.413)       (0.301)         (0.065)      (0.063)      (0.090)      (0.345)       (0.256)




46
     Ȳ at threshold          0.73         0.59         0.81        3.87          5.28            0.60          0.21        0.35         3.46          5.78
     N                        5,625       5,625        4,253        5,625         4,253           5,625        5,625        3,524        5,625         3,524
     (C) Good readers
     Double-dosed             0.039       0.097        0.084       -0.286        -0.654∗          0.022        0.019        0.017        0.364         0.338
                             (0.053)     (0.087)      (0.098)      (0.441)       (0.369)         (0.073)      (0.086)      (0.141)      (0.605)       (0.564)
     Ȳ at threshold          0.80         0.62         0.78        4.37           5.46           0.66          0.26        0.39         3.81          5.76
     N                        4,075       4,075        3,188        4,075         3,188           4,075        4,075        2,727        4,075         2,727
      Notes: Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered by 8th grade math score are in parentheses (* p<.10 ** p<.05 *** p<.01). Each coefficient is
      an instrumental variables estimate of the impact of double-dose algebra on the given outcome, with treatment instrumented by eligibility. The estimates
      are generated by local linear regression weighted with an edge kernel using the first-stage Ludwig-Miller cross-validation bandwidth of 9. Included are
      controls for cohort, gender, race, subsidized lunch status, special education status, Census block poverty and SES measures, and 8th grade reading scores.
      Panel A uses the full sample while panels B and C split the sample into students whose 8th grade reading scores are below and above the 50th percentile.
      Columns 1-5 measure third year outcomes and columns 6-10 measure fourth year outcomes. The first column in each section indicates whether a student
      was present, measured by taking any credits, in that year of high school. The second column measures the number of math credits earned, counting
      those not present as zeroes. The third column measures the number of math credits earned, conditional on being present. The fourth and fifth columns
      similarly measure the total number of credits earned. Below each estimate is the mean value of each outcome just above the eligibility threshold, as well
      as the sample size.
                                                 Table 7: Double-Dose Algebra and Math Test Scores

                                        PLAN, Fall 10                              PLAN, Fall 11                              ACT, Spring 11
                               Took        Math       Verbal              Took        Math       Verbal             Took         Math        Verbal
                               exam        score      score               exam        score      score              exam         score       score
                                (1)         (2)        (3)                 (4)         (5)        (6)                (7)           (8)        (9)
     (A) Full sample
     Double-dosed              0.045         0.086         0.109         0.065∗        0.235∗∗        0.075         0.009        0.180∗∗∗        0.273∗∗∗
                              (0.053)       (0.094)       (0.067)        (0.035)       (0.101)       (0.101)       (0.031)       (0.065)         (0.078)
     Ȳ at threshold           0.69          0.00          -0.05           0.64         -0.05         0.02          0.57           -0.19           -0.10
     N                         9,700         6,865         6,882          9,700         6,209         6,219         9,700         5,590           5,590
     (B) Poor readers
     Double-dosed             0.102∗        0.180∗         0.102         0.088∗        0.316∗∗        0.083         0.051         0.156∗           0.154
                              (0.060)       (0.105)       (0.089)        (0.048)       (0.135)       (0.117)       (0.047)        (0.083)         (0.109)




47
     Ȳ at threshold           0.66          -0.11         -0.31           0.60         -0.17         -0.27         0.55           -0.28           -0.40
     N                         5,625         3,911         3,925          5,625         3,530         3,538         5,625          3,120           3,120
     (C) Good readers
     Double-dosed              -0.042        -0.060        0.099          0.045         0.143         0.052        -0.044         0.206∗         0.454∗∗∗
                              (0.076)       (0.125)       (0.105)        (0.066)       (0.144)       (0.100)       (0.054)        (0.119)        (0.155)
     Ȳ at threshold            0.74          0.14          0.27           0.68          0.10         0.35          0.60           -0.08           0.26
     N                         4,075         2,954         2,957          4,075         2,679         2,681         4,075          2,470          2,470
      Notes: Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered by 8th grade math score are in parentheses (* p<.10 ** p<.05 *** p<.01). Estimates are
      generated by local linear regression weighted with an edge kernel using the first-stage Ludwig-Miller cross-validation bandwidth of 9. Included are
      controls for cohort, gender, race, subsidized lunch status, special education status, Census block poverty and SES measures, and 8th grade reading
      scores. Panel A uses the full sample and the optimal bandwidth generated by the first stage regression of the double-dose indicator on the running
      variable. Panels B and C split the sample by 8th grade reading score, using the optimal bandwidth generated by each sub-sample’s first stage. Columns
      1, 4 and 7 measure the probability of taking the given math exam. Columns 2, 5 and 8 measure the math z-score for those students who took the math
      exam. Columns 3, 6 and 9 measure the verbal z-score for those students who took the verbal exam. Below each estimate is the mean value of each
      outcome just above the eligibility threshold, as well as the sample size.
                                               Table 8: Double-Dose Algebra and High School Graduation

                                      Math                 Total              Earned              Graduated               Graduated              Graduated
                                     credits              credits              24+                HS within               HS within              within 5,
                                     earned               earned              credits              4 years                 5 years               if present
                                       (1)                  (2)                 (3)                  (4)                     (5)                     (6)
     (A) Full sample
     Double-dosed                   1.023∗∗∗              1.474              0.085∗∗∗               0.098∗                  0.121∗∗                 0.042
                                    (0.116)              (0.905)             (0.033)                (0.054)                 (0.047)                (0.047)
     Ȳ at threshold                  2.37                18.52                0.46                   0.51                    0.56                   0.84
     N                               9,700                9,700               9,700                  9,700                   9,700                  6,251
     (B) Poor readers
     Double-dosed                   1.246∗∗∗             3.072∗∗              0.129∗∗               0.137∗∗                0.179∗∗∗                 0.072
                                    (0.197)              (1.350)              (0.052)               (0.063)                (0.053)                 (0.051)




48
     Ȳ at threshold                  2.35                17.73                0.44                   0.50                   0.54                    0.84
     N                               5,625                5,625                5,625                 5,625                  5,625                   3,524
     (C) Good readers
     Double-dosed                   0.699∗∗∗              -0.739               0.024                 0.044                   0.043                  0.001
                                    (0.142)              (1.298)              (0.080)               (0.075)                 (0.073)                (0.070)
     Ȳ at threshold                  2.40                 19.56               0.48                   0.52                    0.58                   0.85
     N                               4,075                 4,075               4,075                 4,075                   4,075                  2,727
      Notes: Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered by 8th grade math score are in parentheses (* p<.10 ** p<.05 *** p<.01). Each coefficient is
      an instrumental variables estimate of the impact of double-dose algebra on the given outcome, with treatment instrumented by eligibility. The estimates
      are generated by local linear regression weighted with an edge kernel using the first-stage Ludwig-Miller cross-validation bandwidth of 9. Included
      are controls for cohort, gender, race, subsidized lunch status, special education status, Census block poverty and SES measures, and 8th grade reading
      scores. Panel A uses the full sample while panels B and C split the sample into students whose 8th grade reading scores are below and above the 50th
      percentile. Columns 1-2 measure the number of math and total credits taken or earned within four years of entering high school. Column 3 indicates
      whether a student has earned 24 credits within four years of entering high school. Columns 4 and 5 indicate whether a student has graduated from high
      school within four or five years of entering high school. Columns 6 replicates column 5 but conditions the sample on being present in the fourth year of
      high school. Below each estimate is the mean value of each outcome just above the eligibility threshold, as well as the sample size.
                                                 Table 9: Double-Dose Algebra and College Enrollment

                                                      Full sample                                                  High school graduates
                               Enrolled        Enrolled      Part-time            Total           Enrolled        Enrolled     Part-time             Total
                                in any         in 2-year     in 2-year          semesters          in any         in 2-year    in 2-year           semesters
                               college          college       college            enrolled         college          college      college             enrolled
                                  (1)             (2)           (3)                (4)               (5)             (6)          (7)                 (8)
     (A) Full sample
     Double-dosed              0.108∗∗          0.067∗∗         0.082∗∗∗          0.632∗           0.086            0.052          0.108∗∗            0.481
                               (0.048)          (0.033)         (0.031)           (0.328)         (0.071)          (0.054)         (0.053)           (0.547)
     Ȳ at threshold             0.28             0.16            0.08              1.76            0.51            0.29             0.14              3.14
     N                          9,700            9,700           9,700             9,700           5,415            5,415           5,415             5,415
     (B) Poor readers
     Double-dosed               0.111            0.030           0.072             0.367           0.041           -0.051           0.075             -0.315
                               (0.087)          (0.072)         (0.056)           (0.498)         (0.138)          (0.124)         (0.101)           (0.859)




49
     Ȳ at threshold             0.26             0.16            0.08              1.59            0.48            0.30             0.15              2.93
     N                          5,625            5,625           5,625             5,625           3,021            3,021           3,021             3,021
     (C) Good readers
     Double-dosed               0.098            0.111          0.096∗           0.989∗∗∗          0.130            0.170          0.160∗           1.414∗∗
                               (0.071)          (0.075)         (0.053)          (0.377)          (0.089)          (0.124)         (0.096)          (0.698)
     Ȳ at threshold             0.32             0.15            0.07             1.98             0.54            0.26             0.13             3.40
     N                          4,075            4,075           4,075            4,075            2,394            2,394           2,394            2,394
      Notes: Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered by 8th grade math score are in parentheses (* p<.10 ** p<.05 *** p<.01). Each coefficient is
      an instrumental variables estimate of the impact of double-dose algebra on the given outcome, with treatment instrumented by eligibility. The estimates
      are generated by local linear regression weighted with an edge kernel using the first-stage Ludwig-Miller cross-validation bandwidth of 9. Included
      are controls for cohort, gender, race, subsidized lunch status, special education status, Census block poverty and SES measures, and 8th grade reading
      scores. Panel A uses the full sample while panels B and C split the sample into students whose 8th grade reading scores are below and above the 50th
      percentile. Columns 1-3 indicate whether a student has ever enrolled in any college, any 2-year college, and part-time in any 2-year college within five
      years of entering high school. Column 4 measures the total number of college enrollment spells within eight years of entering high school, with part-time
      spells weighted accordingly. Columns 5-8 replicate columns 1-4 but limit the sample to those who graduate high school within five years of entering.
      Below each estimate is the mean value of each outcome just above the eligibility threshold, as well as the sample size.
                                               Figure A.1: The Distribution of 8th Grade Math Scores




                                   0.89                           (A) Pr(in HS sample)
          Pr(in HS sample)
                                   0.81




                                          40                            49.5                           60
                                                                8th grade math percentile


                                                               (B) Number of observations
                                   565
          Number of observations
                                   500




                                          40                            49.5                           60
                                                                8th grade math percentile


Notes: Panel A shows the probability of being in the analysis sample, conditional on having a valid
8th grade math score. Panel B shows the number of observations for each 8th grade math score,
conditional on being in the analysis sample. Both panels show the predicted values generated by
the default regression specification described in the text.

                                                                        50
                                Figure A.2: Being Present in The Second Year of High School




                    .94   .92                           (A) All students
          Present, year 2
            .88     .9
                    .86
                    .84




                                40                          49.5                              60
                                                    8th grade math percentile


                                                        (B) Poor readers
                    .94   .92
          Present, year 2
            .88     .9
                    .86
                    .84




                                40                          49.5                              60
                                                    8th grade math percentile


Notes: Panel A shows the probability of being present in the second year of high school by 8th
grade math score for all students. Panel B limits the sample to students with 8th grade reading
scores below the 50th percentile. Both panels show predicted values generated by the default
regression specification described in the text.

                                                            51
                             Figure A.3: Being Present in The Third Year of High School




                  .85                                (A) All students
          Present, year 3
           .75    .7   .8




                            40                           49.5                             60
                                                 8th grade math percentile


                                                    (B) Poor readers
                  .85
          Present, year 3
           .75    .7   .8




                            40                           49.5                             60
                                                 8th grade math percentile


Notes: Panel A shows the probability of being present in the third year of high school by 8th grade
math score for all students. Panel B limits the sample to students with 8th grade reading scores
below the 50th percentile. Both panels show predicted values generated by the default regression
specification described in the text.

                                                        52
                            Figure A.4: Being Present in The Fourth Year of High School




                  .7                                (A) All students
          Present, year 4
          .6      .55.65




                            40                          49.5                              60
                                                8th grade math percentile


                                                    (B) Poor readers
                  .7
          Present, year 4
          .6      .55.65




                            40                          49.5                              60
                                                8th grade math percentile


Notes: Panel A shows the probability of being present in the fourth year of high school by 8th grade
math score for all students. Panel B limits the sample to students with 8th grade reading scores
below the 50th percentile. Both panels show predicted values generated by the default regression
specification described in the text.

                                                        53
                                          Figure A.5: Math Test Scores, Fall 10th Grade




                       .2       .1                         (A) All students
           Fall 10 math z-score
          -.2     -.1    0
                       -.3




                                     40                        49.5                       60
                                                       8th grade math percentile


                                                           (B) Poor readers
                       .2       .1
           Fall 10 math z-score
          -.2     -.1    0
                       -.3




                                     40                        49.5                       60
                                                       8th grade math percentile


Notes: Panel A shows the mean fall 10th grade math score by 8th grade math score for all stu-
dents who took the exam. Panel B limits the sample to students with 8th grade reading scores
below the 50th percentile. Both panels show predicted values generated by the default regression
specification described in the text.

                                                               54
                                     Figure A.6: ACT Math Scores, Spring 11th Grade




                    .2      0                          (A) All students
            ACT math z-score
          -.4     -.2
                    -.6




                                40                         49.5                       60
                                                   8th grade math percentile


                                                      (B) Poor readers
                    .2      0
            ACT math z-score
          -.4     -.2
                    -.6




                                40                         49.5                       60
                                                   8th grade math percentile


Notes: Panel A shows the mean ACT math score by 8th grade math score for all students who
took the exam. Panel B limits the sample to students with 8th grade reading scores below the 50th
percentile. Both panels show predicted values generated by the default regression specification
described in the text.

                                                          55
                                            Table A.1: Eligibility as an Instrument for Double-Dose Algebra

                               All          2003         2004         Male        Female        Poorest     Least poor        Black       Hispanic       White
                               (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)           (6)          (7)             (8)           (9)         (10)
     (A) Full sample
     Eligible               0.384∗∗∗      0.508∗∗∗     0.258∗∗∗     0.371∗∗∗      0.395∗∗∗     0.407∗∗∗       0.363∗∗∗      0.406∗∗∗      0.387∗∗∗      0.211∗∗∗
                            (0.024)       (0.027)      (0.031)      (0.040)       (0.020)      (0.026)        (0.035)       (0.028)       (0.032)       (0.052)
     Ȳ at threshold          0.24          0.22         0.27         0.27          0.22         0.25           0.23          0.25          0.24          0.19
     N                       9,700         4,839        4,861        4,456         5,244        4,641          5,059         5,511         3,467          722
     F                       256.9         361.6         70.5         84.5         397.5        237.5          107.6         204.1         148.7          16.2
     (B) Poor readers
     Eligible               0.389∗∗∗      0.497∗∗∗     0.267∗∗∗     0.357∗∗∗      0.420∗∗∗     0.427∗∗∗       0.357∗∗∗      0.409∗∗∗      0.391∗∗∗      0.234∗∗∗
                            (0.026)       (0.029)      (0.039)      (0.050)       (0.022)      (0.039)        (0.043)       (0.042)       (0.033)       (0.083)
     Ȳ at threshold          0.30          0.26         0.34         0.34          0.27         0.32           0.27          0.33          0.25          0.27




56
     N                       5,625         2,944        2,681        2,614         3,011        2,781          2,844         3,148         2,115          362
     F                       225.2         297.9         46.0         51.6         368.3        123.1           69.1          96.7         137.8           8.0
     (C) Good readers
     Eligible               0.371∗∗∗      0.512∗∗∗     0.245∗∗∗     0.392∗∗∗      0.348∗∗∗     0.374∗∗∗       0.365∗∗∗      0.399∗∗∗      0.367∗∗∗      0.179∗∗
                            (0.029)       (0.030)      (0.037)      (0.038)       (0.029)      (0.026)        (0.042)       (0.025)       (0.058)       (0.079)
     Ȳ at threshold          0.17          0.16         0.19         0.20          0.14         0.16           0.19          0.15          0.23         0.15
     N                       4,075         1,895        2,180        1,842         2,233        1,860          2,215         2,363         1,352          360
     F                       159.7         292.3         42.7        106.8         142.6        199.4           75.2         245.6          40.2          5.1
      Notes: Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered by 8th grade math score are in parentheses (* p<.10 ** p<.05 *** p<.01). Each coefficient
      presents a first-stage estimate of the relationship between eligibility for and assignment to double-dose algebra. The estimates are generated by local
      linear regression weighted with an edge kernel using the first-stage Ludwig-Miller cross-validation bandwidth of 9. Included are controls for cohort,
      gender, race, subsidized lunch status, special education status, Census block poverty and SES measures, and 8th grade reading scores. Panel A uses
      the full sample while panels B and C split the sample into students whose 8th grade reading scores are below and above the 50th percentile. Column
      1 includes all students and the remaining columns split the sample by cohort, gender, Census block poverty measure, and race/ethnicity. Below each
      estimate is the mean value of each outcome just above the eligibility threshold, as well as the sample size. Also listed is the value from an F-test of the
      instrument.
                                           Table A.2: Double-Dose Algebra and Imputed Math Test Scores

                                    PLAN, Fall 10                               PLAN, Fall 11                               ACT, Spring 11
                             Grade 8 40th %ile 60th %ile                 Grade 8 40th %ile 60th %ile                 Grade 8 40th %ile 60th %ile
                               (1)      (2)       (3)                      (4)      (5)       (6)                      (7)      (8)        (9)
     (A) Full sample
     Double-dosed             0.045          0.061          0.030        0.123∗         0.142∗∗         0.097         0.084∗∗       0.090∗∗         0.083∗∗
                             (0.075)        (0.066)        (0.090)       (0.066)        (0.065)        (0.069)        (0.039)       (0.040)         (0.041)
     Ȳ at threshold          0.06           -0.05          0.17           0.04          -0.09           0.17          -0.03         -0.18           0.12
     N                        9,700          9,700          9,700         9,700          9,700          9,700          9,700         9,700           9,700
     (B) Poor readers
     Double-dosed             0.100         0.134∗          0.063        0.156∗         0.184∗∗         0.122          0.063        0.081∗           0.046
                             (0.084)        (0.077)        (0.097)       (0.080)        (0.081)        (0.083)        (0.051)       (0.045)         (0.061)
     Ȳ at threshold          -0.01          -0.13          0.11          -0.03          -0.17           0.11          -0.07         -0.23           0.09




57
     N                        5,625          5,625          5,625         5,625          5,625          5,625          5,625         5,625           5,625
     (C) Good readers
     Double-dosed            -0.027          -0.040        -0.011         0.083          0.094          0.062          0.113         0.101          0.132∗
                             (0.090)        (0.084)        (0.106)       (0.106)        (0.105)        (0.114)        (0.072)       (0.074)         (0.074)
     Ȳ at threshold          0.15            0.06          0.24           0.13          0.02            0.24          0.03          -0.11           0.17
     N                        4,075          4,075          4,075         4,075          4,075          4,075          4,075         4,075           4,075
      Notes: Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered by 8th grade math score are in parentheses (* p<.10 ** p<.05 *** p<.01). Estimates are
      generated by local linear regression weighted with an edge kernel using the first-stage Ludwig-Miller cross-validation bandwidth of 9. Included are
      controls for cohort, gender, race, subsidized lunch status, special education status, Census block poverty and SES measures, and 8th grade reading
      scores. Panel A uses the full sample and the optimal bandwidth generated by the first stage regression of the double-dose indicator on the running
      variable. Panels B and C split the sample by 8th grade reading score, using the optimal bandwidth generated by each sub-sample’s first stage. Columns
      1-3 measure 10th grade PLAN math z-scores, columns 4-6 measure 11th grade PLAN math z-scores, and columns 7-9 measure ACT math z-scores.
      Students missing scores are assigned their 8th grade math z-scores in columns 1, 4 and 7, the equivalent of a 40th percentile score in columns 2, 5 and
      8, and the equivalent of a 60th percentile score in columns 3, 6 and 9. Below each estimate is the mean value of each outcome just above the eligibility
      threshold, as well as the sample size.
                            Table A.3: Heterogeneity by Gender, Income and Race

                                                                Total      Graduated        Enrolled      Enrolled
                                   Passed        Passed        credits     HS within         in any       in 2-year
                                   algebra      geometry       earned       5 years         college        college
                                     (1)           (2)           (3)          (4)              (5)           (6)
(A) By gender
Double-dosed * female              0.085∗        0.104∗∗        1.345        0.137∗∗∗        0.123∗∗       0.098∗∗
                                   (0.048)       (0.049)       (0.860)       (0.042)         (0.049)       (0.037)
Double-dosed * male                 0.101        0.133∗∗        1.628         0.102           0.089         0.031
                                   (0.064)       (0.063)       (1.186)       (0.065)         (0.057)       (0.034)
p (β F emale = β M ale )            0.729         0.469         0.757         0.486           0.453         0.028

(B) By income
Double-dosed * poorest             0.103∗        0.106∗∗       1.667∗        0.122∗∗∗        0.099∗        0.062∗
                                   (0.052)       (0.052)       (0.852)       (0.045)         (0.050)       (0.033)
Double-dosed * least poor           0.071        0.157∗∗        0.968        0.123∗∗         0.133∗∗       0.082∗∗
                                   (0.055)       (0.061)       (1.213)       (0.059)         (0.050)       (0.041)
p (β P oor = β N onpoor )           0.318         0.163         0.290         0.975           0.223         0.410

(C) By race
Double-dosed * black                0.077       0.143∗∗∗        1.244        0.126∗∗        0.153∗∗∗       0.084∗∗
                                   (0.055)      (0.047)        (0.885)       (0.049)        (0.050)        (0.033)
Double-dosed * Hispanic             0.081         0.049         1.118         0.076          -0.029         0.018
                                   (0.058)      (0.053)        (1.017)       (0.051)        (0.050)        (0.032)
Double-dosed * white                0.074        -0.032        -0.736        -0.022           0.068         0.064
                                   (0.083)      (0.075)        (1.882)       (0.101)        (0.077)        (0.056)
p (β Black = β Hispanic )           0.870         0.000         0.815         0.059           0.000         0.001
p (β Black = β W hite )             0.963        0.003          0.180         0.048          0.170          0.695
p (β Hispanic = β W hite )          0.923         0.200         0.254         0.219           0.123         0.318

N                                   9,700         9,700         9,700         9,700           9,700         9,700
 Notes: Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered by 8th grade math score are in parentheses (* p<.10
 ** p<.05 *** p<.01). Each coefficient presents an instrumental variables estimate of the impact of double-dose
 algebra on the given outcome, with treatment instrumented by eligibility. The estimates are generated by local
 linear regression weighted with an edge kernel using the first-stage Ludwig-Miller cross-validation bandwidth of
 9. Each panel interacts both the instrument and the treatment variable with group indicators, as well as controlling
 directly for such indicators. Below each set of estimates are the p-values from an F-test of the equality of the
 coefficients shown.



                                                          58
                                         Table A.4: Robustness checks

                                                                 Total       Graduated        Enrolled      Enrolled
                                   Passed        Passed         credits      HS within         in any       in 2-year
                                   algebra      geometry        earned        5 years         college        college
                                     (1)           (2)            (3)           (4)              (5)           (6)
(A) Full sample
BW = 9 (CV)                        0.093∗        0.117∗∗         1.474         0.121∗∗        0.108∗∗        0.067∗∗
                                   (0.051)       (0.052)        (0.914)        (0.048)        (0.048)        (0.033)
BW = 9 (CV), no controls            0.078        0.101∗∗         1.116         0.101∗∗        0.082∗         0.059∗
                                   (0.055)       (0.048)        (0.915)        (0.049)        (0.047)        (0.031)
Bandwidth = 12.7 (IK)              0.069∗        0.074∗          0.946         0.079∗∗        0.089∗∗        0.072∗∗
                                   (0.041)       (0.041)        (0.725)        (0.039)        (0.042)        (0.029)
Bandwidth = 5                      0.120∗        0.216∗∗        2.759∗∗        0.151∗∗        0.137∗∗        0.074∗
                                   (0.066)       (0.087)        (1.248)        (0.065)        (0.055)        (0.039)
Untreated cohorts (RF)              0.001         0.012          0.137         -0.006          0.003          0.024
                                   (0.016)       (0.024)        (0.397)        (0.015)        (0.020)        (0.014)
(B) Poor readers
BW = 9 (CV)                        0.132∗        0.183∗∗        3.072∗∗       0.179∗∗∗         0.111          0.030
                                   (0.066)       (0.069)        (1.365)       (0.054)         (0.088)        (0.073)
BW = 9 (CV), no controls           0.125∗        0.170∗∗∗       2.970∗∗       0.162∗∗∗         0.094          0.024
                                   (0.068)       (0.063)        (1.305)       (0.055)         (0.080)        (0.068)
Bandwidth = 12.7 (IK)              0.096∗        0.130∗∗        2.244∗∗       0.136∗∗∗         0.102          0.058
                                   (0.053)       (0.055)        (1.077)       (0.045)         (0.069)        (0.057)
Bandwidth = 5                       0.158        0.275∗∗        5.205∗∗       0.232∗∗∗         0.153          0.015
                                   (0.102)       (0.112)        (2.007)       (0.079)         (0.126)        (0.108)
Untreated cohorts (RF)              0.008         0.003          0.088         -0.000          0.006          0.012
                                   (0.023)       (0.030)        (0.536)       (0.024)         (0.023)        (0.017)
 Notes: Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered by 8th grade math score are in parentheses (* p<.10
 ** p<.05 *** p<.01). Each coefficient is an instrumental variables estimate of the impact of double-dose algebra
 on the given outcome, with treatment instrumented by eligibility. The estimates are generated by local linear
 regression weighted with an edge kernel using various bandwidths. Panel A uses the full sample while panel B
 includes only students whose 8th grade reading scores are below the 50th percentile. The first uses our default
 specification, with the first stage’s Ludwig-Miller cross-validation bandwidth of 9 and controls for cohort, gender,
 race, subsidized lunch status, special education status, Census block poverty and SES measures, and 8th grade
 reading scores. The second row replicates the first row but without those controls. The third row replicates the first
 row using the first stage’s Imbens-Kalyanaraman optimal bandwidth of 12.7. The fourth row replicates the first
 row using a bandwidth of 5. The fifth row shows reduced form estimates generated by the pre-treatment cohorts
 of 2001 and 2002, using a bandwidth of 9.




                                                          59
                         Table A.5: Compliance with Implementation Guidelines

                                                                   Total      Graduated       Enrolled      Enrolled
                                      Passed        Passed        credits     HS within        in any       in 2-year
                                      algebra      geometry       earned       5 years        college        college
                                        (1)           (2)           (3)          (4)             (5)           (6)
(A) By compliance
Double-dosed                         0.111∗∗        0.124∗∗         1.667       0.126∗∗        0.113∗∗       0.073∗∗
                                      (0.055)       (0.057)       (1.007)       (0.052)        (0.050)       (0.034)
Double-dosed * compliance            -0.223∗∗        -0.084        -2.345        -0.061         -0.066        -0.062
                                      (0.110)       (0.107)       (2.009)       (0.092)        (0.092)       (0.063)

(B) By treatment cohort
Double-dosed                           0.063       0.119∗∗∗        1.385       0.117∗∗∗        0.109∗∗        0.051
                                      (0.047)      (0.044)        (0.837)      (0.042)         (0.046)       (0.032)
Double-dosed * 2004                   0.089∗        -0.006         0.265        0.013           -0.003        0.050
                                      (0.048)      (0.051)        (1.157)      (0.065)         (0.055)       (0.043)

N                                      9,700         9,700         9,700         9,700          9,700         9,700
 Notes: Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered by 8th grade math score are in parentheses (* p<.10
 ** p<.05 *** p<.01). Each coefficient is an instrumental variables estimate of the impact of double-dose algebra
 on the given outcome, with treatment instrumented by eligibility. The estimates are generated by local linear
 regression weighted with an edge kernel using the first-stage Ludwig-Miller cross-validation bandwidth of 9. Each
 panel interacts both the instrument and the treatment variable with the given measure, as well as controlling directly
 for that measure. In panel A, the measure is a de-meaned average of three compliance measures, each of which
 runs from 0 to 1. The three measures are the fraction of double-dosed students in the school with the same teacher
 for both classes, the fraction with both periods consecutive, and the fraction of algebra peers who are also double-
 dosed. In panel B, the main coefficient measures the impact of double-dosing on the 2003 cohort, while the
 interaction measures the difference in effect size between 2004 and 2003.




                                                          60
