NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MONETARY POLICY SURPRISES, CREDIT COSTS AND ECONOMIC ACTIVITY
Mark Gertler
Peter Karadi
Working Paper 20224
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20224
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2014

Prepared for the NBER conference on "Lessons From the Crisis for Monetary Policy," October 18,19
in Boston. We are grateful to Claudio Schioppa for his excellent research assistance, to Refet Gurkaynak
for sharing his data, to an anonymous referee and to Gianni Amisano, Karel Mertens, Giorgio Primiceri,
Eric Swanson for helpful discussions. The views expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the ECB, the Eurosystem, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Mark Gertler and Peter Karadi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Monetary Policy Surprises, Credit Costs and Economic Activity
Mark Gertler and Peter Karadi
NBER Working Paper No. 20224
June 2014
JEL No. E3,E4,E5
ABSTRACT
We provide evidence on the nature of the monetary transmission mechanism. To identify policy
shocks in a setting with both economic and financial variables, we combine traditional monetary
vector autoregression (VAR) analysis with high frequency identification (HFI) of monetary policy
shocks. We first show that the shocks identified using HFI surprises as external instruments produce
responses in output and inflation consistent with both textbook theory and conventional monetary
VAR analysis. We also find, however, that monetary policy surprises typically produce "modest
movements" in short rates that lead to "large" movements in credit costs and economic activity. The
large movements in credit costs are mainly due to the reaction of both term premia and credit spreads
that are typically absent from the standard model of monetary policy transmission. Finally, we show
that forward guidance is important to the overall strength of the transmission mechanism.
Mark Gertler
Department of Economics
New York University
269 Mercer Street, 7th Floor
New York, NY 10003
and NBER
mark.gertler@nyu.edu
Peter Karadi
Research Department
European Central Bank
Neue Mainzer Strasse 66
Frankfurt am Main
60311
Germany
and CEPR
peter.karadi@ecb.int

1

Introduction

This paper provides evidence on the nature of the monetary policy transmission mechanism. We focus in particular on how monetary policy actions
influence credit costs that in turn affect economic activity. Our goal is to
assess the extent to which the response of credit costs to monetary policy
is consistent with standard theory and, in doing so, identify any significant
discrepancies that the theory should address.
There is of course a voluminous literature on monetary policy transmission.1 Two main considerations motivate us to revisit this classic topic.
First, the conventional models of monetary policy transmission treat financial markets as frictionless. To put it mildly, the recent financial crisis suggests re-thinking this premise. As we discuss in section 2, the conventional
“frictionless” frameworks have sharp predictions for how credit costs should
respond to monetary policy actions. In particular, the response of borrowing
rates should depend entirely on the expected path of the central bank’s policy instrument, the short term interest rate. To a first approximation there
should be no response in either term premia or credit spreads. We proceed to
examine this hypothesis. The goal here is to determine whether a significant
component of the response of credit costs to monetary policy may indeed
reflect movements in term premia and credit spreads, consistent with some
form of financial market imperfection.
The second consideration involves the evolution in the way the Federal
Reserve manages its policy instrument. In conventional descriptions of the
transmission mechanism, the central bank adjusts the current short term
interest rate. Market participants then form expectations about the future
path of the short rate based on the central bank’s historical tendencies for
rate adjustment. However, as Gürkaynak, Sack, and Swanson (2005) (hereafter GSS) and others have argued, over time the Fed has increasingly relied
on communication - in Fedspeak known as “forward guidance” - to influence
market beliefs about the expected path of short term rates. Indeed, once
the short term interest rate reached the zero lower bound during the current
crisis in December 2008, forward guidance became the only way the central
bank could affect market interest rates without resorting to unconventional
credit market interventions. Accordingly, in assessing how monetary policy influence credit costs, it is important to account for the role of forward
1

See Boivin, Kiley, and Mishkin (2010) for a recent survey.

3

guidance.
To evaluate the nature of monetary policy transmission, we analyze the
joint response of a variety of economic and financial variables to exogenous
monetary policy surprises. The policy surprises, further, include shocks to
forward guidance. Our specific approach involves combining the traditional
”money shock” vector autoregression (VAR) analysis (e.g. Bernanke and
Blinder (1992), Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans (1996))2 with high frequency identification (HFI) of the effects of policy surprises on interest rates
(e.g. Kuttner (2001), Gürkaynak et al. (2005), Hamilton (2008), Campbell,
Evans, Fisher, Justiniano, Calomiris, and Woodford (2012)). GSS, in particular, use unexpected changes in Federal Funds rate and Eurodollar futures
on FOMC dates to measure policy surprises. Our hybrid approach employs
HFI measures of policy surprises as external instruments in a set of VARs
to identify the effects of monetary shocks. The VARs we consider include
output, inflation and a variety of interest rates.
The particular approach we take is dictated by the need to identify policy
surprises that can be considered exogenous with respect to both the economic
and financial variables in the VAR. Otherwise it is not possible to properly
identify the responses of these variables to policy shifts. The standard identification strategy in VARs analyzing monetary shocks is to impose timing
restrictions on both the behavior and the impact of the policy rate, typically
taken to be the Federal Funds rate. A standard set of restrictions is to suppose that within a period the Funds rate responds to all the other variables
in the VAR but not vice-versa. That is, the impact of the Funds rate on the
other variables occurs with a lag of at least one period. So long as the period
length is not too long (e.g. a month to a quarter), these kinds of timing
restrictions may be reasonable for the interactions between the Funds rate
and economic activity variables such as output and inflation. However, they
are problematic once additional financial variables are present. The problem
is simultaneity: Within a period, policy shifts not only influence financial
variables, they may be responding to them as well. Even if the central bank
is not directly responding to the financial indicators, it may be responding
to underlying correlated variables left out of the VAR.
The HFI approach addresses the simultaneity issue by using daily data.
In particular, policy shocks are surprises in Fed Funds futures that occur
2

See also Rudebusch (1998) for a critique of the methodology and an early recommendation of using futures data to measure monetary policy shocks.

4

on FOMC days. To isolate the impact of news about monetary policy, the
surprises in futures rates are usually measured within a tight window (e.g.
thirty minutes) of the FOMC decision. The dependent variables in the event
studies are typically the same day responses in various interest rates and asset
returns. The key identifying assumption is that news about the economy on
the FOMC day does not affect the policy choice. Only information available
the previous day is relevant. Given this assumption, surprises in Fed Funds
futures on FOMC dates are orthogonal to within period movements in both
economic and financial variables. One additional benefit of this approach is
that the policy surprise measure can include “shocks” to forward guidance.
Following GSS, this is accomplished by incorporating in the instrument set
surprises in Fed Funds futures for contracts that expire at a subsequent date
in the future. These surprises in principle reflect revisions in beliefs on FOMC
dates about the future path of short term rates.
There are however some limitations to the HFI approach. While it is
possible to measure the instantaneous effect of a policy surprise on market
interest rates, due to the event study framework it is difficult to identify how
persistent the impact is. For a similar reason, it is not possible to examine
the response of economic activity variables such as output and inflation.
In contrast, our approaches combines the strengths of the VAR and HFI
methodologies. We exploit the HFI approach to identify exogenous policy
surprises but then use a full VAR to trace out the dynamic responses of real
and financial variables.
In addition to the classic VAR and HFI papers mentioned earlier, several
other papers are relevant to our analysis. Hanson and Stein (2012) and Nakamura and Steinsson (2013) use HFI to investigate the impact of monetary
policy surprises on the real yield curve. The former emphasize the response
of term premia. The latter use the event study to identify parameters in
a small-scale New-Keynesian model. Other papers have incorporated HFI
measures of monetary policy shocks into VARs (e.g. Bagliano and Favero
(1999), Cochrane and Piazzesi (2002), Faust, Swanson, and Wright (2004),
and Barakchian and Crowe (2013)). We differ by employing an external instruments approach that permits sharp testing of conventional theories of
the impact of monetary policy on credit costs.
In section 2 we describe the conventional monetary transmission mechanism in detail. We derive a several testable implications involving the response of credit costs to monetary policy shocks. In section 3 we present our
methodology. We present our VAR framework and describe in particular how
5

we make use of interest rate futures surprises as external instruments. Finally,
we present evidence on the response of credit costs and economic activity to
monetary policy in section 4. We begin with a discussion of our choice of
interest rate to serve as a policy indicator and of the instruments set we
use to identify exogenous monetary policy surprises. We then show that in a
VAR with both financial and economic variables, our external instrument approach produces a more convincing set of responses to a monetary shock than
does a standard Cholesky identification scheme. An unanticipated monetary
tightening produces a significant drop in output and a modest insignificant
drop in the price level. In addition, real credit costs increase for all of the
securities we consider. Each of these results is consistent with conventional
models of the monetary transmission mechanism.
But we also obtain some results that are inconsistent with the standard
model. In particular, monetary policy responses typically produce “modest”
movements in short rates that lead to “large” movements in credit costs. As
we show, the large movements in credit costs are mainly due to the reaction of
both term premia and credit spreads. The baseline model of the transmission
mechanisms abstracts from both these considerations. At the same time, the
large movement in credit costs may help unlock the puzzle of why seemingly
modest movements in short term rates appear to have a substantial impact
on economic activity. To be sure, we find evidence for the kind of price
stickiness present in the conventional models. The response of real rates to
monetary policy surprises is approximately equal to the response of nominal
rates. However, to account for the overall response of credit costs, it may be
necessary to amend the model to account for movements in term premia and
credit spreads.
Finally, we show that forward guidance is important to the overall strength
of policy transmission. Holding constant the size of the response of the Funds
rate, the impact of a monetary policy surprise on economic activity depends
on the degree of news from forward guidance embedded in the shock.

6

2

The Conventional Monetary Policy Transmission Mechanism: Some Testable Implications

In this section we describe the conventional monetary transmission mechanism and propose several testable implications. We take as an example of
the conventional mechanism the one present in the New-Keynesian models
used widely by central banks across the globe.3 Within these frameworks
aggregate spending depends on current and expected future short term real
interest rates. Transmission of monetary policy then works as follows: The
central bank chooses the short term nominal interest rate it each period which
we express in annualized terms. Due to some form of nominal price and/or
wage rigidities, control over the nominal rate gives the central bank control
over current and expected future real rates, at least for some horizon. It is
this leverage over the time path of short term real interest rates that allows
the central bank to influence aggregate spending that in turn translates into
movements in output and inflation.
Given the expectations hypothesis of the term structure, a way to summarize the impact of monetary policy actions on the path of short term interest
rates is to examine the response of the yield curve. A loglinear approximation
of an m period zero-coupon gov’t bond yields
(m−1
)
X
1
it+j + φm
(1)
im
t
t = Et
m j=0
m
where im
t is the annual bond yield and φt is the annualized term premium.
m
To a first order, φt is a constant within a local region of the steady state.
It follows that variation in long term rates reflects variation in the path of
current and expected future short rates. In this respect, the transmission of
monetary policy actions to credit costs operates via the yield curve. This link
between short and long rates is present in standard New-Keynesian models
3

Examples of the conventional New-Keynesian DSGE model include Christiano,
Eichenbaum, and Evans (2005) and Smets and Wouters (2007). Variations that allow
for financial market frictions include Bernanke, Gertler, and Gilchrist (1999), Gertler and
Karadi (2011) and Christiano, Motto, and Rostagno (2014). Examples of models with
the risk-taking channel of monetary policy are Drechsler, Savov, and Schnabl (2013) and
Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2013).

7

and is a feature of all conventional models of monetary policy transmission.
Equation (1) also makes clear how forward guidance provides the central
bank with some leverage over longer maturity interest rates, to the extent
it is able to effectively communicate its intentions about the path of future
short rates.
Of course what matters for monetary transmission is the behavior of real
interest rates. Let πt be the annualized percent change in the price level
between time t and t + 1 and let πtm be the annualized percent change in the
price level between t and t +m. Then to a first approximation the real return
of the m period nominal bond, can be express as the following function of the
expected path of short term real rates, again with the additive term premium
φm
t :
(m−1
)
X
1
m
(it+j − πt+j ) + φm
(2)
im
t
t − E t π t = Et
m j=0
with πtm = 1/m

m−1
P

πt+j , and as before φm
t is constant within a local region

j=0

of the steady state. As we have noted, the standard theory of monetary
transmission presumes that the central bank’s adjustment of nominal rates
leads to adjustment in real rates due to temporary nominal rigidities that
inhibit offsetting movements in inflation. Of course, in the standard model
the central bank’s leverage over longer maturity rates depends on the degree
of price stickiness.
Up to this point we have analyzed the link between monetary policy actions and government bond yields. As we noted earlier, in the standard models of the transmission mechanism financial markets are frictionless. Thus for
given maturity, the interest rate on a private security equals the corresponding government bond rate, up to a first order. The effects of monetary policy
actions on the government bond yield curve translate exactly into effects
on private borrowing rates. With financial market imperfections present,
however, monetary transmission may involve a “credit channel” effects (e.g.
Bernanke and Gertler (1995)). In particular, with credit market frictions
operative, the private annual borrowing rate on an m period security imp
t
exceeds the rate on a similar maturity government bond, adjusting for risk.
Let xm
t denote the external finance premium, i.e. the spread between the
private security and government bond rates. Then up to a first order
m
imp
= im
t
t + xt

8

(3)

With a credit channel present, tightening of monetary policy not only
raises government bond rates but also the external finance premium, which
amplifies the overall effect of the policy action on private borrowing rates.
The external finance premium increases because the tightening of monetary
policy leads a tightening of financial constraints. Theories of the credit channel differ on the precise way central bank interest rate shifts influence credit
constraints. A common prediction, however, is that the credit channel magnifies the impact of the interest rate adjustment on private borrowing rates
via the impact on credit spreads.
Overall, our analysis leads to three implications of the standard theory
that we can test. First, the response of the annual yield on an m period government bond to a surprise monetary policy action should equal the surprise
in the average the annualized current short rate and the expected future short
rates m − 1 periods into the future, with no response of the term premium.
Second, the response of the yield on an m period private security should similarly equal the surprise in the expected path of the short rate over a similar
horizon, though in this case with no change in either the term premium or
the credit spread. Finally, a surprise monetary policy action should affect
real rates as well as nominal rates across a nontrivial portion of the yield
curve.
To test the first hypothesis, rearrange equation (1) to obtain the following
expression for the term premium on the government bond
(m−1
)
1 X
m
m
(4)
it+j
φ t = i t − Et
m j=0
One can then obtain the response of the term premium to a monetary policy
surprise by using the identified VAR to compute the response of the long
rate im
t and the path of short rate it . Under the null of the standard theory,
the response of the term premium should be zero.
To test the second hypothesis, first define the excess return on the m
mp
period bond, χm
and the
t , as the difference between the market rate it
average of current and expected annualized short rates over the life of the
bond, as follows:
(m−1
)
X
1
mp
χm
it+j
(5)
t = i t − Et
m j=0
Then combine equations (3) and (5) to obtain the following expression for
9

χt :
χm
t

(m−1
)
X
1
= im
it+j + xm
t − Et
t
m j=0

(6)

m
= φm
t + xt

Equation (6) relates the excess return on the private security to the sum of the
term premium and the external finance premium. We obtain the response of
χm
t to a monetary policy shock by summing the impulse responses of the term
premium and the external finance premium, which we measure directly using
the spread between the rate on the private security and a similar maturity
government bond. We measure the response of the term premium exactly as
in the previous case.
Finally, we can easily compute the response of real interest rates to monetary policy shocks. We do so by first computing the impulse response of
the relevant nominal interest rate and the log price level. We then make use
of equation (2) to calculate the response of real interest rates. The interesting issue is how much of the response of nominal rates to monetary shocks
reflects movement in real rates across different maturities.

3

Econometric Framework

Our econometric model is vector autoregression with a mixture of economic
and financial variables. To identify monetary surprises we use external instruments. Our use of external instruments in a VAR is a variation of the
methodology developed by Stock and Watson (2012) and Mertens and Ravn
(2013). We describe the approach below.
Let Yt be a vector of economic and financial variables, A and Cj ∀ j ≥ 1
conformable coefficient matrices, and εt a vector of structural white noise
shocks. Then the general structural form of the VAR we are considering is
given by
p
X
AYt =
Cj Yt−j + εt
(7)
j=1

Multiplying each side of the equation by A−1 yields the reduced form representation
p
X
Yt =
Bj Yt−j + ut
(8)
j=1

10

where ut is the reduced form shock, given by the following function of the
structural shocks:
ut = Sεt
(9)
with Bj = A−1 Cj ; S = A−1 . The variance-covariance matrix of the reduced
form model equals Σ.
E [ut u0t ] = E [SS 0 ] = Σ.
(10)
Let ytp  Yt be the policy indicator, specifically the variable in the structural representation (7) with exogenous variation due to the associated primitive policy shock εpt . We distinguish between the policy indicator and the
policy instrument. The latter is the current period short term interest rate
(specifically the Federal Funds rate). In the standard money shock VAR the
policy indicator and policy instrument are one in the same, since the structural policy shock corresponds to an exogenous innovation in the current
short rate. However, because we wish to include shocks to forward guidance
in the measure of the policy innovation, we instead take as the policy indicator a government bond rate with a maturity somewhat longer than the
current period funds rate. The advantage of the government bond rate is
that its innovations incorporate not only the effects of surprises in the current funds rate but also shifts in expectations about the future path of the
funds rate, i.e. shocks to forward guidance. Later in this section we describe
formally our distinction between the policy indicator and policy instrument.
Next, let s denote the column in matrix S corresponding to impact on
each element of the vector of reduced form residuals ut of the structural policy
shock εpt . Accordingly, to compute the impulse the responses to a monetary
shock, we need to estimate
Yt =

p
X

Bj Yt−j + sεpt .

(11)

j=1

Because we are not interested in computing a variance decomposition or
the impulse responses to other shocks we do not have to identify all the
coefficients of S, but rather only the elements of the column s.
One can simply use least squares estimation of the reduced form VAR
to obtain estimates of the coefficients in each matrix Bj . Some restrictions
are necessary, however, to identify the coefficients in s. The standard timing
restriction we described earlier amounts to assuming that all the elements

11

of s are zero except the one that corresponds to the policy indicator. This
generates extra restrictions, that are sufficient to identify s.
As we noted earlier, however, this kind of timing restriction is problematic
when financial variables appear in the VAR along with the policy indicator. A
restriction that an innovation in the policy indicator has no contemporaneous
impact on other financial variables is generally implausible. In addition, it is
difficult to argue that current policy does not respond to the news contained
in financial variables. Accordingly, because we are interested in examining
the joint response of economic and financial variables, a different approach
to identifying monetary policy surprises is needed. It is for this reason that
we instead make use of external instruments as an identification strategy.
We begin with a general explanation of the external instruments methodology, before turning to the precise approach we take. Following Stock and
Watson (2012) and Mertens and Ravn (2013), let Zt be vector of instrumental variables and let εqt be a structural shock other than the policy shock. To
be a valid set instruments for the policy shock, Zt must be correlated with
εpt but orthogonal to each εqt , as follows:
0

E[Zt εpt ] = φ
0
E[Zt εqt ]

(12)

= 0

To obtain estimates of the elements in the vector s in equation (11),
proceed as follows: First, obtain estimates of the vector of reduced form
residuals ut from the ordinary least squares regression of the reduced form
VAR. Then let upt be the reduced form residual from the equation for the
policy indicator and let uqt be the reduced form residual from the equation
for variable q 6= p. Also, let sq ∈ s be the response of uqt to a unit increase in
the policy shock εpt . Then we can obtain an estimate of the ratio sq /sp from
the two stage least squares regression of uqt on upt , using the instrument set
Zt .
Intuitively, the first stage isolates the variation in the reduced form residual for the policy indicator that is due to the structural policy shock. It does
so by regressing upt on Zt to form the fitted value ubpt . Given that the variation
in ubpt is due only to εpt the second stage regression of uqt on ubpt then yields a
consistent estimate of sq /sp
uqt

sq bp
= p ut + ξt
s
12

(13)

where ubpt is orthogonal to the error term ξt , given the assumption of equation
(12) that Zt is orthogonal to all the structural shocks other than the shock to
the policy indicator εpt . An estimate for sp is then derived from the estimated
reduced form variance-covariance matrix using equations (10) and (13). We
are then able to identify sq .4 Given estimates of sp , each sq and each Bj , we
can use equation (11) to compute responses to monetary policy surprises.
As we discussed, following the HFI literature, the set of potential external
instruments we use to identify monetary policy shocks consists of surprises
in Fed Funds and Eurodollar futures on FOMC dates. In particular, let
ft+j be the settlement price on the FOMC day in month t for interest rate
futures (either Fed Funds or Eurodollars) expiring in t + j; and let ft+j,−1
be the corresponding settlement price for the day prior to FOMC meeting.
In addition, let (Et it+j )u be the unexpected movement in the target funds
rate anticipated for month t + j, with (Et it )u = iut the surprise in the current
short rate. Accordingly we can express (Et it+j )u as as the surprise in the
futures rate, as follows.5
4

Consider partitioning the vector of reduced form residuals as ut =
0
[u1t u02t ] , and the corresponding matrix of structural coefficients as



 

s11 s12
S = s Sq = S1 S2 =
,
s21 s22
and the reduced form variance-covariance matrix as


Σ11 Σ12
Σ=
.
Σ21 Σ22

 p q0 0
ut ut
=

(14)

(15)

sp is identified up to a sign convention and can be obtained by the following closed form
solution
(sp )2 = s211 = Σ11 − s12 s012 ,
(16)
where
s12 s012 =
with


Σ21 −

s21
Σ11
s11

0



s21
Q−1 Σ21 −
Σ11 ,
s11



s21
s021
s21 0 s21 0
Q=
Σ11
− Σ21
+
Σ
+ Σ22 .
s11
s11
s11
s11 21

(17)

(18)

application of the restrictions in 10 noticing that
 The derivation
0 is the straightforward

s21
s21
Σ21 − s11 Σ11
Σ21 − s11 Σ11 = s12 Qs012 .
5
Following Kuttner (2001) and others, we measure the surprise in the target rate using
the change in the futures rate as opposed to the difference between the realized target

13

(Et it+j )u = ft+j − ft+j,−1

(19)

For j = 0, the surprise in futures rates measures the shock to the current
Fed Funds futures, which is the case studied by Kuttner (2001).6 For j ≥ 1,
the surprise in the expected target rate may be thought of as measuring a
shock to forward guidance, following Gürkaynak et al. (2005). Finally, also
following GSS, to ensure that the surprises in futures rates reflect only news
about the FOMC decision, we measure these shock within a thirty minute
window of the announcement.
We next discuss exactly how we use interest rate futures as external instruments to identify exogenous monetary policy shocks. Within the baseline
set of VARs we consider, we take the one year government bond rate as the
relevant monetary policy indicator, rather than the Federal Funds as is common in the literature. As we suggested earlier, using a safe interest rate with
a longer longer maturity than the Funds rate allows us to consider shocks
to forward guidance in the overall measure of policy shocks. Under this scenario, a component of the reduced form VAR residual for the one government
bond rate is a monetary policy shock that includes exogenous surprises not
only in the current Funds rate but also exogenous surprises in the forward
guidance about the path of future rates.
Our conceptually preferred indicator is the two year government bond
rate based on arguments by Swanson and Williams (ming) and Hanson and
Stein (2012) and others who argue the Federal Reserve’s forward guidance
strategy operates with a roughly two year horizon. That is, the central bank’s
focus is on managing expectations of the path of the short rate roughly two
years into the future. Bernanke, Reinhart, and Sack (2004) and GSS provide
some evidence in support of this view. They find that FOMC statements
and the futures rate forecast. The reason is to cleanse risk premia in futures from the
measure of the unanticipated movement in the target. Assuming that the risk premium
for the futures rate does not change in the twenty four hours leading up to the FOMC
decision, differencing the future rates eliminates the risk premium for the measure of the
unanticipated change in the target. See also Piazzesi and Swanson (2008) and Hamilton
(2009).
6
To measure the surprise in the futures rate for the current month we need to take
account the the timing of when the FOMC date occurs within the month. This is because
the futures rate is expressed as an average over all the days of the month. Following
Kuttner (2001) we multiply the the surprise in ft by the factor TT−t , where T is the
number of days in the month and t is the number of days elapsed before the FOMC
meeting.

14

interpretable as providing forward guidance have a significant impact on
futures rates that are relevant to pricing the two year government bond rate.
We find, however, that interest rate futures surprises that have significant
explanatory power for movements in the two year government bond rate on
FOMC dates, are not strong instruments for monthly (reduced form) VAR
innovations. By contrast, for the one year government bond rate, it is possible
to find good instruments among the set of futures rate surprise. Accordingly,
we use the one year rate as the policy indicator in out baseline analysis, but
then show all our results are robust to using the two year rate. In the next
section we describe in detail the issues involved in the choice of the policy
indicator as well as the instrument set.
In the mean time, we can be precise about how the innovation in the one
year government bond incorporates policy surprises that allow for shocks to
forward guidance. In particular, given the monthly frequency and our earlier
notation (see equation 1) we can approximate the return on the one year
government bond rate, i12
t as a function of current and expected short rates
along with a term premium φ12
t , as follows.
( 11
)
X
1
it+j + φ12
(20)
i12
t
t = Et
12 j=0
Given equation (20), we can argue that the reduced form VAR residual in the
equation for i12
t is equivalent to the month ahead forecast error as follows:
11

i12
t

−

Et−1 i12
t

1 X
12
=
{Et it+j − Et−1 it+j } + φ12
t − Et−1 φt
12 j=0

(21)

The residual for i12
t thus depends on revisions in beliefs about the path of
short rates as well as unexpected movements in the current short rate and
the current term premium. A monetary policy shock within our framework,
accordingly, is a linear combination of exogenous shocks to the current and
expected future path of future rates. This contrasts with the conventional
literature which considers only shocks to the current short rate. By allowing
for shocks that cause revisions in beliefs about the future path of short rates
we are able to capture shocks to forward guidance.
Of course, innovations in current and expected future interest rates reflect
in part news about the economy that in turn induces the central bank to
adjust interest rates. The challenge is to identify the component of these
15

innovations that is due to purely exogenous policy shifts. It is for this reason
that we consider a set of surprises in Fed Funds and Eurodollar futures on
FOMC days as external instruments. Doing so allows us to isolate the portion
of the innovation in the one year government bond rate that is due entirely
to the exogenous policy surprise. Note that by using surprises for futures
contracts settled in subsequent months along with the surprise for the current
month, we have instruments for innovations in expected future short rates as
well as for the current rate.

4

Data, Estimation and Results

We analyze monthly data on a variety of economic and financial variables
over the period 1979:07 to 2012:06. We choose the starting point to coincide
with the beginning of Paul Volcker’s tenure as Federal Reserve chair. We do
not use the pre-Volcker data based on evidence of differences in the monetary
policy regime pre- and post-Volcker (e.g. Clarida, Gali, and Gertler (2000)).
We also explore sub-sample robustness.7
The data of course includes the recent crisis, a period where the short
term interest rate reached the zero lower bound. However, until 2011, our
baseline policy indicator, the one year government bond rate, remained positive, indicating some degree of central bank leverage over this instrument.
Swanson and Williams (ming) make the case that the zero lower bound was
not a constraint on the Federal Reserve’s ability to manipulate the two year
rate. This was probably less true for the one year rate, though the data suggest flexibility at least until the past year. We address the concern over the
zero lower bound by showing our results are robust to (i) using the two year
rate as the policy indicator; and (ii) not including the period of the Great Recession. It’s also true that both real and financial variables exhibited greater
volatility during the crisis period. We address this issue by showing in the
online appendix that our results are robust to allowing for a simple form of
stochastic volatility.
Our potential instrument set consists of futures rates surprises on FOMC
dates used by GSS’s event study analysis, including the surprises in the current month’s Fed Funds futures (FF1), in the three month ahead monthly
Fed Funds futures (FF4), and in the six month, nine month and year ahead
7

In the online appendix we show that our results are robust to reasonable sample splits,
including: 1983:01 - 2012:06, 1983:01 - 2008:06, 1979:07 - 2008:06.

16

futures on three month Eurodollar deposits (ED2, ED3, ED4). The instruments are available for us from the period 1991:01 through 2012:06, which
is shorter that the sample available for the other series. Accordingly, we use
the full sample 1979:07 to 2012:06 to estimate the lag coefficients and obtain
the reduced form residuals in equation (8). We then use the instrumental
variables and reduced form residuals for the corresponding period to identify
the contemporaneous impact of monetary policy surprises (i.e. the vector s
in equation (11).
To illustrate the issues of the choices of a policy indicator and associated instruments and of how our external instruments approach works, we
start with a simple VAR. This stripped-down VAR includes two economic
variables, log industrial production and the log consumer price index, the
one year government bond rate (the policy indicator), and a credit spread,
specifically the Gilchrist and Zakrajsek (2012) excess bond premium. We
then construct a baseline VAR that includes additional indicators of credit
costs. Finally, we consider additional interest rates by adding them one at a
time to the baseline.
In the next sub-section we present an analysis of policy indicator and
instrument choice. We then use the simple VAR to show how our external
instrument identification works, as well as how it compares with a standard
Cholesky identification. In the final sub-sections we present our baseline
VAR along with variants. We proceed to use the framework to present our
main analysis of the impact of monetary policy surprises on credit costs.

4.1

Policy Indicator and Instrument Choice

To evaluate our choice of a policy indicator along with instruments for policy
shocks, we begin with a high frequency variant of the external instruments
approach that we ultimately use in the monthly VAR. In this high frequency
variant, we examine the response of various market interest rates to surprises
in various policy indicators, using interest rate futures surprises on FOMC
dates as instruments. As in the HFI literature, the dependent variables in
this exercise are surprises in daily rates. What this exercise permits is an
analysis of the implications of different policy indicators and instruments
for market interest rates in a setting where all the instruments have good
explanatory power. This then sets the stage for an evaluation of indicator
and instrument choice for the monthly VAR.
Let int be the interest rate on an n month government bond that serves
17

as the policy indicator, let ∆Rt be the change in an asset return on an
FOMC day, and let (int )u be the same day unanticipated movement in int .
Accordingly, the equation we consider relates ∆Rt to (int )u as follows:
∆Rt = α + β(int )u + εt

(22)

We estimate equation (22) using two stage least squares with various interest
rate futures as instruments. Under our identifying assumptions, the instrumental variables estimation isolates variation in int due to pure monetary
policy surprises that is orthogonal to the error term εt , which leads to consistent estimates of β . Note that this formulation is slightly different from
convention in the HFI literature, which regresses the change in asset returns
directly on the futures rate surprises. However, as we just noted, the exercise
corresponds directly to what we do in the VAR analysis. The difference is
that in the latter, the dependent variables are monthly VAR residuals.
We consider three policy indicators: the Federal Funds rate, one year government bond rate and the two year government bond rate. We also consider
three different instrument rate combinations: (i) the surprise in the current
Federal Funds futures rate (FF1); (ii) the surprise in the three month ahead
futures rate (FF4); and (iii) the full GSS instrument set.Our choice of FF4 is
based on the strong performance of this variable as an external instrument in
the VAR analysis, as we illustrate shortly. Finally, the independent variables
we consider are the five, ten and thirty year government bond rates8 , the
five-by-five forward rate, the Moody’s baa spread and the prime mortgage
spread.9
As we noted earlier, we measure the surprises in the futures rates within
a thirty minute window of the FOMC announcement. The response of the
various government bond yields, as well as the changes in the monetary policy
indicators are measured in a daily window. Because the markets for the baa
and mortgage securities are less liquid than for government bonds we instead
measure the response of the returns on these instruments over a subsequent
two week period. We estimate the regressions over the available 1991:012012:06 sample and we exclude the 2008:07-2009:06 crisis period with excess
financial turbulence.
Table 1 presents the results. Each row represents a particular combination
8

We use the daily series of constant maturity government bond yields derived by
Gürkaynak, Sack, and Wright (2007).
9
The spreads are calculated over the ten year government bond rates.

18

of a policy indicator and instrument set. The coefficient in each column
represents the impact of a one hundred basis point increase in a given policy
indicator (due to an exogenous monetary policy shock) on a corresponding
asset return. Overall, three results stand out: First, innovations in the one
and two year government bond rates induced by policy surprises have a
stronger effects on longer term interest rates and credit spreads than do
similarly induced innovations in the Federal Funds rate. A surprise one
hundred basis point increase in the Funds rate instrumented by FF1 has
a significant effect on both the two and five year government bond rate:
The former increases roughly thirty-seven basis points and the latter twentythree. Conversely, a similar increase in the one year government bond rate
also instrumented by FF1 has roughly double the effect on the two and five
year rate. Simply put, the one year rate captures more persistent changes in
interest rate policy than the Funds rate does. As Kuttner (2001) observes, a
nontrivial portion of the variation in the Funds rate reflects changes in the
timing of the rate adjustment, as opposed to a persistent adjustment in the
policy rate.
Second, for a given policy indicator, instruments that reflect expectations
of interest rate movements further into the future induce a stronger impact
of the policy indicator on market interest rates. For example, instrumenting
the one year government bond rate with FF4 instead of FF1 increases its
impact on two year rate from seventy four to eighty eight basis points and
on the five year rate from forty seven to sixty eight basis points. In addition,
with FF4 as the instrument, the one year rate also has a significant positive
effect on the ten year rate, the baa spread and the mortgage spread. (Note
that the impact on the spread variables is suggestive of a credit channel
effect, as discussed in section 2.) Similarly, the two year government bond
rate with the complete set of GSS instruments exerts the strongest impact
on market rates. Intuitively, funds rate surprises on contracts settled further
in the future capture movements in the policy indicator associated with more
persistent changes in policy.
Third, the one year and two year policy indicators have similar quantitative effects on market interest rates, particularly if instruments are used
which reflect some degree of forward guidance (i.e., FF4 or GSS). While the
two year with GSS has the largest effects, the one year with FF4 has effects
of similar magnitude. Interestingly, in each case the policy indicator has a
significant impact on the baa and mortgage spreads that is nearly identical
in magnitude.
19

Of course we are ultimately interested in the impact of the policy indicator on real interest rates. Both Hanson and Stein (2012) and Nakamura
and Steinsson (2013) have shown using TIPS data that virtually all the responsiveness of nominal rates to policy surprises on FOMC dates reflects
variation in real rates, with a negligible response of expected inflation. Table
2 reports the results from a similar exercise using our instrumental variables
methodology. The dependent variables are the TIPS two year, five year and
ten year real rates and the corresponding breakeven inflation rates.10 We
also consider the same mix of policy indicators and instruments from Table
1. The 5 and 10 year rates are available from 1999:01, and the 2 year rates
from 2004:01. The results confirm that virtually all the impact of the policy
surprise is on real rates, with virtually no impact on inflation. In addition,
this results confirm that the main insights from Table 1 also hold in this context. The one and two year rates as policy indicators have a much stronger
impact on market interest than does the Funds rate. In addition, the one
and two year rates have a nearly identical effect on real rates and expected
inflation. One small qualification is that the two year rate with the GSS
instrument set has a small but significant effect on inflation.
We now turn to the issue of policy indicator and instrument choice in
the monthly VARs. While it appears possible to use the one and two year
rates interchangeably with high frequency dependent variables, a complication emerges in the monthly VARs. In particular, the futures rate surprises
on FOMC appear to be good instruments for the monthly VAR innovation
in the one year rate, but they may be less effective as instruments for the
two year rate.
Table 3 summarizes the issues. The columns considered are first stage
regression residual of a particular policy indicator regressed on various instrument sets.11 The residuals are computed from the simple VAR described
10

The rates are from the daily TIPS yield curve estimates of Gürkaynak, Sack, and
Wright (2010).
11
For the monthly VAR, we need to turn the futures surprises on FOMC days into
monthly average surprises. If all the FOMC meetings were on the first day of each month,
our job would be easy, the surprises on those days would be our measure of monthly
average surprise. But, in reality, the day of the FOMC meetings vary over the month, and
we do not want to lose information by disregarding this. Furthermore, as we use monthly
average rates (not end of the month rates) for our monetary policy indicators, a surprise
that happens at the end of a month can be expected to have a smaller influence on the
monthly average rate than a surprise coming at the beginning of the month. We can do
our calculation in two steps. First, for each day of the month, we cumulate the surprises

20

earlier that includes industrial production, the consumer price index, the excess bond premium and a policy indicator.12 The first five columns consider
the one year rate as the policy indicator, while the last five consider the two
year rate. Both the R2 and the robust F statistic for each regression are
reported at the bottom of the corresponding column.
To be confident that a weak instrument problem is not present, Stock,
Wright, and Yogo (2002) recommend a threshold value of ten for the F statistic from the first stage regression. Table 3 shows that in three of the five
cases for the one year rate, the F statistic is safely above this threshold. The
instrument that works best is FF4, which explains nearly eight percent of
monthly innovation in the one year rate and has an associated F statistic of
the seventeen and a half. For the two year rate, none of the instrument combinations meets the threshold. This is somewhat surprising, given the strong
explanatory of the GSS instrument set, and ED4 in particular, for the variation in the two year rate in the high frequency data. One possibility is that
as compared to the one year rate and FF4, there is greater high frequency
variation in the two year rate and ED4 in daily data. Conversely, movements
in the one year rate and FF4 are relatively persistent by comparisons.
The evidence in Tables 1, 2 and 3 leads us to choose the one year rate as
the policy indicator and the three month ahead funds rate surprise (FF4) as
the policy indicator for our baseline case. This permits us to establish a set
of results for our external instrument approach in a setting where there is
unlikely to be a weak instruments problem. We then show that our results are
robust to variations that allow for the two year rate as the policy indicator.
We also explore variations in the instrument set that capture different degrees
of forward guidance.
on any FOMC days during the last 31 days (e.g. on February 15, we cumulate all the
FOMC day surprises since January 15), and, second, we average these monthly surprises
across each day of the month. Or, equivalently, we can first create a cumulative daily
surprise series by cumulating all FOMC day surprises (similarly as was done by Romer
and Romer (2004) and Barakchian and Crowe (2013)), then, second, we can take monthly
averages of these series, and, third, obtain monthly average surprises as the first difference
of this series.
12
The results are robust to using the richer VARs described in the next section.

21

4.2

Results from the Simple VAR

To show how our external instruments approach works, we first present results from the simple VAR that includes the log industrial production, the
log consumer price index, the one year government bond rate as the policy
indicator, and the GZ excess bond premium. Roughly speaking, the latter
is the component of spread between an index of rates of return on corporate
securities and a similar maturity government bond rate that is left after the
component due to default risk is removed. As such, it is possibly interpretable
as a pure measure of the spread between yields on private versus public debt
that is due to financial market frictions. The inclusion of the excess bond
premium allows us to clearly illustrate that our external instruments approach is particularly useful when examining the response of financial as well
economic variables to exogenous monetary policy surprises.
We choose the excess bond premium as the financial indicator in the simple VAR for two reasons. First, as GZ show, the excess bond premium has
strong forecasting ability for economic activity, outperforming every other financial indicator. Accordingly, this variable may provide a convenient summary of much of the information from variables left out of the VAR that
may be relevant to economic activity. Second, we are ultimately interested
in examining the response of credit costs to monetary policy surprises. As we
show, it is fairly straightforward, to evaluate the response of the excess bond
premium against the conventional theory of monetary policy transmission,
particularly since the measure cleans off default considerations.
Figure 1 shows the impulse responses of both the economic and financial
variables is the simple VAR. The left panels show the case where money
shocks are identified using external instruments. For comparison, the right
panels show the case using a standard Cholesky identification. In each case,
the panels report the estimated impulse responses along with ninety-five
percent confidence bands, computed using bootstrapping methods.13
We begin with the external instruments case. As noted earlier, we use
the three month ahead Funds rate future surprise FF4 to identify monetary
policy shock. As a check to ensure that this instrument is valid, we report the
13

Similarly to Mertens and Ravn (2013), we are using wild bootstrap that generates valid
confidence bands under heteroskedasticity and strong instruments. The estimation errors
related to the instrumental variable regression is incorporated in the reported confidence
bands, because both stages of the estimation are included in the bootstrapping procedure.
Thereby, we avoid any potential ’generated regressor’ problem.

22

F statistic from the first stage regression of the one year bond rate residual on
FF4. We find an F value of twenty one and half eighteen. We also compute
a robust F statistic (which allows for heteroskedasticity) of seventeen and a
half. Both values are safely above the threshold suggested by Stock, Wright,
and Yogo (2002) to rule out a reasonable likelihood of a weak instruments
problem.
As the top left panel shows, a one standard deviation surprise monetary
tightening induces a roughly twenty five basis point increase in the one year
government bond rate. Consistent with conventional theory, there is a significant decline in industrial production that reaches a trough roughly a year
and a half after the shock. Similarly consistent with standard theory, there
is a small decline in the consumer price index that is not statistically significant. Note that in contrast to the Cholesky identification, we do not impose
zero restrictions on the contemporaneous responses of output and inflation.
The identification of the monetary policy shock is entirely due to the external
instrument.
The GZ excess bond premium increases on impact roughly ten basis
points, an amount which is statistically significant. The spread further remains elevated at roughly seven basis points for roughly another half year.
As we elaborate in the next section, this increase in the excess bond premium
following the monetary tightening is consistent with a credit channel effect on
borrowing costs: It cannot be explained simply by an increase in bankruptcy
probabilities since default premia have been cleaned off the measure.
Critical for obtaining these results is our use of external instruments to
identify monetary shocks, as comparison with the case of the Cholesky identification scheme makes clear. Under the Cholesky scheme we consider, the
one year rate is ordered second to last and the excess bond premium last.
Given these identifying restrictions, the central bank adjustment of the one
year rate can have an immediate impact on the excess bond premium. But
contemporaneous innovations in the excess bond premium do not affect how
the central bank manipulates the one year rate. By assumption, any information in the innovation to the excess bond premium that is relevant to the
central bank’s decision is already contained in the innovations to industrial
production and the CPI. Finally, as in the standard Cholesky case, the central bank can respond to news about output and prices within the period
but can affect these variables only with a lag.
As Figure 1 shows, how well a pure monetary policy surprise is identified
under the Cholesky scheme is questionable. While the one year rate increases,
23

both industrial production and the CPI display “puzzles”: The monetary
policy shock induces a modest but statistically significant increase in each
variable. Though the point estimate of industrial productions eventually
falls, the decline is not statistically significant.
The behavior of the excess bond premium illustrates the problem with the
identification. In response to the surprise monetary tightening, this spread
exhibits a statistically significant decline of several basis points. The decline
in the spread is inconsistent with theory, which would suggest if anything just
the opposite. More likely, there is a problem with the identifying restrictions.
It appears the central bank is responding at least in part to the information
contained in the excess bond premium. The below trend value of the premium is a consistent with a strong economy, which induces the central bank
to tighten. The resulting output and price puzzles are consistent with this
interpretation. Accordingly, the restriction that the central bank does not
respond to innovations in the excess bond premium either directly of indirectly (by responding to variables outside the VAR which are correlated with
the premium) does not appear to be reasonable. Conversely, it is not reasonable to assume that the excess bond premium cannot respond instantly to a
monetary shock. Thus we conclude that the conventional timing restrictions
used in monetary VARs do not work well in circumstances like the one here,
where both financial and real variables are present. By contrast, our external
instruments approach appears well suited for this kind of environment.

4.3

The Response of Credit Costs to a Monetary Surprise: Facts and Interpretation

We are now able to address the central question of the paper: namely, how
credit costs respond to exogenous surprises in monetary policy. We do so by
examining the responses of various credit spreads, various government bond
yields, and the Federal Funds rate. We then use this information to construct
the response of overall credit costs for different classes of securities along with
a decomposition of the movement of these costs between: variation in (i) the
expected path of short rates; (ii) term premia and (iii) credit spreads.
We present a sequence of VARs rather than a single one that includes
all the variables. Because interest rates of varying maturity are highly correlated, including all at once would lead to a problem of multi-collinearity
as well as over-parametrization. Accordingly, we begin with a baseline VAR

24

that includes economic activity variables, a variety of credit spreads, and the
one year government bond rate, which we again take as the policy indicator.
We choose this specification as our baseline because it appears reasonably
robust to sub-sample splits and the inclusion of additional variables. We
then consider a sequence of VARs which adds an additional interest rate to
the baseline specification. As we show in the appendix, the behavior of the
variables in the baseline is essentially invariant to the inclusion of the additional interest rates in the subsequent VARs. Thus in effect, the subsequent
VARs reveal the behavior of the additional interest rate, holding constant
the behavior of the variables in the baseline.
We include six variables in the baseline specification: industrial production; the consumer price index; the one year government bond rate; the excess
bond premium, the mortgage spread, and the commercial paper spread. It
is the extension of the model of Figure 1 with the addition of the latter two
spreads. The three spread variables reflect (components of) credit costs for
three significant financial markets. The excess bond premium is relevant to
the cost of long term credit in the non-farm business sector. The mortgage
spread is relevant to the cost of housing finance. Finally, the commercial
paper spread is relevant to the cost of short term business credit, as well as
the cost of financing consumer durables.
As earlier, we start with FF4 as the instrument to identify monetary policy surprises. As was the case with the simple VAR, the F statistics from the
first stage regressions are safely in the region where a weak instruments problem is very unlikely. We also explore other policy indicator and instrument
combinations.
Figure 2 shows the responses of the variables in the baseline to a one
standard deviation contractionary monetary policy surprise. The one year
rate increases roughly twenty basis points on impact and then reverts back
to trend after roughly a year. There is a significant and fairly rapid drop
in industrial output that begins after several months and reaches a trough
after roughly eighteen. The CPI declines steadily, though this decline is not
significant. Associated with the output decline is a significant increase, both
statistically and quantitatively, in each of the credit spreads. The excess bond
premium increases eight basis points on impact and remains at that level
for roughly eight months before returning to trend. The mortgage spread
increases only two to three points on impact but then increases sharply to
seven points above trend after two months. Finally the commercial paper
spread increases roughly five basis points on impact for roughly four to five
25

months. We discuss shortly the implications for the movements in these
spreads for overall credit costs.
Figure 3 reports the responses of various market interest rates. As we
discussed earlier, the responses are calculated by adding each interest rate to
the baseline VAR, one at a time. For convenience, we also report the response
of the one year government bond rate from the baseline VAR. The Federal
Funds rate increases significantly upon impact. The increase of roughly eighteen points matches the rise in the two year rate. Both interest rates revert
to trend after roughly eight months. This decline is consistent with the quick
and sharp contraction in industrial production, presuming the central bank
typically reduces short term rates as the economy weakens. The response
of the longer maturity government bond rates is largely consistent with the
HFI analysis presented in Table 1. The two, five and ten year rates increase
significantly upon impact but by smaller amounts as the maturity lengthens.
Interestingly, all the interest rates revert to trend after about eight months.
Finally, also consistent with the HFI analysis in Table 1, the five by five forward does not respond significantly upon impact to the surprise tightening.
This suggests that the movement in market reflects some combination of expected movements in short rates less than five years out and/or movement
in term premia. We turn to this issue in a moment.
As we discussed earlier, what matters for monetary policy transmission
is the behavior of real rates. Further, HFI analysis using TIPS data suggests
that virtually all the movement in nominal rates following a monetary policy
surprise reflects movements in real rates, with relatively little impact on
inflation. Figure 4 shows that our VAR analysis confirms this result. The
left panels report the responses of both the real and nominal two, five and
ten year government bonds rates to a surprise monetary tightening. The
right panels report the corresponding breakeven inflation rates. The real
interest rate is computed using the response of the nominal rate and expected
inflation, the latter calculated from the impulse response of the price level.14
As the figure shows, real rates move with nominal rates virtually one-for-one.
There is a tiny decline in breakeven inflation rates at the different horizons.
The declines are marginally significant upon impact at the five and ten year
horizons, but otherwise insignificant.
14
In particular, we use the price level responses in each corresponding 7 variable VARs
including the particular nominal rate (not shown). Extending the number of variables
introduces minor variations in the estimated price level responses relative to the baseline 6
variable VAR presented on Figure 2, but it does not influence our qualitative conclusions.

26

We now turn to the question of how overall credit costs responds to monetary policy and what are the factors that underlie the movement in these
costs. To address this issue, Figure 5 presents a decomposition of the responses of interest rates to the tight money shock. Each of the top four panels reports the response of a government bond rate along with the response
of its respective term premium. We calculate the latter using equation (4),
which equates the nominal rate to the sum of the term premium and the
expected path of short rates. We use the impulse response of the short rate
to compute the latter.
As the figure shows, for the two year, five year and ten year maturities,
virtually all the rate increase is due to the term premium, with no impact
of the path of expected short rates. Even for the one year rate, most of the
movement, roughly eighty percent, is due to a term premium effect. That
the strong term premium effects arise is not surprising given the behavior of
short rates. As we noted earlier, short rates quickly revert to trend following
a tight money shock due to the weakening of the economy. It is true that the
term premium effects dissipate quickly and are not statistically significant
for the ten year government bond rate. Nonetheless, they are significant on
impact for the five year rate and at least three to four months for the one
and two year rates.
The bottom two panels of Figure 6 report a similar decomposition of
the response of private credit costs, except allowing for a component due
to the movement in credit spreads. In particular, each panel reports the
response of the combined excess premium for each security along with the
overall response of the rate. It is first worth noting that the responses of the
corporate bond rates and mortgages are relatively substantial. A roughly
twenty basis point increase in the one year government bond rate leads to a
roughly fifteen basis point increase in the corporate bond rate and seven basis
point increase in the mortgage rate. In each case virtually all the movement
in rates is due the the excess premium, defined as the sum of the credit
spread and the term premium. Again, the relatively transitory response of
short rates account for the negligible impact of expected short rates on credit
costs.
It is of course possible that a component of the term premium response is
due to the VAR forecast of short rates not accurately mirroring true market
expectations. It could be the case that following a contractionary monetary
policy shock, market expectations of the path of interest rates exceed our
VAR model’s implied path. One possible reason for this overreaction could
27

be that private individuals fail to anticipate the decline in short rates that
accompanies the subsequent recession. In this instance, the overreaction of
expectations could explain the rise in interest rates across the yield curve,
with little or no movement in term premia.
We explore this issue including a survey measure of private sector expectations into our baseline VAR,15 In particular, we use the Blue Chip Economic
Indicators survey, which collects expectations of key market analysts every
month since 1983:03 on various interest rates over the subsequent five to six
quarters. To facilitate comparison with our baseline one year policy indicator, we create a one year constant maturity expectation from the projected
path of the Federal Funds rates.This rate measures the average short term
interest rate over the subsequent year expected by the private sector.16 The
survey does not collect interest rate expectations beyond six quarters, so to
get estimates on the expected path further out, we use our VAR model. In
particular, we generate estimates for future expectations by obtaining the
VAR implied path of our yearly expectations measure. For an average expectations over the two year horizon, for example, we take the average of the
current one year expectation and its VAR implied level one year ahead. For
the average five and ten year expectations, analogously, we take the current
and the one to four and one to nine year ahead implied rates, respectively.
Figure 6 shows the estimated effects of the monetary policy shock on the
average short term rate expectations over one, two, five and ten year horizons. We compare these expectations to similar averages obtained from the
’riskless’ Federal Funds rate path of our baseline VAR and to the similar
maturity Treasury Bond rates. For the one and two year horizons, there is
some evidence that market expectations overreact. Their responses exceed
the corresponding VAR implied average policy rate, which lies slightly below
confidence bands around the path of expectation. Though they also fall short
of the corresponding Treasury rate responses, implying, even after correcting for expectations, a small term premium effect. On the other hand, the
uncertainty surrounding the estimates of the path of expectations makes it
very hard to reach definitive conclusions about whether some kind of market
15

Nakamura and Steinsson (2013) similarly use survey data to explore term premium
effects of monetary policy shocks.
16
To obtain a yearly measure, we need implied expectations for the last months in the
current quarter and the first months in the 4. quarter ahead. For the current quarter, we
are using realized rates to filter out expectations for the remaining months and assume
constant monthly expectations during the 4. quarter ahead.

28

overreaction of beliefs (relative to the VAR prediction) could account for the
response of term premia at the one and two year horizons. At the five and ten
year horizons, however, market expectations measures line up closely with
the implied VAR measures. This suggests that the term premia responses of
the five and ten year rates are unlikely to be explained by an overreaction of
private sector beliefs.
It is important to add that even absent a significant term premium response, our results suggest that the impact of monetary policy on credit costs
is stronger than a frictionless model would predict due to sizeable effects in
credit spreads. We note also that borrowers cannot escape these effects on
excess premia for longer term credit by switching to short term since the
spread for short term securities (the commercial spread) increases as well, as
Figure 4 shows.
We next turn to the issue of the role of forward guidance. A conceptually
nice way to assess the importance of forward guidance would be to follow
GSS by isolating the component of the instrument set that reflects surprises
in future rates that are orthogonal to surprises in the current rate. This
component, which GSS refer to as the “path” factor then in principle captures
the effect of pure shocks to forward guidance. The residual component which
GSS refer to as the ”target factor” captures shocks associated with movement
in the current target rate. Unfortunately, this decomposition between target
and path factors leads to instruments that are too weak in the context of
our external instruments setup to credibly identify pure surprises to forward
guidance.
Accordingly, to get a sense of the importance of forward guidance, we opt
for the following indirect approach: We replace the one year government bond
rate with the Federal Funds rate in our baseline VAR. We also replace the
three month ahead futures rate surprises with the contemporaneous surprise
in Fed Fund futures. Roughly speaking, the Funds rate instrumented by FF1
is likely to capture less persistent variation in short term rates than is the one
year rate instrumented by FF4. The results from the HFI analysis in Table
1 are consistent with this interpretation: the one year rate instrumented by
FF4 has stronger effect on longer term interest rates than does the Funds
rate instrumented by FF1. This suggests the latter may incorporate a greater
degree of forward guidance than the former.
Figure 7 reports the response of the system to a tight money shock in the
case with the Funds rate as the policy indicator. For comparison, we also
report the response of our baseline VAR with the one year rate as the policy
29

indicator. We normalize the size of the shock so that the response of the
Funds rate is quantitatively the same as in the baseline case. Overall, the pure
Funds rate shock has weaker impact on both economic and financial variables
than in the case where the innovation in the one year rate (instrumented by
FF4) incorporates the policy surprise. The contraction in output is more
than fifty percent smaller and the fall in the CPI is similarly smaller relative
to the baseline. In each case, further, the response of the variable in the
baseline lies below the ninety-five percent confidence interval for the Funds
rate shock. In addition the response of credit spreads and long term interest
rates is significantly weaker in response to the Funds rate shock relative to
the baseline one year rate shock. Overall, the results are consistent with the
impact of the monetary policy surprise increasing in the relative degree of
forward guidance that underlies the shock (holding constant the change in
the current Funds rate). 17
We conclude with three robustness exercises. First, we replace the one
year rate as the policy indicator, with the two year rate instrumented by
the full GSS set of futures rate surprises. As we noted earlier, the latter
is our conceptually preferred policy indicator/instrument variables combination. While concern over weak instruments kept us from using this combination in the baseline VAR, it is useful to assess its performance relative to the
baseline. Figure 8 reports the impulse responses of the main variables in our
baseline framework for this case. We normalize the two year rate shock so
that it produces the same movement in the one year rate as does the shock in
the baseline case. Overall, despite the potential weak instruments problem,
the two year rate shock produces responses of the economic variables that
are very similar to the baseline. If anything, the two year rate shock has
a slightly stronger effect, thought the differences are not significantly different. The stronger effects are consistent with the two year rate shock have
a greater degree of forward guidance, as confirmed by the HFI analysis in
17
Our results are robust to restricting the identification sample to the pre-crisis period
(1991:01-2008:06). This dissolves potential concerns that by using the three month futures
surprise (FF4) as instrument, we implicitly overweigh the post crisis sample, when these
rates can be expected to exhibit excess volatility over the current month futures surprises
(FF1) as a result of more prevalent forward guidance shocks. In particular, high frequency
responses reported in Table 1 are robust to excluding the post crisis period from the
sample. Furthermore, qualitative conclusions drawn from Figure 7. remain intact if we
restrict the sample used for identification to the pre-crisis period. Results are available
from the authors upon request.

30

Table 2.
Next, we show that our results are not dependent on including the crisis
period in the sample. Figure 9 repeats the baseline exercise with a sample
that is truncated at 2008:06. As the figure shows, a surprise monetary tightening produces responses of the economic and financial variables that are
very similar to the baseline. The drop in output is a bit smaller relative to
the baseline, though it remains statistically significant 18
Finally, we address the issue of whether our measure of monetary policy
surprises is truly exogenous. Romer and Romer (2000) have argued that news
on FOMC dates could reflect the Fed’s superior ability to forecast economic
activity, as opposed to orthogonal policy surprises. To support this contention, they show that Federal Reserve ”Greenbook” forecasts consistently
outperform private sector forecasts. We address this issue in two ways. First,
following Barakchian and Crowe (2013) we construct a measure of the Fed’s
”private information” by taking the difference between the Greenbook forecast and the private sector forecast of the same economic activity variable,
where we use the Blue Chip Economic Indicators Survey to measure the latter. Then we regress our measure of monetary policy surprises on this private
information measure to determine the variation in the former explained by
the latter. Second, we then use the residuals from this regression to construct
a new measure of policy surprises that eliminates the component that may be
due to the Fed’s private information. We then repeat the VAR analysis using this ”purified” measure of policy surprises. We note that the Greenbook
data is only available through 2007 and only for scheduled FOMC dates. We
thus limit the sample used for the identification of monetary policy shock
accordingly.
Table 4 reports the results from regressions of surprises in interest rate
futures on measures of the Fed’s private information. The three dependent
variables we consider are the surprises (on FOMC dates) in: the current
month’s Fed Funds future rate (FF1); the three month ahead Fed Funds
future rate FF4; and the year ahead three month Eurodollar rate (ED4). The
four independent variables include the Fed’s private information for current
inflation π, for current output growth dy, and for the change in each of
these variables from the previous meeting, ∆π and ∆dy.19 In each case, the
18
Including a zero restriction on the contemporaneous output response enhances the
decline.
19
Adding additional lags of these variables does not improve predictability.

31

private information variables are statistically significant but explain only a
small fraction of the variation in the policy surprise. In particular, the private
information variables account for only fifteen percent of the surprise variation
in our baseline instrument FF4 and slightly less of the surprise variation in
the other instruments. Thus we conclude that the Fed’s private information
cannot account for the overall variation in our policy surprises measures.
We next turn to the VAR analysis. We first ”clean” our measure of
policy surprises of the Fed’s private measure by using the residuals from the
regression for FF4 in Table 4 as our new instrument. In principle, these
residuals capture variation in the surprise in FF4 on FOMC dates that is
orthogonal to the Fed’s private information. Figure 10 then reports the
effect of a surprise monetary tightening using the ”purified” measure of policy
shocks. As one might expect, the effect of the surprise tightening is stronger
than in the baseline: the fall in output and inflation is larger and the increases
in spreads is greater. For example, private information that the economy is
stronger that the public expects is likely to cause the Fed to raise rates more
than expected, leading to procyclical movement in output and the policy
indicator. By cleaning off the private information, it is possible to isolate the
contractionary effects of the policy tightening. A caveat, however. Having
to limit the sample due to the availability of the Greenbook forecast data
implies that in contrast to our baseline case we cannot confidently rule out
a problem of weak instruments.20

5

Conclusion

Conventional VAR analysis of monetary shocks typically finds that relatively
modest and transitory increases in short term interest rates lead to significant
contractions in output. We re-examine this issue using an external instruments identification approach borrowing insights from the high frequency
identification literature of Kuttner (2001) and Gürkaynak, Sack, and Swanson (2005). The approach facilitates analyzing the joint response of financial
20

The large effects of the cleaned surprise measure is partly coming from our method of
shock normalization. In particular, we normalize the impulse responses to reflect similar
effects on the monetary policy indicator variable in the first 3 months. The cleaned
surprise measure implies significantly smaller effects on the monetary policy indicator, and
only slightly larger effects on prices, economic activity and premia. As the normalization
increases the monetary policy shock size, these responses also get amplified.

32

and real variables to monetary policy shocks and also allows for incorporating innovations in forward guidance into the measure of the shock. A
key finding is that there is an enhanced movement in credit costs from the
policy shock due to the response of term premia and credit costs. The response of credit costs is thus significantly larger than inspection of the short
rate response alone would suggest. These kinds of phenomena are absent in
standard models of monetary policy transmission.
Overall, our results suggest a need to incorporate term premium and
credit spread effects in the modeling of monetary policy transmission. One
example of this approach, is Gertler and Karadi (2013) who extend a conventional sticky price monetary DSGE model to allow for limited participation
in financial markets and limits to arbitrage. Within this framework a monetary tightening can produce increase in both term premia and credit spreads
broadly consistent with the evidence in this paper. A byproduct of limited participation/limited arbitrage is that asset supplies affect asset prices,
opening up a role for quantitative easing. There are other approaches as well
worth pursuing.

References
Bagliano, F. C. and C. A. Favero (1999). Information from financial markets and VAR measures of monetary policy. European Economic Review 43 (4), 825–837.
Barakchian, S. M. and C. Crowe (2013). Monetary policy matters: Evidence from new shocks data. Journal of Monetary Economics 60 (8),
950–966.
Bernanke, B., V. Reinhart, and B. Sack (2004). Monetary policy alternatives at the zero bound: An empirical assessment. Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity 2004 (2), 1–100.
Bernanke, B. S. and A. S. Blinder (1992). The federal funds rate and the
channels of monetary transmission. American Economic Review 82,
901–921.
Bernanke, B. S. and M. Gertler (1995). Inside the black box: The credit
channel of monetary policy transmission. Journal of Economic Perspectives 9 (4), 27–48.
33

Bernanke, B. S., M. Gertler, and S. Gilchrist (1999). The financial accelerator in a quantitative business cycle framework. Handbook of Macroeconomics 1, 1341–1393.
Boivin, J., M. T. Kiley, and F. S. Mishkin (2010). How has the monetary
transmission mechanism evolved over time? Volume 3 of Handbook of
Monetary Economics, pp. 369 – 422. Elsevier.
Brunnermeier, M. K. and Y. Sannikov (2013). The i theory of money.
manuscript.
Campbell, J. R., C. L. Evans, J. D. Fisher, A. Justiniano, C. W. Calomiris,
and M. Woodford (2012). Macroeconomic effects of federal reserve forward guidance [with comments and discussion]. Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity, 1–80.
Christiano, L. J., M. Eichenbaum, and C. Evans (1996). The effects of
monetary policy shocks: Evidence from the flow of funds. The Review
of Economics and Statistics, 16–34.
Christiano, L. J., M. Eichenbaum, and C. L. Evans (2005). Nominal rigidities and the dynamic effects of a shock to monetary policy. The Journal
of Political Economy 113 (1), 1–45.
Christiano, L. J., R. Motto, and M. Rostagno (2014). Risk shocks. The
American Economic Review 104 (1), 27–65.
Clarida, R., J. Gali, and M. Gertler (2000). Monetary policy rules and
macroeconomic stability: evidence and some theory. The Quarterly
Journal of Economics 115 (1), 147–180.
Cochrane, J. H. and M. Piazzesi (2002). The fed and interest rates-a highfrequency identification. American Economic Review 92 (2), 90–95.
Drechsler, I., A. Savov, and P. Schnabl (2013). A model of monetary policy
and risk premia. manuscript.
Faust, J., E. T. Swanson, and J. H. Wright (2004). Identifying VARS based
on high frequency futures data. Journal of Monetary Economics 51 (6),
1107–1131.
Gertler, M. and P. Karadi (2011). A model of unconventional monetary
policy. Journal of Monetary Economics 58 (1), 17–34.

34

Gertler, M. L. and P. Karadi (2013). Qe 1 vs. 2 vs. 3...: A framework
for analyzing large-scale asset purchases as a monetary policy tool.
International Journal of Central Banking 9 (1), 5–53.
Gilchrist, S. and E. Zakrajsek (2012). Credit spreads and business cycle
fluctuations. The American Economic Review 102 (4), 1692–1720.
Gürkaynak, R. S., B. Sack, and E. T. Swanson (2005). Do actions speak
louder than words? the response of asset prices to monetary policy
actions and statements. International Journal of Central Banking.
Gürkaynak, R. S., B. Sack, and J. H. Wright (2007). The us treasury yield
curve: 1961 to the present. Journal of Monetary Economics 54 (8),
2291–2304.
Gürkaynak, R. S., B. Sack, and J. H. Wright (2010). The tips yield curve
and inflation compensation. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 70–92.
Hamilton, J. D. (2008). Daily monetary policy shocks and new home sales.
Journal of Monetary Economics 55 (7), 1171–1190.
Hamilton, J. D. (2009). Daily changes in fed funds futures prices. Journal
of Money, Credit and Banking 41 (4), 567–582.
Hanson, S. G. and J. C. Stein (2012). Monetary policy and long-term real
rates. FRB Discussion Paper 2012-46.
Kuttner, K. N. (2001). Monetary policy surprises and interest rates: Evidence from the fed funds futures market. Journal of Monetary Economics 47 (3), 523–544.
Mertens, K. and M. O. Ravn (2013). The dynamic effects of personal and
corporate income tax changes in the united states. American Economic
Review 103 (4), 1212–47.
Nakamura, E. and J. Steinsson (2013). High frequency identification of
monetary non-neutrality. NBER WP. 19260.
Piazzesi, M. and E. T. Swanson (2008). Futures prices as risk-adjusted
forecasts of monetary policy. Journal of Monetary Economics 55 (4),
677–691.
Romer, C. D. and D. H. Romer (2000). Federal reserve information and the
behavior of interest rates. American Economic Review 90 (3), 429–457.

35

Romer, C. D. and D. H. Romer (2004). A new measure of monetary shocks:
Derivation and implications. American Economic Review , 1055–1084.
Rudebusch, G. D. (1998). Do measures of monetary policy in a VAR make
sense? International Economic Review , 907–931.
Smets, F. and R. Wouters (2007). Shocks and frictions in us business cycles:
A bayesian DSGE approach. The American Economic Review 97 (3),
586–606.
Stock, J. H. and M. W. Watson (2012). Disentangling the channels of the
2007–09 recession. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2012 (1),
81–135.
Stock, J. H., J. H. Wright, and M. Yogo (2002). A survey of weak instruments and weak identification in generalized method of moments.
Journal of Business & Economic Statistics 20 (4).
Swanson, E. T. and J. C. Williams (forthcoming). Measuring the effect
of the zero lower bound on medium- and longer-term interest rates.
American Economic Review .

36

Table 1: Yield effects of monetary policy shocks (event study, daily, 19912012)
Indicator &
Instruments

(1)
2 yr

(2)
5yr

(3)
10yr

(4)
30yr

(5)
5x5 forw

(6)
baa+

(7)
Mortg.+

FF, FF1

0.367***
(3.467)

0.233**
(2.241)

0.0980
(1.053)

0.00637
(0.103)

-0.0369
(-0.388)

0.139
(1.475)

0.170
(1.445)

1YR, FF1

0.739***
(8.493)

0.469***
(3.094)

0.197
(1.173)

0.0128
(0.103)

-0.0744
(-0.379)

0.280
(1.544)

0.343
(1.416)

1YR, FF4

0.880***
(15.81)

0.683***
(8.201)

0.375***
(4.410)

0.145*
(1.694)

0.0668
(0.614)

0.333**
(2.176)

0.427**
(2.239)

2YR, FF4

0.778***
(11.80)

0.432***
(5.306)

0.169*
(1.839)

0.0848
(0.702)

0.355**
(1.986)

0.483**
(2.141)

2YR, GSS

0.878***
(18.70)

0.575***
(11.84)

0.234***
(4.139)

0.271***
(3.601)

0.231*
(1.844)

0.350**
(2.049)

Robust z-statistics in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
QE dates and crisis period are excluded, 188 observations
+ : 2-week cumulative changes

37

Table 2: TIPS and breakeven inflation effects of monetary policy shocks
(daily event study, 1999-2012)
Indicator &
Instruments

(1)
TIPS 2yr

(2)
TIPS 5yr

(3)
TIPS 10yr

(4)
Bkeven 2yr

(5)
Bkeven 5yr

(6)
Bkeven 10yr

0.245
(1.348)

0.263**
(2.217)

0.149**
(2.287)

0.0427
(0.596)

-0.116
(-1.553)

-0.109**
(-2.081)

1YR, FF1

0.800***
(4.141)

0.639***
(7.606)

0.384***
(6.121)

0.282*
(1.913)

-0.0932
(-0.620)

-0.125
(-1.165)

1YR, FF4

0.804***
(5.171)

0.565***
(5.763)

0.315***
(4.136)

0.0990
(0.474)

0.00376
(0.0269)

-0.0738
(-0.815)

2YR, FF4

0.759***
(5.090)

0.618***
(4.302)

0.344***
(3.592)

0.0935
(0.525)

0.00412
(0.0269)

-0.0808
(-0.743)

2YR, GSS

0.754***
(7.749)

0.630***
(8.394)

0.462***
(9.350)

0.196**
(1.981)

0.189**
(2.165)

0.101*
(1.818)

FF, FF1

Robust z-statistics in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
QE dates and crisis period are excluded, 58 (2yr), 100 observations
+ : 2-week cumulative changes

38

Table 3: Effects of high-frequency instruments on the first stage residuals of
the 4 variable VAR (monthly, 1991-2012)
VARIABLES
FF1

(1)
1YR

(2)
1YR

(3)
1YR

(4)
1YR

0.890***
(4.044)

FF4

1.151***
(4.184)

1.266***
(4.224)

ED2
ED3
ED4

Observations
R-squared
F-statistic

0.624**
(2.039)
258
0.066
16.36

258
0.078
17.50

-0.167
(-0.476)

(5)
1YR

(6)
2YR

0.394
(1.129)
1.243***
(3.608)
1.440
(1.244)
-4.443***
(-2.635)
2.674**
(2.493)

0.533**
(2.116)

258
258
258
258
0.025
0.079
0.110
0.020
4.159
11.00
8.347
4.477
Robust t-statistics in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

39

(7)
2YR

(8)
2YR

(10)
2YR

0.293
(0.923)

-0.339
(-0.863)

0.174
(0.462)
1.379***
(3.361)
1.134
(0.859)
-4.733**
(-2.448)
2.946**
(2.465)

258
0.005
0.851

258
0.033
3.760

258
0.064
5.162

0.779**
(2.272)

258
0.029
5.160

(9)
2YR

1.013***
(2.643)

Table 4: Effects of private information on tight window monetary policy
surprise (1991-2007)

VARIABLES
π
dy
∆π
∆dy

(1)
FF1

(2)
FF4

0.0227** 0.0145**
(2.161)
(2.109)
0.0166* 0.0209***
(1.724)
(3.077)
-0.0289** -0.0178*
(-2.387)
(-1.925)
-0.00663 -0.00755*
(-1.309)
(-1.881)

(3)
ED4
0.0152
(1.611)
0.0256***
(3.072)
-0.0185
(-1.528)
-0.00627
(-1.033)

Observations
141
141
141
R-squared
0.108
0.155
0.135
F-statistic
2.175
3.243
3.368
prob > F
0.0751
0.0141
0.0116
Robust t-statistics in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

40

Figure 1: 1 year rate shock with excess bond premium

1 year rate
0.4

External Instruments

0.2

%

%

0.4

1 year rate

0
−0.2

Cholesky

0.2
0
−0.2

10

20

30

40

10

20

0.2

0

0

−0.2

30

40

30

40

−0.2
10

20

30

40

10

20

IP

IP

0.2
0
−0.2
−0.4
−0.6

%

%

40

CPI

0.2
%

%

CPI

30

10

20

30

0.2
0
−0.2
−0.4
−0.6

40

10

Excess Bond Premium

20

Excess Bond Premium

0.1

0.1
%

0.2

%

0.2

0
−0.1

0
10

20

30

First stage regression: F: 21.55

−0.1

40

robust F: 17.64

41

10
R2: 7.76%

20

30

40

Adjusted R2: 7.40%

Figure 2: 1 year rate shock with corporate and mortgage premia

CPI
0.1

0.4

0
%

%

1 year rate
0.6

0.2
0
−0.2
0

−0.1
−0.2

20

40

−0.3
0

60

IP

0.1
%

%

0.05

−0.5

0
20

40

−0.05
0

60

Mortgage spread

20

40

60

Commercial Paper spread (3 months)
0.15

0.15

0.1
%

0.1
%

60

0.15

0

0.05

0.05

0
−0.05
0

40

Excess Bond Premium

0.5

−1
0

20

0
20

40

First stage regression: F: 21.61

60

−0.05
0

robust F: 17.26

42

20

R2: 7.78%

40
Adjusted R2: 7.42%

60

Figure 3: 1 year rate shock: Response of other interest rates

1 year rate

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1
%

%

Federal Funds Rate

0

0

−0.1

−0.1

−0.2

−0.2
10

20

30

40

10

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1

0

−0.1

−0.2

−0.2
20

30

40

10

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1

0

−0.1

−0.2

−0.2
30

First stage regression: F: 21.61

30

40

0

−0.1

20

20

5x5 forward

%

%

10 year rate

10

40

0

−0.1

10

30

5 year rate

%

%

2 year rate

20

40

10

robust F: 17.26

43

R2: 7.78%

20

30

40

Adjusted R2: 7.42%

Figure 4: 1 year rate shock: Response of real rates and breakeven inflation
rates

2 year rate

2 year breakeven inflation rate
0.1
Real
Nominal

0.1

0.05
%

%

0.2

0

0

−0.05

−0.1
−0.2

10

20

30

−0.1

40

5 year rate

10

20

30

40

5 year breakeven inflation rate
0.1
0.05

0.1

%

%

0.2

0

0

−0.05

−0.1
−0.2

10

20

30

−0.1

40

10 year rate

10

20

30

40

10 year breakeven inflation rate
0.1
0.05

0.1

%

%

0.2

0

0

−0.05

−0.1
−0.2

10

20

30

First stage regression: F: 21.61

−0.1

40

robust F: 17.26

44

10
R2: 7.78%

20

30

40

Adjusted R2: 7.42%

Figure 5: 1 year rate shock: Response of term premia and excess premia

1 year rates
Term premium
Nominal rates

0.2
0.1

0.2
%

%

2 year rates

0.1

0

0

−0.1

−0.1

−0.2

10

20

30

−0.2

40

10

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1

0

0

−0.1

−0.1

−0.2

10

20

30

−0.2

40

10

Corporate bond
Combined excess premium
Nominal rates

0.1

−0.1

−0.1
20

30

First stage regression: F: 21.61

30

40

0.1
0

10

20

0.2

0

−0.2

40

Mortgage

%

%

0.2

30

10 year rates

%

%

5 year rates

20

−0.2

40

robust F: 17.26

45

10
R2: 7.78%

20

30

40

Adjusted R2: 7.42%

Figure 6: 1 year rate shock: Response of private sector expectations, 19792012

1 year rate (FF)

2 year rate (FF)

0.2

0.2
Expectations
Nominal
Implied riskless rates

0.1

%

%

0.1

0

−0.1

−0.2

0

−0.1

10

20

30

−0.2

40

10

0.2

0.1

0.1

0

−0.1

−0.2

30

40

10 year rate (FF)

0.2

%

%

5 year rate (FF)

20

0

−0.1

10

20

30

First stage regression: F: 21.61

−0.2

40

robust F: 17.26

46

10
R2: 7.78%

20

30

40

Adjusted R2: 7.42%

Figure 7: Forward guidance: Federal Funds vs 1 year rate shock

1 year rate
1−year
FF

0.2
%

0.2
%

CPI

0

0
−0.2

−0.2

10

20

30

40

10

IP

20

30

40

Excess Bond Premium

0.2
0.1

−0.2

%

%

0
−0.4

0.05
0

−0.6
−0.8

10

20

30

−0.05

40

Mortgage spread

%

%

40

0.05

0

0
10

20

30

−0.05

40

10

5 year rate

20

30

40

10 year rate
0.2

%

0.2

%

30

0.1

0.05

0

−0.2

20

Commercial Paper spread (3 months)

0.1

−0.05

10

10

20

30

First stage regression: F: 25.16

0

−0.2

40

robust F: 14.04

47

10
R2: 8.95%

20

30

40

Adjusted R2: 8.59%

Figure 8: 2 year rate shock with a full set of GSS instruments

1 year rate
1−year, FF4
2−year, GSS

0.2
%

0.2
%

CPI

0

0
−0.2

−0.2

10

20

30

40

10

IP

20

30

40

Excess Bond Premium

0.2
0.1

−0.2

%

%

0
−0.4

0.05
0

−0.6
−0.8

10

20

30

−0.05

40

Mortgage spread

%

%

40

0.05

0

0
10

20

30

−0.05

40

10

5 year rate

20

30

40

10 year rate
0.2

%

0.2

%

30

0.1

0.05

0

−0.2

20

Commercial Paper spread (3 months)

0.1

−0.05

10

10

20

30

First stage regression: F: 2.65

0

−0.2

40

robust F: 3.99

48

10
R2: 4.99%

20

30

40

Adjusted R2: 3.10%

Figure 9: 1 year rate shock, 1979-2008

1 year rate
1979−2012
1979−2008

0.2
%

0.2
%

CPI

0

0
−0.2

−0.2

10

20

30

40

10

IP

20

30

40

Excess Bond Premium

0.2
0.1

−0.2

%

%

0
−0.4

0.05
0

−0.6
−0.8

10

20

30

−0.05

40

Mortgage spread

%

%

40

0.05

0

0
10

20

30

−0.05

40

10

5 year rate

20

30

40

10 year rate
0.2

%

0.2

%

30

0.1

0.05

0

−0.2

20

Commercial Paper spread (3 months)

0.1

−0.05

10

10

20

30

First stage regression: F: 17.62

0

−0.2

40

robust F: 14.76

49

10
R2: 7.81%

20

30

40

Adjusted R2: 7.37%

Figure 10: 1 year rate shock with instruments without the Fed’s private
information, 1979-2012

1 year rate

CPI

0.5

0.2
0
%

%

FF4
FF4, No Private Info
0

−0.2
−0.4

−0.5

10

20

30

40

10

IP

%

%

0.2

−0.5
−1

0.1
0

−1.5
10

20

30

−0.1

40

Mortgage spread

10

20

30

40

Commercial Paper spread (3 months)

0.3

0.3

0.2

0.2
%

%

40

0.3

0

0.1

0.1

0

0
10

20

30

−0.1

40

10

5 year rate
0.2

0.2

0

0

−0.2

−0.2

−0.4

−0.4
10

20

30

First stage regression: F: 2.32

20

30

40

10 year rate

%

%

30

Excess Bond Premium

0.5

−0.1

20

40

10

robust F: 2.08

50

R2: 1.13%

20

30

40

Adjusted R2: 0.64%

