                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      THE REAL EXCHANGE RATE IN THE LONG RUN:
                     BALASSA-SAMUELSON EFFECTS RECONSIDERED

                                         Michael D. Bordo
                                         Ehsan U. Choudhri
                                           Giorgio Fazio
                                         Ronald MacDonald

                                        Working Paper 20228
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20228


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2014




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Michael D. Bordo, Ehsan U. Choudhri, Giorgio Fazio, and Ronald MacDonald. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Real Exchange Rate in the Long Run: Balassa-Samuelson Effects Reconsidered
Michael D. Bordo, Ehsan U. Choudhri, Giorgio Fazio, and Ronald MacDonald
NBER Working Paper No. 20228
June 2014
JEL No. F31,F41

                                            ABSTRACT

Historical data for over hundred years and 14 countries is used to estimate the long-run effect of
productivity on the real exchange rate. We find large variations in the productivity effect across four
distinct monetary regimes in the sample period. Although the traditional Balassa-Samuelson model
is not consistent with these results, we suggest an explanation of the results in terms of contemporary
variants of the model that incorporate the terms of trade mechanism. Specifically we argue that changes
in trade costs over time may affect the impact of productivity on the real exchange rate over time. We
undertake simulations of the modern versions of the Balassa-Samuelson model to show that plausible
parameter shifts consistent with the behavior of trade costs can explain the cross-regime variation
of the productivity effect.


Michael D. Bordo                                   Giorgio Fazio
Department of Economics                            Newcastle University Business School
Rutgers University                                 Newcastle University
New Jersey Hall                                    5 Barrack Road
75 Hamilton Street                                 Newcastle upon Tyne
New Brunswick, NJ 08901                            NE1 4SE
and NBER                                           United Kingdom
bordo@econ.rutgers.edu                             and University of Palermo
                                                   giorgio.fazio@newcastle.ac.uk
Ehsan U. Choudhri
Carleton University                                Ronald MacDonald
Loeb Building                                      Adam Smith Business School
1125 Colonel By Drive                              Gilbert Scott Building
Ottawa, Ontario                                    University of Glasgow
K1S 5B6 Canada                                     Glasgow, G12 8RT, UK
ehsan_choudhri@carleton.ca                         ronald.macdonald@glasgow.ac.uk
1. Introduction


        A basic hypothesis about the behavior of the real exchange rate is that the Purchasing

Power Parity (PPP) holds in the long run and the real exchange rate converges to a constant

value. Empirical testing of this hypothesis (based on post Bretton Woods period as well as longer

spans of time) has produced mixed results.1 The evidence that the real exchange rates series are

stationary is not conclusive, but even when stationarity is indicated the series exhibit a high

degree of persistence. Estimates of the half-life of deviations from the mean value (typically

from 3 to 5 years) suggest the PPP puzzle (Rogoff, 1996) that they are too long to be produced

by monetary shocks (needed to account for exchange rate volatility) under plausible nominal

rigidities.


        One explanation of the highly persistent behavior of the real exchange rate is provided by

the Balassa-Samuelson model that includes nontraded goods.2 In the standard version of this

model, the long-run PPP holds only for traded goods, and the real exchange rate in the long run

is a function of the relative productivity of traded to nontraded goods in the home and foreign

countries. The time series properties of the real exchange rate in the model depend on the

behavior of home and foreign productivity ratios (for traded relative to nontraded sectors). The

Balassa-Samuelson effects also suggest an explanation of the PPP puzzle: estimates of the half-




1
  For example, see Froot and Rogoff (1995), MacDonald (1995) and Taylor and Taylor (2004),
for overviews of the extensive empirical research on PPP.
2
  We use the conventional name for this model based on Balassa (1964) and Samuelson (1964).
A number of studies also recognize the contribution of Harrod (1933) and call it the Harrod-
Balassa-Samuelson model.
                                                                                                   3
life would be biased if they are based on deviations from a constant mean value when the long-

run value of the real exchange rate is, in fact, time varying.3


       There is growing evidence for the post Bretton Woods period (for which sector-level

productivity data are available) that the relative productivity of traded goods exerts a significant

long-run effect on the real exchange rate.4 The magnitude of the effect, however, is typically

smaller than the level predicted by the standard Balassa-Samuelson theory. A possible source of

this result is that PPP does not hold for traded goods even in the long run.5 Departures from

traded goods PPP can arise if, as suggested by recent trade and macroeconomic models, home

and foreign goods are not perfect substitutes because of specialization in production or product

differentiation. In this case, changes in traded goods productivity affect the real exchange rate

not only through the relative price of nontraded goods (the conventional channel), but also via

the relative price of home to foreign traded goods (the terms of trade). The terms of trade

adjustment can diminish or even reverse the productivity effect operating through the

conventional channel.6


       The empirical literature on the Balassa-Samuelson effects has not adequately explored

how well the conventional model and its variants fit the data. To explore this issue, we use a

large data set spanning over one hundred years and including 14 countries. As productivity data


3
  See Taylor, Peel and Sarno (2001) and Imbs et al. (2005) for alternative explanations of the
PPP puzzle based, respectively, on nonlinearities and aggregation bias. Also see Macdonald and
Ricci (2005) for an explanation highlighting the role of the distribution sector within the Balassa-
Samuelson framework.
4
  See, for example, Chinn and Johnston (1996), Choudhri and Khan (2005), Lee and Tang
(2007), and Ricci, Milesi-Ferretti and Lee (2008).
5
  There is considerable evidence of the failure of PPP for traded goods (e.g., Canzoneri, Cumby,
and Diba, 1999, Engel, 1999). See MacDonald and Ricci (2005) for a theoretical discussion.
6
  For an example of the reversal of the productivity effect within a DGE model (calibrated to
UK-Euro area), see Benigno and Thoenissen (2003).
                                                                                                       4
at the sectoral level are not available for earlier periods, our empirical analysis follows the usual

practice of using the income per capita differential between the home and foreign countries as a

proxy for the traded goods productivity differential, and identifying the Balassa-Samuelson

effect with the coefficient of the income differential in the real exchange rate relation. The

magnitude of the effect (so interpreted) depends on the behavior of the nontraded good

productivity differential. We show that if, as typically assumed, the shares and productivity

growth of nontraded goods do not differ between countries, then the Balassa-Samuelson effect in

the conventional model equals the relative share of nontraded to traded goods. We also show that

the effect would be smaller (but not change sign) in a variation of the model where the nontraded

good productivity differential varies less than proportionately to changes in the traded good

productivity differential.


       We also examine the Balassa-Samuelson effects in two modern variants of the model, the

first one based on specialization in production and the second on monopolistic competition. Both

variants introduce the terms of trade channel, and the second variant also adds another channel

operating via endogenous entry and exit of firms.7 We show that, as compared to the

conventional model, the Balassa-Samuelson effects can be smaller or even of the opposite sign in

the two variants, depending on the extent to which the terms of trade adjust in response to

productivity changes.8 The two key determinants of the terms of trade response are the elasticity


7
  In the monopolistic competition model, we focus on the conventional case of homogeneous
productivity (e.g., Krugman, 1980). Ghironi and Melitz (2005) suggest an alternative model of
Balassa-Samuelson effects without nontraded good based on Melitz (2003) model of
heterogeneous productivity. Bergin, Glick and Taylor (2006) develop a model where the share of
nontraded goods (in an exogenous set of goods) is determined endogenously.
8
  The terms of trade adjustment can cause a reversal of the Balassa-Samuelson effect even in a
model with one factor of production. Other mechanisms such as labor market inefficiencies or
biased technological change could also lead to a reversal of this effect in models with multiple
factors: see, for example, Sheng and Xu (2011) and Gubler and Sax (2013).
                                                                                                        5
of substitution between the home and foreign traded goods and the bias for home goods in the

consumption of traded goods.9


       In our empirical analysis, we let the United States be the reference country and use Panel

Dynamic Ordinary Least Squares (PDOLS) and Group Mean procedures to estimate the long-run

Balassa-Samuelson effect. For the whole 1880-97 sample period, we find that the average long-

run effect (across countries) is significantly positive, but is small and between 0.13 and 0.22

(depending upon which procedure is used and whether a trend is included or not). Assuming that

the share of nontraded goods is at least 0.5, the conventional model predicts the effect to equal or

exceed 1.0. It is difficult to explain such a large discrepancy between the estimated and predicted

values. The discrepancy is smaller if the nontraded good productivity differential varies with the

traded goods differential, but it is not reduced much under plausible assumptions. An explanation

of the results is suggested by the modern versions that incorporate the terms of trade mechanism.

We show that in these models, the size of the estimated effect can be accounted for by reasonable

estimates of the home bias and the elasticity of substitution (within the range of values used in

macroeconomic models).


       The sample period involves major shifts in exchange-rate regimes and we distinguish

four sub-periods representing different regimes: 1880-1913 (the classical gold standard), 1914-

1945 (the wars and interwar), 1946-1971 (Bretton Woods), and 1972-1997 (managed floating).

There were also important shifts in the structure of trade across these monetary regimes caused

by changes in trade costs. To allow for differences in both the dynamics and the long-run effects

among regimes, we also estimate the real exchange rate relation for each sub-period separately.

9
  Choudhri and Schembri (2010) show that changes in the values of the substitution elasticity and
the home bias (within the range suggested in the literature) can cause considerable variation in
the Balassa-Samuelson effect.
                                                                                                    6
We find that the average long-run productivity effect differs considerably across regimes: it is

significantly positive but small in the 1880-1913 sub-period; becomes significantly negative and

large in the 1914-1945 sub-period; is generally not significantly different from zero in the 1946-

1971 sub-period; and is significant and positive for the 1972-1997 sub-period. The conventional

model also does not provide a satisfactory explanation of these cross-regime differences. In the

modern versions, however, we show that plausible changes in the home bias and the substitution

elasticity caused by shifts in the behavior of trade costs could account for key differences in the

Balassa-Samuelson effects across regimes.10


       Although the Balassa-Samuelson effect tends to vary across regimes, the evidence

suggests that it is present, and in the long-run the real exchange rate is not constant but

conditioned on relative income levels. To explore the role of the Balassa-Samuelson effect in

explaining the PPP puzzle, we examine both the conventional estimates of the half-life (based on

the deviations from the mean) and the estimates controlling for the Balassa-Samuelson effect

(based on the residuals in the real exchange rate regression). For the whole period, the (Nickel

and time corrected) estimate of the half-life without the Balassa-Samuelson effect is between 3.4

and 5.3 years and is similar to conventional range of 3-5 years.11 Accounting for this effect

lowers the estimated range to 1.9-2.6 years, which is much lower but still fairly long.12 The

whole-period estimates, however, do not allow for a heterogeneous effect across regimes. Thus,

we also estimate the half-life for each sub-period. The sub-period estimates (incorporating the

10
   We also explore an extended real exchange rate relation that includes trade balance (a proxy
for net foreign assets) as an additional variable. The introduction of this variable makes little
difference to the estimates of the Balassa-Samuelson effect (for the whole period as well as sub-
periods).
11
   The correction is based on the procedure suggested by Choi, Mark and Sul (2006) and is
discussed in Section 4.1.
12
   The estimates for the whole period as well as for the sub-periods discussed below are based on
residuals in regressions with a time trend
                                                                                                      7
Balassa-Samuelson effect) further reduce the half-life range to 0.4-0.7 years in the 1880-1913,

0.8-1.4 years in the 1914-1945, 0.3-0.6 years in the 1946-1971, and 0.7-1.2 years in the 1972-

1997 sub-periods.13 These estimates suggest that the adjustment for a variable Balassa-

Samuelson effect substantially lowers the persistence of the real exchange rate and helps resolve

the PPP puzzle.


       Our paper is related to Lothian and Taylor (2008) study, which uses data for three

countries over a long span of time (nearly two centuries) to examine the importance of the

Balassa-Samuelson effect. Their focus, however, is on testing the significance of this effect

(assumed to be homogeneous over the entire period) within a framework that allows nonlinear

reversion to the equilibrium real exchange rate and shifts in exchange rate volatility across

regimes.14 The focus of our paper instead is on explaining the magnitudes and the signs of the

Balassa-Samuelson effect under different regimes. Important contributions of our paper are to

show that the estimates of the Balassa-Samuelson effect vary across regimes and to provide an

explanation consistent with the modern versions of the Balassa-Samuelson model, which

incorporate the terms of trade channel.


       Our paper also relates to Chong, Jorda and Taylor (2012), who use panel data including a

large number of countries and covering the recent period to provide support for the existence of a

long-run Balassa-Samuelson relation. Their main objective is to measure adjustment to long-run


13
   Even the sub-period estimates without the Balassa-Samuelson effect imply shorter half lives
since they partially account for the time variation in the real exchange rate by allowing a
different mean for each regime. These estimates, however, do not reduce half lives as much as
the estimates with the Balassa-Samuelson effect.
14
   Their estimate of the Balassa-Samuelson effect equals 0.125 for sterling-dollar and zero for the
sterling-franc real exchange rates. Interestingly, the average value of their estimates (0.0625) is
not much different than our estimate of the average effect for the whole period without a time
trend (0.068).
                                                                                                  8
equilibrium, which is purged of short-run frictions. Using a local projection approach, they find

that the long-run adjustment has shorter half lives. Their results, however, do not explain the PPP

puzzle related to short-run adjustment.15 Although explaining this puzzle is not the main concern

of our paper, our empirical analysis does suggest that half lives of the short-run adjustment (after

removing the long-run Balassa-Samuelson effect and allowing this effect to vary across periods)

are not too long.


2.     Data, Descriptive Evidence and Monetary Regimes


We have assembled annual data for 14 countries over the period 1880-1997 on real exchange

rates relative to the U.S., real per capita GDP and the trade balance to GDP ratio. The countries

covered, most of which are advanced countries are: Argentina, Australia, Canada, Denmark,

Finland, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Netherlands, Spain, Sweden, the UK and the US. For the

data sources see the Data Appendix. Gaps in the annual data reflecting missing data during the

World Wars for several countries were filled in by linear interpolation. The three series for each

country ordered alphabetically are presented in figure 1 which shows both the actual data and the

data filtered using a Hodrick-Prescott filter. The series presented are all relative to the U.S.


2.1    Monetary Regimes


Our data covers close to 12 decades. During that time span the world exhibited significant

changes in the exchange rate regimes followed, as well as in the structure of the global economy.

We demarcate the 12 decades into 4 distinct regimes: 1880-1913, the classical gold standard;

l914-1945, the wars and interwar; 1946-1971, Bretton Woods; and 1972-1997 managed floating.


15
   In fact, they restate the puzzle as “How can one reconcile the high-frequency variability and
flexibility of nominal exchange rates with the slow adjustment and persistence generated by
frictions thought to have effects in the short term only?”
                                                                                                     9
Our sample concludes just before the start of the formation of the euro zone. Including more up

to date data would have resulted in five of the countries in our sample entering with identical

exchange rates and monetary policy after the introduction of the Euro, thereby restricting our

analysis.


1880-1913


This was the period of the classical gold standard in which most countries of the world had fixed

gold parities (in our sample Italy adhered to gold for only part of the period as did Argentina,

Spain never did). It was also a period characterized by relatively low tariffs and non-tariff

barriers in most countries (with the principal exception of the US), open capital markets,

relatively flexible wages and prices and limited government intervention in the economy.


In this period most countries had relatively stable real exchange rates reflecting the fixed parity

and relatively stable price levels. It was also a period of sustained growth across the world

although with the principal exception of Canada and Sweden, not growing as rapidly as the US

(see figure 1). In this period, there were massive capital flows from the advanced countries of

Western Europe to the emerging countries of the day: Argentina, Australia and Canada. This was

reflected in persistent current account surpluses in the former countries and deficits in the latter

(Bordo, Eichengreen and Kim 1998).


1914-1945


This turbulent period marked a significant change in the policy regime and in structure. Most

countries abandoned the gold standard during and after World War I and allowed their exchange

rates to float, or they imposed extensive exchange and capital controls (Obstfeld and Taylor



                                                                                                   10
1998). The gold standard was reinstated from 1925-1936 as a Gold-exchange standard. It was

followed by a period of heavily managed floating.


The 1930s were characterized by large increases in tariff and non-tariff barriers and extensive

capital controls. The 1930s also was a period with considerable nominal rigidity and in which

government intervention in the economy increased dramatically to protect income and

employment from the shocks of the Great depression. World War II continued the trends of the

1930s.


In this period the real exchange rate was highly unstable with no distinct trend. Per capita real

growth, although high in the 1920s, declined dramatically in most countries during the 1930s

until they cut the link with gold (Eichengreen l992). There is little pattern of convergence with

the US in the 1930s and substantial divergence in the war years (figure 1). The relationship

between trade balances and the real exchange rate also appears to be weak in this period

reflecting the disruption in trade and capital flows.


1946-1971


The Bretton Woods system established in 1944 required members to declare fixed parities in

terms of the dollar. It also required current account convertibility. The postwar era was

characterized by significant declines in tariff barriers, continued restrictions on capital mobility,

considerable government intervention in the macro economy and remarkable macro stability

(Bordo 1993). Real exchange rates were stable.


Economic growth in most countries was dramatic as they recovered from the war. The

convergence that occurred in real per capita growth relative to the US is evident in figure 1. Also



                                                                                                    11
evident in this period from figure 1 is a strong correlation between relative growth and the real

exchange rate for a number of countries.




1972-1997


In this period, the Bretton Woods system collapsed and was replaced by generalized managed

floating. For the first 10-15 years real exchange rate volatility was relatively high, with a positive

trend in most countries. During this period trade protection continued to decline and trade

mushroomed. Also restrictions on capital movements were gradually eliminated. After 1985

exchange rate volatility declined. The pattern of convergence in real per capita GDP with the US,

and the positive correlation between relative per capita incomes and the real exchange rate,

continued until the 1990s. Finally, in this period a negative correlation between the relative trade

balance and the real exchange rate is apparent for a number of countries, especially Canada,

Sweden and the UK.


In sum, as can be seen in figure 1, there is some evidence of the positive relationship between the

real exchange rate and real per capita GDP relative to the U.S. suggested by the theory in section

3. There is also some evidence for the negative relationship between trade balances as a

proportion of GDP relative to the U.S. for a number of countries. In section 4 of the paper we

present econometric evidence that is consistent with the descriptive evidence presented here.


3.     Theoretical Framework


       This section develops a theoretical framework to compare different models of the long-

run behavior of the real exchange rate and motivate the empirical relations estimated in the next


                                                                                                    12
section. We first discuss a basic model based on the conventional Balassa-Samuelson theory. We

then consider two variants of the basic model, which introduce specialization in production and

monopolistic competition. We use a simple setup with two countries (home and foreign), one

factor (labor), and two categories of goods (traded and nontraded goods). To facilitate

comparisons between different models, we assume that there is a continuum of goods (or

varieties) in each category. In the basic model, all traded goods can be produced in both

countries. The first variant assumes that each country is specialized in the production of a subset

of traded goods and thus home and foreign goods are not perfect substitutes. Productivity

changes in this model lead to an adjustment in the terms of trade as well as the relative price of

nontraded goods. The second variant assumes monopolistic competition (with each country

producing different varieties of a differentiated traded good), and introduces an additional

adjustment mechanism through endogenous entry and exit of firms.


3.1     Basic Model


        We focus on the equations of the model for the home economy. Symmetric equations are

assumed for the foreign economy with an asterisk used to denote foreign variables and

parameters. The lifetime utility of a representative household is given by U t   s t  s t Cs ,
                                                                                        




where C s is the household’s aggregate consumption index. As the paper is concerned only with

the long-run effects, we focus on the steady-state conditions, and do not explicitly model the

dynamics that would arise from nominal rigidities or international borrowing or lending (since

the time subscripts are not needed, they are omitted). All prices in the model are defined as real

prices in terms of C for the home relations and C * for the foreign relations.


        The aggregate consumption index is defined by the following Cob-Douglas function:

                                                                                                      13
                                       CN CT1
                                   C             , 0   1,                              (1)
                                      (1   )1

where C N and CT are consumption bundles for nontraded and traded goods, and  is the share

of nontraded goods in expenditure. The indexes for the nontraded and traded consumption

bundles are defined by the following CES aggregators:

                                                                     /( 1)
                                 CN    CN (i )( 1/ di                    ,           (2)
                                       iN               



                                                                     /( 1)
                                 CT    CT ( j )( 1/ dj                   ,           (3)
                                       jT                

where CN (i) and CT ( j ) represent amounts consumed of individual nontraded and traded goods

indexed by i and   j   , respectively; N and T denote sets of nontraded and traded goods; and

 is the elasticity of substitution between goods within each aggregate.

       The production functions for nontraded and traded good are


                                         YN (i)  AN LN (i) ,                               (4)

                                         YT ( j )  AT LT ( j ) ,                           (5)

where YN (i) and LN (i ) denote output and labor input for good i ; YT ( j ) and LT ( j ) are the

corresponding variables for good j ; and AN and AT represent labor productivities for

nontraded and traded goods, which are assumed to be the same for all goods in each category.


       Minimization of unit costs of C , CN , and CT implies the following real prices of these

indices:



                                                                                                    14
                                                                                        1/(1 )
                          1 p p    1
                                           ,   pN       p (i)1 di                            ,    (6)
                                N    T               iN N          

                                                                         1/(1 )
                                    pT       p ( j )1 dj                      ,                   (7)
                                          jT T            

where pN (i) and pT ( j ) are real prices of goods i and j in units of C . Under perfect

competition, these prices are set as


                                                pN (i)  w / AN ,                                       (8)

                                                pT ( j )  w / AT ,                                     (9)

where w denotes the real wage rate. Assume that there are no trade costs.16 Under this

assumption, the law of one price implies that


                                               qpT ( j )  pT* ( j ) ,                                 (10)

where q is the real exchange rate defined as the real value of home currency (i.e., the relative

price of C in terms of C * )


       The equilibrium conditions for nontraded goods and the labor market are


                                                CN (i )  YN (i ) ,                                    (11)

                               L             LN (i ) di             LT ( j ) dj ,                  (12)
                                       i N                    j T



where L is the fixed supply of labor. Following the standard approach, we assume that there

exists a debt-dependent transaction cost or a risk premium that induces a unique steady state with

the ratio of real net foreign assets to C equal to a certain (possibly zero) value. Letting b denote


16
  Trade costs are introduced in the variants of this model. In the present model, however,
absence of trade costs is needed to have both diversified production (all goods in set T are
produced in both countries) and trade in goods.
                                                                                                              15
the corresponding ratio of the real trade balance to C (i.e., the net foreign asset ratio times the

real interest rate), we express the equilibrium condition for the current account balance as


                                   j T
                                            pT ( j )[CT ( j )  YT ( j )] dj  bC .           (13)

        To derive a relation determining the real exchange rate, we use a first-order log-linear

approximation around the initial steady state. Let a hat over a variable denote the log deviation

from its initial steady state value. Using (6)-(9), their foreign counterparts and (10), we can

derive a general form of the conventional Balassa-Samuelson relation for the real exchange rate

as


                                     qˆ   ( AˆT  Aˆ N )   * ( AˆT*  Aˆ N* ) .           (14)

Empirical analysis often uses a simple form of this relation, where the real exchange depends on

the home-foreign differential in traded goods productivity or income per capita. This form can be

derived by making the following two assumptions:


Assumption 1.    * .

Assumption 2. Aˆ N  Aˆ N* .

The first assumption abstracts from international differences in tastes (i.e., the share parameters

in the aggregate consumption index). The second assumption accords with the view often

associated with the Balassa-Samuelson theory that nontraded goods generally represent services,

which are produced by similar technology across countries. Under assumptions 1 and 2, relation

(14) simplifies to: qˆ   ( AˆT  AˆT* ) . Thus in the simple version, the home-foreign differential in

the traded goods productivity is the only determinant of the real exchange rate and the coefficient

of the productivity differential equals the share of nontraded goods.


                                                                                                           16
       The simple version also implies a relation that links the real exchange rate to the differential

between real income per capita in the home and foreign country. Let y denote real income per

capita and assume that it is proportional to real income per worker. Also let b  0 in the initial

steady state so that real income per worker simply equals the real wage (since labor is the only

factor and there are zero profits). Set y  w , and use (6)-(9) to get


                                                            yˆ   Aˆ N  (1   ) AˆT .                                (15)

Next, Use (15) and its foreign counterpart to substitute for AˆT and AˆT* in (14) and get:

                                                                *
qˆ           ( yˆ  yˆ * )           ( Aˆ N  Aˆ N* )                       ( yˆ *  Aˆ N* ) . Under assumptions 1 and 2, this
       1                      1                         (1   )(1   * )

relation reduces to


                                                                      
                                                              qˆ           ( yˆ  yˆ * ) .                             (16)
                                                                     1 



Note that the coefficient of income differential (the Balassa-Samuelson effect) is larger than the

share of the nontraded goods. The magnitude of this coefficient, however, is sensitive to the

assumption about the productivity differential for nontraded goods. For example, consider a

modified version, which replaces assumption 2 by the following assumption:


Assumption 3. Aˆ N  Aˆ N*   ( AˆT  AˆT* ), 0    1 .


Assumption 3 allows the nontraded good productivity differential to vary, but for simplicity,

assumes a proportional relation between the productivity differentials for nontraded and traded

goods. To capture the view that international productivity differences are less important for

nontraded than traded goods, the elasticity of the nontraded good productivity differential with

                                                                                                                                    17
respect to the traded good differential (  ) is assumed to be less than one. Using assumptions 1

and 3 along with (14), (15) and its foreign counterpart, we modify (16) as


                                                   (1   )
                                          qˆ                ( yˆ  yˆ * ) .                                           (17)
                                                 1    

The alternative assumption 3 still allows the real exchange rate to be expressed as a function of

the income differential, but this differential’s coefficient is smaller than under assumption 2.


3.2    Specialization in Production


       This section examines how the results change if the basic model is modified to let the

home and foreign countries be specialized in the production of traded goods. To motivate this

variation, assume that each country’s productivity differs between two groups of traded goods.

Partition the traded good set into two subsets,  H and F , and modify the production function

(5) for traded goods as


                                              A L ( j ) if j   H
                                    YT ( j )  H T                      .                                              (18)
                                               AF LT ( j ) if j   F

Let AH / AH*  AF / AF* , so that the home country has a comparative advantage for goods in the

subset,  H . We assume that this advantage will lead to equilibrium with the home country

producing goods in this subset and the foreign country producing goods in the other subset

(goods in the two subsets are referred to as home and foreign traded goods).


       Also, modify the consumption index (3) for traded goods as

                                                                               /( 1)
                        CT  (  H CH )( 1)/  (  F CF )( 1)/                  ,
                                                  /( 1)                                              /( 1)       (19)
            CH       C ( j )( 1)/ dj                  , CF    * CF ( j * )( 1)/ dj *                 ,
                  jH H                                         j F                      

                                                                                                                              18
where  is the elasticity of substitution between home and foreign goods;  H and  F are

preference parameters for these goods; and CH ( j ) and C F ( j * ) represent domestic consumption

of home (exported) good j and foreign (imported) good j* . The above specification allows for

home bias in preferences as well as for asymmetric elasticities of substitution between and within

home and foreign bundles.


        We also introduce trade costs in this model and assume that they take the form of iceberg

costs such that  (  1) units of a product need to be exported to deliver 1 unit in the importing

country. The price indexes for CT , CH and CF are given by


                                                                          1/(1 )
                                     p 1   p 1 
                               pT   H    F                                   ,
                                      H    F                                                       (20)
                                            1/(1 )                                          1/(1 )
              pH       p ( j )1 dj               ,  pF    * { pF ( j * )}1 dj *            ,
                    jH H                                   j F                     

where pH ( j ) is the home real price (in terms of C ) of home good j , p F ( j * ) is the foreign real

price (also in terms of C ) of foreign good j* , and  p F ( j * ) the home real prices of the foreign

good. In view of the production function (18),


                                               pH ( j )  w / AH .                                           (21)

The real prices of individual goods in terms of C are connected by the real exchange rate to

those in terms of C * (denoted by an asterisk) as


                               qp H ( j )  p H* ( j ),     qp F ( j * )  p F* ( j * ) .                    (22)

The labor market condition (12) still holds, but note that LT ( j )  0 for j   F . The condition for

the current account balance can now be written as

                                                                                                                    19
                                               p F C F  p H C H*  bC .                                   (23)

        Let z  pH / ( pF ) denote the terms of trade for the home country. Normalize

pT  pH  pF  1 in steady state, use (6), (8), (20), (21), the corresponding foreign equations, and

(22) to modify the relation for the real exchange rate as


                    qˆ   ( Aˆ H  Aˆ N )   * ( Aˆ F*  Aˆ N* )  [ (1   )   * *     * ]zˆ,   (24)

where   (  H ) 1  1  (  F /  ) 1 is the steady-state share of home goods in the home traded

good basket while  *  (  H* /  ) 1  1  (  F* ) 1 is the share of home goods in the foreign basket.

Note that  increases and  * decreases as trade cost index,  , increases. There is a home bias

for the national traded good if    * . In the presence of trade costs, home bias arises even if

preferences for the national good are the same in the two countries (  H   H* ). The home bias,

moreover, increases in trade costs. The real exchange rate relation (24) now includes a terms of

trade effect [represented by the third term in (24)], thorough which productivity differentials can

potentially offset the standard Balassa-Samuelson effects [captured by the first two terms in

(24)], as discussed below. Real income per worker also depends on the terms of trade. Letting

y  w , and using (6), (8), (20), (21) , we can express


                                    yˆ   Aˆ N  (1   ) Aˆ H  (1   )(1   ) zˆ                      (25)

        Letting      * denote home bias (with a value between zero and one) and using

assumption 1, the solution for the terms of trade is derived in the Appendix A as


                                                        ( Aˆ H  Aˆ F* )
                                                 zˆ                      .                                (26)
                                                         (1   )  



                                                                                                                  20
Note that if    / (1   ) , then  (1   )    0 , and we have the typical result that an

improvement in home productivity (relative to foreign productivity) will worsen the terms of

trade.17


     To relate the real exchange rate to the income differential, we first substitute the value of ẑ

from (26) into (24), (25) and its corresponding foreign equation, use assumption 2 (as in the

basic model), and obtain


                                       (1   )  1   /          ˆ
                              qˆ                                   ( AH  AF ),
                                                                              ˆ*             (27)
                                       (1   )                  

                                                    (1   )  1  ˆ
                             yˆ  yˆ *  (1   )                  ( AH  AF ),
                                                                            ˆ*               (28)
                                                    (1   )   

We then use (27) and (28) to get


                                                  
                                         qˆ                ( yˆ  yˆ * ) ,                 (29)
                                                (1   )

                     /
where   1                   . As (29) indicates, the Balassa-Samuelson effect in the specialization
                 (1   )  1

model is different than in the conventional model [relation (16)]. In the (typically-assumed) case

of    / (1   ) ,  is less than one and decreases as  increases or  decreases. In this case,

moreover,  is negative if  / (1   )   / (1   ). Thus, incorporating the terms of trade effect

not only decreases the Balassa-Samuelson effect [compare (29) with (16)], but also reverses the




17
  If    / (1   ) , then we obtain the case highlighted in Corsetti, Dedola and Leduc (2008) ,
where higher home productivity, in fact, improves the terms of trade and thus enhances the
Balassa-Samuelson effect.
                                                                                                        21
sign of the effect if the substitution elasticity is sufficiently low or home bias is sufficiently

high.18


3.3       Monopolistic Competition


          Finally, we briefly discuss how monopolistic competition affects the results. Assume that

the nontraded and traded products now represent varieties of differentiated goods produced under

monopolistic competition. Let N now denote the set of domestic nontraded varieties, and  H

and F the sets of home and foreign traded varieties. The production function for a nontraded

variety (indexed by i ) is still given by (4), but the production functions for home and foreign

traded varieties (indexed by j and j* ) are now revised as


                                YH ( j )  AH LH ( j ), YF ( j * )  AF LF ( j * ),                       (30)

where YH ( j ), LH ( j ) and A H denote output, labor input and labor productivity for a home traded

variety and YF ( j * ), LF ( j * ) and A F the corresponding variables for a foreign traded variety. The

consumption and price indices for traded goods are the same as under specialized production, as

given in (19) and (20).


          Under monopolistic competition, the optimal prices for nontraded varieties, and for

traded varieties in the home and foreign markets are


                                w                            w                            w
                  pN (i)                 ,   pH ( j )                 , qpH* ( j )                 .   (31)
                             (  1) AN                    (  1) AH                    (  1) AH

The number of firms is determined endogenously in each sector by the condition that free entry

and exit leads to zero profits. Assume that fixed amounts of labor equal to  N / AN and H / AH

18
     The productivity coefficient is similarly influenced by the terms of trade effect.
                                                                                                                 22
are required to start the production of a variety of the nontraded and traded goods, respectively.

Under the zero-profit condition, the price of each variety also equals its average cost, and thus


                   pN (i)  (w / AN )(N / YN (i )  1),            pH ( j )  (w / AH )(H / YH ( j )  1) .               (32)

Given symmetric prices in each set, the aggregate prices for the sets of nontraded and traded

varieties according to (6) and (20) are


              p N  ( n N )1/ (1 ) p N (i ),   p H  ( n H )1/ (1 ) p H ( j ),  p F  ( n F )1/ (1 )  p F ( j * )   (33)

where nN , nH and nF are the numbers (mass) of varieties in the three sets. The trade-balance

condition (23) still holds, but the condition for the labor market is modified as


                                 L  nN [N / AN  LN (i)]  nH [H / AH  LH ( j )] .                                      (34)

          Make use of (6), (20), (31), (33) and their foreign counterparts, let y  w , and derive the

relations for the real exchange rate and real income per worker for the monopolistic-competition

case as


                         qˆ   ( Aˆ H  Aˆ N )   * ( Aˆ F*  Aˆ N* )  [ (1   )   * *     * ] zˆ
                                                                                                                            (35)
                             [ (nˆ H  nˆ N )   * ( nˆ F  nˆ *N )] / (  1),

                    yˆ   Aˆ N  (1   ) Aˆ H  (1   )(1   ) zˆ  [ nˆ N  (1   )nˆH ] / (  1).                  (36)

Both of these relations now include an additional effect [represented by the fourth term in each

relation] operating through changes in the number of firms. Note that if the number of firms is

fixed in the monopolistic competition model (so that the adjustment occurs only on the intensive

margin), the relations for the real exchange rate and income per capita are no different from the

perfect competition model with specialization.


   As shown in Appendix A, the solution of the model (with assumption 1) yields

                                                                                                                                   23
                                                        ( Aˆ H  Aˆ F* )
                                             zˆ                           ,                              (37)
                                                    (  1)[   (  1)]

                                                                     1
                 nˆ H  nˆ N  Aˆ H  Aˆ N ,  nˆ N  (1   )nˆH        yˆ  (1   )(1   ) zˆ  .   (38)
                                                                       

      Next, use (35)-(38), foreign counterparts of (36) and (38), and (16) to obtain


                                           (1   ) 1   /       ˆ
                                qˆ                                     ( AH  AF ),
                                                                                ˆ*
                                        1   (1   )  
                                                                                                          (39)
                                                                       

                                              (1   )   (1   ) 1  ˆ
                               yˆ  yˆ *                               ( AH  AF ).
                                                                                 ˆ*                       (40)
                                               1   (1   )   

In comparison with the specialization model [see (27) and (28)], the effect of the traded- goods

productivity differential on both the real exchange rate and the income differential is magnified

in the present model. Remarkably, however, the degree of magnification is the same for both

variables. The relation between q̂ and yˆ  yˆ * implied by (39) and (40) is the same as (29). Thus,

although endogenous entry/exit (adjustment on the extensive margin) in the monopolistic

competition model increases the productivity coefficient, it does not alter the coefficient of the

income differential, which remains the same as that in the specialization model.


3.4       Extensions and Empirical Implementation


         Our empirical model is based on the long-run theoretical relation that links the real

exchange rate to the income differential. In empirically implementing the two-country model to a

multi-country world, we let the home country represent an individual country and the foreign

country stand for the rest of the world. Using subscripts c and w to denote variables for a

country and the rest of the world, and assuming that the coefficients (except the constant term)

are homogeneous across countries, we specify our empirical relations as


                                                                                                                 24
                                    ln qc ,t   0 c  1 (ln yc ,t  ln y w ,t )  ec ,t ,   (41)

where ec ,t is the error term. In the simple version of the conventional Balassa-Samuelson model

(relation (16) based on assumptions 1 and 2), 1 equals  / (1   ) . The value of this coefficient

would be smaller in the modified version, which allows the nontraded good productivity

differential to vary (relation (17) based on assumptions 1 and 3). In this case, 1 equals

(1   ) / (1     ) with   1 . In the modern version of the Balassa-Samuelson model which

incorporates specialized production or monopolistic competition (relation (29)), 1 equals

  / (1   ) where   1  (  /  ) / ( (1   )   ) is less than one, and can even be negative

under sufficiently low substitution elasticity or high home bias.


         Estimation of (41) requires data for all economies to measure the real exchange rate of a

country with respect to all other countries ( qc ), and the income variable for the rest of the world

( yw ). As our historical data set includes data for a subset of countries, we use a bilateral version

of (41). Choosing the United States as the reference country and letting subscript u denote US

variables, and defining the country c ’s bilateral real exchange rate with US as qcu  qc / qu (so

that it represents the real value of the currency of country c in terms of US dollar), we subtract

relation (41) for US from that for country c , and derive


                                     ln qcu ,t   0  1 (ln yc ,t  ln yu ,t )  ec ,t    (42)

where  0   0c   0u and ec ,t  ec ,t  eu ,t .

    We estimate this relation in the next section using panel data. If assumption 1 does not hold,

1 would differ across countries and we allow for this possibility. In this case, world variables



                                                                                                        25
could have an additional effect that is omitted in (42).19 This omission would introduce cross-

sectional dependence between relations for different non-US countries and we introduce time

effects in our panel estimates to account for this possibility. We also estimate the model with and

without a time trend. The trend term could allow for the possible effect of changes in parameters

such as trade costs and the share of nontraded goods, which are treated as constants in our model

for simplicity. This term could also capture the effect of deterministic trends in the productivity

differential for nontraded goods if there are departures from assumptions 2 or 3.20


     Finally, we also consider the possibility that the net foreign assets ratio does not converge to

a unique value in steady state. In this case, trade balance (relative to income) would not be

constant in the long run, and this variable would also be included in the real exchange rate

relation. To allow for this possibility, we also estimated the bilateral version of the empirical

model with trade balance differential between country c and the US as an additional variable.21




19
   Note that without assumption 1 (but with assumption 2), (14), (15) and its counterpart imply
                                    *
that qˆ       ( yˆ  yˆ * )                     ( yˆ *  Aˆ N* ) . The second term for country c and US would
          1                  (1   )(1   * )
now be different and introduce additional world variables in (42).
20
   A deterministic trend could also be present in the traded goods productivity differential.
However, although the income differential and the real exchange rate relations would have a
deterministic trend in this case, the relation between these variables would not include the trend
term.
21
   Letting bc denote the balance of trade of a country, the global exchange rate relation is
modified as ln qc ,t   0 c   1 (ln y c ,t  ln y w ,t )   2 bc ,t  ec ,t , which implies the following bilateral
relation: ln qcu ,t   0 c   1 (ln y c ,t  ln yu ,t )   2 (bc ,t  bu ,t )  ec ,t .

                                                                                                                      26
4.      Empirical Analysis


4.1     Stationarity tests and real exchange rate persistence


        In Table 1 we present both univariate and panel unit root tests for the full sample period.

The univariate tests are calculated using the method of Elliot, Rotenberg and Stock (1996) with

the optimal lag order calculated using a sequential t-test proposed by Ng and Perron (2000).

Three different tests are reported for the panel unit root tests and these are the Adj-t* test of

Levin, Lin and Chu (2002), the W-t-bar test of Im, Pesaran and Shin (2003) and the Z[t-bar] test

of Pesaran (2003). As can be seen, the evidence with respect to the stationarity properties of the

univariate series is rather mixed for all three variables (although the main focus of our analysis is

the real exchange rate /productivity relationship we also include the relative trade balance term

here since that features in our robustness tests). For example, in 14 out of 42 cases, non-

stationarity of the variables can be rejected in the no time trend regression and on 13 occasions

out of 42 when a time trend is included. In the univariate case the majority of rejections of non-

stationarity arise for the real exchange rate series.


        In terms of the panel unit root results, presented in the bottom half of Table 1, we always

reject non-stationarity at the 5% or 1% level for the real exchange rate and the trade balance

term. Productivity differentials (measured by per capita income differentials) prove to be

stationary at both the 1% and 5% levels on the basis of all three tests when a time trend is

included. The panel unit root tests for our four different sub samples are presented in Table 2 and

it is interesting to note that the rejection of nonstationarity is not as clear cut in the cases of the

real exchange rate and trade balance differential as it was for the full sample period. In terms of


                                                                                                          27
the real exchange rate, there is more evidence in favor of stationarity for the two post world war

II sub samples.


        In table 3 we present the half lives calculated for the real exchange rates using the method

of Choi, Mark and Sul (2006). The full period results fall within the conventional 3 – 5 year

range. As would be expected, the two fixed rate periods – the Gold Standard and Bretton Woods

– produce the fastest adjustment speeds, with Bretton Woods delivering the tightest range of 0.5

to 0.8. The two floating rate periods – inter war and post Bretton Woods - produce slower,

although similar, adjustment speeds.


4.2     Panel Estimates


        The long-run effect of productivity differential on the real exchange rate can be estimated

by Group Mean (GM) and Panel DOLS procedures. These procedures provide unbiased

estimates of the coefficients in the long run relation if the variables in the relation are

nonstationary or mixed stationary and non-stationary and cointegrated. As discussed above, the

evidence for nonstationarity of the real exchange rate and productivity differential based on sub

samples is mixed. If these variables are assumed to be nonstationary, the evidence on half lives

of the residuals (discussed below) suggests that they are cointegrated. Thus, we use GM and

Panel DOLS to estimate the long-run productivity effect, but as a robustness exercise, we also

explore alternative estimates based on an error-correction specification, which are appropriate if

all variables are nonstationary and cointegrated and allow the short run dynamics to be

influenced by the deviation from equilibrium.


        In tables 4 and 5 we present the individual, Group Mean and panel DOLS estimates for

our base line productivity specification. Since we found evidence of cross-sectional dependence


                                                                                                 28
in our panel estimates (discussed further below), we only report estimates where cross-sectional

dependence is accounted for by time dummies and demeaning the series.22 The individual

coefficients on the relative productivity term, reported in Table 4 reveal a preponderance of

positive coefficients in the range of 0.03 to 1.67 with weak statistical significance. The pooled

results, however, show a much clearer picture. The results in the GM row are for the simple

group mean and these give a statistically significant coefficient of 0.19 in the specification

without a trend and 0.22 in the specification with a time trend. The PDOLS estimates are similar

and significant both with and without a common trend, although the result of the latter test is

significant only at 10% when an individual trend is used.


       The results for the various sub sample periods are reported in Table 5 and show

considerable variation across regimes. In the Classical Gold standard period, 1880-1913, the

coefficient values on the relative productivity term are all positive, significant and of a similar

order of magnitude with and without a trend (irrespective of the trend being common or

individual). The values, in the range of 0.13 to 0.25 are clearly smaller than that expected in the

traditional Balassa-Samuelson narrative but (as explained below) are consistent with the modern

versions presented in Section 3. Moving into the period 1914-1945, we note that the sign flips

from being positive to significantly negative in all cases and the magnitude of the coefficient

using the Panel DOLS estimators is approximately double the size of the coefficient in the case

of the GM estimator.


       In the Bretton Woods period the results differ both with respect to whether a trend is

included or not and also depending on the estimator used. For example the GM results produce


22
  As discussed in Section 3.4, departures from assumption 1 (symmetric shares) could lead to
cross-sectional dependence.
                                                                                                      29
an insignificantly negative outcome in the no trend case and a significantly negative outcome in

the trend case. With the Panel DOLS estimator the results all produce a small but insignificantly

positive coefficient on the relative productivity term. In the post Bretton Woods period the

results show a clear positive and statistically significant coefficient with the coefficient varying

from 0.20 to 1.18 depending on the specification. An interesting aspect of the post Bretton

Woods results is that the coefficient on the relative income term falls from 1.18 to 0.58 when an

individual trend is used rather than a common trend. These results do not qualitatively change

when, as a robustness exercise, we re-estimate the Balassa-Samuelson effects after introducing

the trade balance as an additional regressor (see Appendix B).


       Again, changes in the sign and the magnitude of the coefficient across sub samples are

puzzling. An explanation of these results in terms of the modern version of the Balassa-

Samuelson theory is suggested in the next section.


4.3    Half Lives of Residuals


       The half-life estimates discussed above do not account for the influence of the

productivity differential. To control for this effect, Table 6 shows estimates of half-lives of

residuals obtained from relations that contain the productivity variable. We consider two

specifications based on panel DOLS: the first excludes the first difference terms (no fd’s) and the

second includes these terms (fd’s). The first specification controls only for the long-run effect of

the productivity differential while the second specification also controls for the short-run effects

of the differential captured by the first difference terms. For each specification, half-life

estimates are presented for relations with and without a time trend. As already noted above, even

without the productivity effect half-lives tend to be shorter for sub samples than for the whole


                                                                                                   30
sample. Controlling for this effect, sub sample half-lives are significantly reduced, especially if

short term effects are also incorporated. The half-lives are further reduced when a time trend is

included, thereby perhaps suggesting that our productivity term may not capture the totality of

productivity trends. The statistical significance of these results indicates clear evidence of

cointegration in the panel DOLS estimates. It is interesting to note that it is possible to provide a

resolution for the PPP puzzle in the context of a linear model by controlling for productivity

effects and allowing a time trend. For example, the half-life range of the real exchange rate in

Table 2 (without controls) is from 1.9 to 5.7 years for the post Bretton Woods period. In the

presence of a time trend, the half-life range in Table 6 reduces sharply to 0.8-1.4 years after

controlling for the long-run productivity effect and 0.7-1.2 years after also controlling for the

short-run effect. The interwar period also has a long half-life range, and controls also

significantly shorten this range.


4.4      Error Correction Specification


         Given the mixed evidence from tables 1 and 2 on the (non)stationarity of some of our

variables, as a robustness check, we also report estimates of the real exchange rate - productivity

relationship using Mean Group (Pesaran and Smith, 1995) and Pooled Mean Group (Pesaran,

Shin and Smith, 2004) estimators which consider the case when all variables are I(1) and

cointegrated. Then, it is possible to adopt an Error Correction Specification of the form:


                                         
qit  i qit 1   0i  1i  y  y *it  11i   y  y *it  it ,

where  should be significantly negative if the variables show a return towards the long-run

equilibrium. These estimators are indicated in case of nonstationary heterogeneous panels,

especially if the number of groups or time periods is large. In order to control for potential cross-


                                                                                                    31
sectional dependence, the series are first demeaned. The two estimators differ in the way they

deal with panel heterogeneity: while the Mean Group estimates are simple unweighted averages

of the N individual regressions, the pooled mean group (PMG) estimator constrains the long-run

elasticity to be equal across countries. Pooling is consistent and efficient if restrictions apply, but

inconsistent if the true model is heterogeneous. Hausman tests are performed under the null that

the difference in coefficients is not systematic. The results in table 7 seem to suggest that pooling

is always consistent and efficient except in one case for the post Bretton Woods period, when a

trend is included. Overall the PMG results seem to confirm, in terms of sign, size and

significance the results obtained using the PDOLS and GM estimators, especially if individual

trends are included. In table 7, we also use the basic formula to extract half-lives based on the

error correction parameters. These show sizes similar to those of the unbiased half lives reported

in table 6, confirming our overall baseline results.


 5.       Explaining the Results


          In this section, we examine if the Balassa-Samuelson theory is capable of explaining the

results discussed above. We consider both the conventional and the modern versions of the

theory.


5.1       The Conventional Version


          The estimates of the income coefficient in the PDOLS and GM regressions are difficult to

reconcile with the conventional Balassa-Samuelson model. The share of nontraded goods (  ) is

typically assumed to be greater than 0.5. For   0.5 , the productivity effect in (16) predicted by

the conventional model (simplified by assumptions 1 and 2) would equal or exceed 1.0. Our




                                                                                                    32
estimates of the coefficient of the productivity differential for the full sample range from 0.13 to

0.22 and are much below the predicted value.


       Small values of the productivity coefficient could be potentially explained by the

modification of the model that allows productivity differential for nontraded goods to vary (as in

relation (17) based on assumption 3 instead of assumption 2). However,  (the elasticity of the

nontraded traded good productivity differential with respect to the traded good differential)

would have to be fairly large to account for the low estimates of the productivity coefficient. For

example, to explain the full-sample range for the productivity coefficient, we would need values,

of  between 0.64 and 0.77 for   0.5 , and between 0.70 and 0.81 for   0.6 . Such high

values of  seem implausible as they imply that international differences in nontraded goods

productivity growth tend to be substantial relative to the productivity growth differences for

traded goods.


       Estimates of the coefficients for the subsamples show considerable variation across

periods and are even harder to explain by the conventional Balassa-Samuelson model. Estimated

values are positive but small (below 0.25) in the gold standard period; are negative (between

-0.17 and -0.42) in the interwar period; have an ambiguous sign (range from -0.33 to 0.12) in the

Bretton-Woods period; and are positive, and on average, larger (within a wide range from 0.2 to

1.18) in the post Bretton-Woods period. The conventional model or its modification do not

suggest an explanation of why the productivity coefficient would be negative in some periods

and why it would differ so much from one period to another.




                                                                                                  33
5.2    Modern Versions


       We next examine whether the modern version of the Balassa-Samuelson model based on

specialization in production or monopolistic competition can explain the range of estimates of

the productivity effect. For both versions, the productivity effect is given by (29) and depends

not only on  , but also on  (the elasticity of substitution between home and foreign tradables)

and  (the home bias). Shifts in these parameters could potentially account for the cross-period

variation in the productivity coefficient. An important reason for such shifts is the behavior of

trade costs, which changed dramatically across the four sub-periods.23 Trade costs fell prior to

World War I mainly as a result of reduction in transport costs and improvements in information

technology. They rose sharply in the interwar period largely due to the escalation of tariff and

nontariff barriers caused by the Great Depression. Trade costs started to fall again after World

War II. The decrease in trade costs accelerated in the post Bretton Woods period because of

significant reductions in trade barriers resulting from regional and international trade agreements

and in transportation costs due to technological improvements.


       Since      * (the difference between the shares of home goods in the home and

foreign bundles of traded goods), changes in trade costs would shift  via their effect on  and

 * . An increase in trade costs would raise the prices of imports and exports, and for   1 , would



23
   Jacks, Meissner and Novy (2009) assign an important role to trade costs in explaining the twin
booms in international trade before World War I and after World War II as well as the
internation trade bust in the interwar period. They also discuss the behavior of trade costs from
1870 to 2000 based on their estimates derived from bilateral trade data using the gravity model
of international trade.
                                                                                                    34
increase  and decrease  * and hence increase  .24 Thus we would expect  to increase in the

interwar period, decrease in the Bretton Woods period, and decrease further in the period after

Bretton Woods. Higher trade costs, especially larger nontariff barriers, could also reduce the

range of foreign goods available in the home market as well as the range of home good available

abroad. Such changes could make imported and exported goods less substitutable with local

goods, and decrease  . Thus  could also have changed across the four regimes in a direction

opposite to that of  .


       It is interesting to explore whether realistic values of  ,  and  for the four regimes

could explain the magnitude and the signs of the productivity coefficient in each regime. There is

much interest in estimating  (often referred to as the “Armington elasticity”), which plays an

important role in a wide variety of macroeconomic and international trade models.

Macroeconomic models typically calibrate or estimate its value at the aggregate level to be

between 0.5 and 2.0.25 Studies using disaggregated international trade data suggest much larger

estimates of the elasticity, but these estimates are based on a specification (different from ours)

which assumes that the elasticity between a pair of varieties is the same regardless of where they

are produced.26 However, in an alternative specification that allows the Armington elasticity to

differ from the elasticity between foreign varieties, Feenstra et al. (2012) estimate the Armington

elasticity to be closer to unity and within the range assumed in the macroeconomic models. In


24
   Trade costs could also affect the share of nontraded good if there are departures from the
typical assumption that the elasticity of substitution between traded and nontraded goods equals
one (i.e., aggregate consumption index is a Cobb-Douglas function of traded and nontraded
bundles of goods)
25
   Estimation of macroeconomic models typically yields an estimate of the elasticity close to the
lower half of this range (e.g., see Bergin, 2004, Lubik and Schorfheide, 2005).
26
   See, for example, Imbs and Mejean (2011) for estimates of the elasticity, allowing it to be
either heterogeneous or homogeneous across sectors..
                                                                                                   35
the simple case of symmetric import shares in tradable bundles ( 1     * ), the home bias can be

expressed as   2  1 . Estimates of  and 1   can be derived from sectoral production and

trade data.27 For OECD countries, such data are available since 1970, and estimates based on this

data suggest values of  above 0.6 and of  below 0.80 (implying  below 0.6).28


The role of  and  in determining the productivity coefficient in the model with specialization

or monopolistic competition is illustrated in Figure 2. For   0.65 , the figure shows the relation

between the productivity coefficient and  for two values of  , a low value of 0.4 and a high

value of 0.8. We let  vary between 1.0 and 2.0. The productivity coefficient is an increasing

function of  , and a higher  shifts the function down (for   1 ). Interestingly, the ranges for

 and  shown in the figure are capable of accounting for not only large negative values of the

productivity coefficient estimated for the interwar period, but also large positive values generally

estimated for the post Bretton Woods period. For  between 0.4 and 0.8, values of  in the 1.2-

1.4 range could generate low positive values of the productivity coefficient consistent with the

gold standard period (as well as the whole period). As can be seen from the figure, however, an

increase in  alone would not be explain the sharp drop in the estimate of the productivity

coefficient for the interwar period. A small decrease in  would also be needed to account for

this result. A combination of an increase in  and a decrease in  could bring about the

estimated changes in the productivity coefficient between the Bretton Woods and the interwar


27
   The estimates of  are sensitive to how traded goods are classified. A narrow measure
identifies traded goods with Manufacturing, Agriculture and Mining sectors. A broader measure
would also include portions of Elecricity and Gas, Transportation and Communication, and
Financial Services sectors that have significant trade.
28
   See, for example, Choudhri and Marasco (2013), who estimate average values of 1   and
1   for a set of OECD countries to equal 0.36 and 0.22, respectively.
                                                                                                   36
periods. Further changes in this direction could produce the results for the post Bretton Woods

period.


          The modern versions also provide an explanation of the PPP puzzle. The long-run real

exchange rate depends on the productivity differential and possibly on a time trend.29 The

productivity and time trend coefficients, moreover, could vary across regimes. Thus the model is

consistent with the evidence that half-lives drop sharply as controls are introduced for

productivity and a time trend and cross-regime variation in coefficients is allowed for.


5.        Conclusions


          There has been a revival of interest recently in the Balassa-Samuelson hypothesis

regarding the effect of productivity on the real exchange rate. The empirical testing of this

hypothesis, however, has not produced clear-cut results. On the one hand, there is considerable

evidence that productivity is a determinant of the real exchange rate. The size and the sign of the

productivity effect, on the other hand, appears to be sensitive to the data sets and varies from one

study to another.


          In this paper, we use historical data for over hundred years and 14 countries to examine

the Balassa-Samuelson productivity effect. Our sample period can be divided into 4 distinct

monetary regimes and we find large variations in the productivity effect across regimes. The

conventional Balassa-Samuelson theory does not provide an explanation of the cross-regime

variation of the productivity effect or even the size of the effect for most regimes.




29
  As noted in Section 3.4, a time trend could capture the effects of departures from assumptions
2 or 3, or intra-regime trends in trade costs.
                                                                                                     37
       We consider two modern variants of the Balassa-Samuelson model (based on

specialization or monopolistic competition) to examine whether these variants are capable of

explaining our results. These variants include a new terms of trade channel which can offset the

traditional Balssa-Samuelson channel (operating via the the relative price of nontraded goods)

and significantly modify the productivity effect. The strength of the terms of trade effect depends

on the home bias in consumption of traded goods and the elasticity of substitution between home

and foreign bundles of these goods. We argue that variations in trade costs caused shifts in these

parameters across regimes. We undertake simulations of the modern variants of the Balassa-

Samuelson model to show that plausible parameter shifts consistent with the cross-regime

behavior of trade costs can explain the size of the productivity effect in each regime as well as

the variation in this effect across regimes. The Balassa-Samuelson theory modified to account for

the terms of trade effect thus has the potential to explain the observed variation in the

productivity effect over a long period.




                                                                                                    38
                                                      Appendix A
                 Determination of the Terms of Trade and the Number of Firms


Specialization in production

Let a hat over a variable denote the log deviation of the variable from its initial steady state value

(denoted by a bar over the variable). In the model with specialization in production, the number

of firms is fixed. We derive the relation determining the terms of trade as follows. From (1), we

have CˆT  Cˆ  pˆ T . Then noting that pˆ T   ( pˆ N  pˆ T ) from (6); pˆ T  pˆ H  (1   ) zˆ from (20)

under the normalization that pH  pF  1 ; and pˆ N  pˆ H  Aˆ H  Aˆ N from (8) and (21); we obtain


                                    CˆT  Cˆ   ( Aˆ H  Aˆ N )   (1   ) zˆ .                  (A1)

Since (19) implies that Cˆ F  CˆT   ( pˆ F  pˆ T ) and (20) implies that pˆ T  pˆ F   zˆ , we can use

these expressions and (A1) to express


                                Cˆ F  Cˆ   ( Aˆ H  Aˆ N )  ( (1   )   ) zˆ .             (A2)

The foreign counterpart of this relation is

                             Cˆ H*  Cˆ *   ( Aˆ F *  Aˆ N * )  [ * *  (1   * )]zˆ .      (A3)



Since wˆ  Aˆ N  pˆ N from (8), we can use (6), (20) and (21) to obtain

                                  wˆ   Aˆ N  (1   ) Aˆ H  (1   )(1   ) zˆ .               (A4)

The corresponding relation for the foreign economy is

                                 wˆ *   * Aˆ N *  (1   * ) Aˆ F *  (1   * ) * zˆ .         (A5)

Use (23) with b  0 in the initial steady state to express

                                                    zˆ  Cˆ F  Cˆ H* .                             (A6)

                                                                                                                  39
Since C  wL , C *  w* L* and Lˆ  Lˆ*  0 , Cˆ  wˆ and Cˆ *  wˆ * , use (A4) and (A5) to substitute

for Ĉ and Ĉ * in (A2) and (A3), then use the resulting expressions to substitute for Cˆ F and Cˆ H*

in (A6) and let  *   under Assumption 1 to obtain


                               zˆ  Aˆ H  Aˆ F *  [1     (   * )  (   * )]zˆ .                    (A7)

Relation (26) can be readily derived from (A7).


    Monopolistic Competition

In the model with monopolistic competition, the number of firms is determined endogenously

and we also derive the relation determining the number of firms. As (33) implies that

pˆ N  pˆ N (i )  nˆN / (  1) and pˆ H  pˆ H ( j )  nˆH / (  1) , and (31) implies that

Aˆ N  pˆ N (i )  Aˆ H  pˆ H ( j ) , we use these relations to obtain


                                  pˆ N  pˆ H  Aˆ H  Aˆ N  (nˆ H  nˆ N ) / (  1) .                       (A8)

Since (1), (6) and (20) imply that Cˆ N  Cˆ  (1   )( pˆ N  pˆ H  (1   ) zˆ ) and

CˆT  Cˆ   ( pˆ N  pˆ H  (1   ) zˆ ) , we can use (A8) to substitute for pˆ N  pˆ H in these expressions to

express




               Cˆ N  Cˆ  (1   )( Aˆ H  Aˆ N )  (1   )(1   ) zˆ (1   )(nˆH  nˆ N ) / (  1) ,    (A9)

                        CˆT  Cˆ   ( Aˆ H  Aˆ N )   (1   ) zˆ  (nˆH  nˆ N ) / (  1) .             (A10)




                                                                                                                      40
Next, using (19) and (20) to express Cˆ F  CˆT   zˆ and Cˆ H  CˆT   (1   ) zˆ , and using (A10) to

substitute for CˆT in these expression, we get


                   Cˆ H  Cˆ   ( Aˆ H  Aˆ N )  [ (1   )  (1   )]zˆ   (nˆH  nˆ N ) / (  1) ,   (A11)

                     Cˆ F  Cˆ   ( Aˆ H  Aˆ N )  ( (1   )   ) zˆ   (nˆH  nˆ N ) / (  1) .      (A12)

From (31) and (33), we have wˆ  Aˆ N  pˆ N  nˆ N / (  1) . Then using (6) and (20) to express

pˆ N  (1   )( pˆ N  pˆ H  (1   ) zˆ) and using (A8), we obtain


                    wˆ  (1   )(1   ) zˆ   Aˆ N  (1   ) Aˆ H  [(1   )nˆH   nˆN ] / (  1) .    (A13)

Using (19), (11), (23) with b  0 , and noting that   C H / (C H  C F ), and 1    C F / (C H  C F )

                                           
under our normalization, we derive Cˆ N       nˆ N  YˆN (i ) , and
                                           1

                                                                            
 Cˆ H  (1   )Cˆ H*         nˆ H   Cˆ H ( j )  (1   )Cˆ H* ( j )      nˆ  Yˆ ( j ) . Since (30) and (32)
                            1                                              1 H H

imply that YN (i)  (  1)N and YH ( j )  (  1)H , YˆN (i )  YˆH ( j )  0 in the above expressions,

we have [note that  Cˆ H  (1   )Cˆ H*   Cˆ H  (1   )(Cˆ F  zˆ) ]


                                                               1 ˆ
                                                     nˆ N        CN ,                                        (A14)
                                                               

                                                 1 ˆ
                                        nˆH        ( CH  (1   )(Cˆ F  zˆ )) .                           (A15)
                                                 

Now use (A9), (A11) and (A12) to substitute for Cˆ N , Cˆ H and Cˆ F in (A14) and (A15), and utilize

the resulting expressions to derive


                                                  nˆH  nˆN  Aˆ H  Aˆ N ,                                   (A16)


                                                                                                                      41
                      [(1   )nˆH   nˆ N )] / (  1)  [Cˆ  (1   )(1   ) zˆ] /  ,   (A17)

which, given Cˆ  yˆ , yield (38).

Using (A13) and (A17) and letting Cˆ  wˆ , we obtain

                                 
                           Cˆ      [ Aˆ  (1   ) Aˆ H ]  (1   )(1   ) zˆ .           (A18)
                                 1 N

Next, using (A16) and (A18) to substitute for nˆH  nˆN and Ĉ in (A12), we restate

                                            ˆ
                                   Cˆ F      A  [(1   )   ]zˆ .                        (A19)
                                           1 H

The corresponding foreign relation can be similarly derived as

                                           ˆ *
                                 Cˆ H*       AF  [ *   (1   * )]zˆ .                   (A20)
                                          1

Finally, using (A6), (A19) and (A20), we obtain the solution for ẑ given by (37).




                                                                                                      42
                                                              Appendix B

                             Table B1 –Univariate and Panel DOLS (1880-1997)


                                                No Trend                                                       Trend
Country                   y-y*         t-stat               b-b*            t-stat       y-y*        t-stat                b-b*       t-stat

Argentina                  1.50         5.48                -0.06           -1.21        -1.44       -3.14                 0.05        1.31
Australia                  0.46         2.31                -0.05           -2.64         0.29        1.39                 -0.03      -1.16
Canada                    -0.13        -1.85                -0.02           -6.05        -0.12       -0.94                 -0.02      -6.01
Denmark                    0.49         1.25                0.01            1.39          0.58        2.17                 -0.04      -2.43
Finland                    0.33         4.82                -0.02           -3.60         0.09        1.62                 -0.02      -4.13
France                     0.16         1.58                -0.01           -2.43         0.20        1.53                 -0.01      -1.37
Germany                    0.68         3.32                -0.01           -1.10         0.64        3.35                 -0.00      -0.04
Italy                     -0.10        -0.95                0.02            5.48         -0.13       -1.40                 0.02        6.00
Japan                     -0.36        -2.16                0.11            2.30         -0.44       -1.99                 0.12        2.67
Netherlands                0.25         2.19                0.01            4.19          0.33        2.69                 -0.00       0.39
Norway                     0.25         0.82                -0.00           0.38          0.20        0.60                 -0.00       0.50
Spain                      0.29         2.08                -0.04           -2.37         0.42        2.75                 -0.01      -0.51
Sweden                     0.10         0.34                0.03            2.13         -0.68       -2.86                 0.02        2.44
UK                         0.16         0.85                -0.00           -0.37         0.47        2.05                 -0.03      -3.37

                          y-y*              τ               b-b*              τ          y-y*          τ                   b-b*            τ

GM                        0.30            9.88              0.004           5.02         0.29        6.65                  0.004      4.06

                          y-y*         t-stat               b-b*            t-stat       y-y*        t-stat                b-b*       t-stat
Panel DOLS
                          0.14            2.43              0.02           10.70         0.17        2.03                  0.01       4.89

                                                                                                               p
Notes:        DOLS     equations    are         specified     as: qit    0  i  t  1  y  y *it        y  y *
                                                                                                             k  p
                                                                                                                      ik           it k
                                                                                                                                             it ,

              N                       N
GM  N 1  ˆ1i and   N 1/2  tˆ1i . To account for cross-sectional dependence, time dummies are included in the
              i 1                   i 1
PDOLS regressions and series are cross-sectionally demeaned before applying the GM estimator. GM significance is based on
heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation consistent standard errors for the underlying univariate regressions. Panel DOLS
significance is based on Driscoll and Kraay standard errors, which are heteroskedasticity consistent and robust to general forms
of cross-sectional (spatial) and temporal dependence (see Hoeckle, 2007).




                                                                                                                                               43
                                     Table B2 – Panel Estimates (sub-periods)
Estimator                       Variable       1880-1997        1880-1913       1914-1945       1946-1971            1972-1997
                                 y-y*             0.30             0.12            -0.28          -0.035                0.68
GM
                                 b-b*            0.004            -0.008          -0.021          -0.016               0.002
                                 y-y*             0.29             0.04            -0.24           -0.06                0.33
GM (Trend)
                                 b-b*            0.004            -0.007           -0.01          0.008                -0.01
                                  y-y*             0.14            0.12                -0.47         0.13              1.20
PDOLS
                                  b-b*             0.02           -0.002               -0.01        0.003             -0.004
                                  y-y*             0.14            0.12                -0.44        0.03               0.570
PDOLS ( trend)
                                  b-b*             0.01           -0.01                -0.02      -0.0007              -0.01
                                                                                p
Notes: DOLS equations are specified as: q   0      1  y  y * 
                                         it        i   t               it         y  y *
                                                                              k  p
                                                                                        ik       it  k
                                                                                                            it ,
              N
GM  N 1  ˆ1i .
             i 1
To account for cross-sectional dependence, time dummies are included in the PDOLS regressions and series are cross-
sectionally demeaned before applying the GM estimator. Italics denote rejection at 10%, Bold denote rejection at 5%, Italics
and Bold denote rejection at 1%. GM significance is based on heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation consistent standard
errors for the underlying univariate regressions. Panel DOLS significance is based on Driscoll and Kraay standard errors,
which are heteroskedasticity consistent and robust to general forms of cross-sectional (spatial) and temporal dependence (see
Hoeckle, 2007).




                                                                                                                                 43
                                         Data Appendix
Updated version of “Is the Crisis Problem Growing More Severe?” Michael Bordo, Barry
 Eichengreen, Daniela Klingebiel and Maria Soledad Martinez-Peria in Economic Policy
                            April 2001, volume 16, issue 32.

Data for 15 Countries – Argentina, Australia, Canada, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany,

Italy, Japan, Netherlands, Norway, Spain, Sweden, UK and USA.

For a full list of the data references, see Michael Bordo’s web page.

Real GDP: Argentina (GDP) – 1884-1913, Gerardo della Paollera: (1988), 1914-1988,

International Historical Statistics: The Americas, 1750-1988, 1993 (B. R. Mitchell New York:

Stockton Press), 1989-1997 International Financial Statistics (IFS) 1998; Australia (GDP) -

1880-1988 International Historical Statistics: Asia, 1750-1988, 1998 (B. R. Mitchell New York:

Stockton Press), 1989-1997 IFS 1998; Canada (GNP) - 1880-1988, B. R. Mitchell (1993), 1989-

1997 IFS 1998; Denmark (GDP)– 1880-1950 GDP, Mitchell (1992), 1951-95 GDP, IFS, series

99B.P; Finland (GDP)– 1880-1980 GDP, Statistical Appendix in R. Hjerppe (1989), The Finnish

Economy 1860-1985, Growth and Structural Change, Bank of Finland, Helsinki, Government

Printing Centre, table 1. 1981-95: GDP, IFS, series 99B.P; France (GNP) - 1880-1988, B. R.

Mitchell (1992), 1914-1920 and 1939-1947 Global Financial Data, 1989-1997 IFS 1998;

Germany (GNP) - 1880-1988, B. R. Mitchell (1992), 1915-1923 and 1940-1945 Global Financial

Data, 1989-1997 IFS 1998; Italy (GNP)- 1880-1988, B. R. Mitchell (1992), 1989-1997 IFS 1998;

Japan (GNP) - 1880-1975, B. R. Mitchell, International Historical Statistics: Asia (New York:

Stockton Press).; 1976-1990, IFS Yearbooks, 1987 and 1992, 1991-1997 IFS 1998; Netherlands

(GNP)– 1900-1988, B. R. Mitchell (1992), 1989-1997 IFS 1998; Norway (GDP) – 1880-1949

GDP, Mitchell (1992), except 1940-46, Data supplied by J. T. Klovland (Norwegian Business

School, Bergen), 1950-95 GDP, IFS, series 99B.P; Spain - 1901-1953 Historical Statistics of

Spain: Siglos XIX-XX, 1989 (Fundacion Banco Exterior), 1954-1988 - B. R. Mitchell (1992),
                                                                                                44
1989-1997 IFS 1998; Sweden (GNP) - B. R. Mitchell (1992), 1989-1997 IFS 1998; U.K. (GNP)

– 1880-1988 - B. R. Mitchell (1992), 1989-1997 IFS 1998; U.S.A (GNP) - B. R. Mitchell (1993),

1989-1997 IFS 1998.


CPI (1989 =100) - Argentina –1880-1912: Global Financial Database, 1913-1984: Domingo F.

Cavallo and Yair Mundlak.; 1985-1990, IFS Yearbook 1992, 1991-1997 IFS 1998; Australia –

1880-1988 B.R. Mitchell (1998), 1980-1997 IFS 1998; Canada - 1880-1988, B. R. Mitchell

(1993), 1989-1997 IFS 1998; Denmark –1880-1988, B. R. Mitchell (1992), 1989-1997 IFS 1998;

Finland –1880-1988, B. R. Mitchell (1992), 1989-1997 IFS 1998; France - 1880-1988, B. R.

Mitchell (1992), 1989-1997 IFS 1998; Germany -1880-1988, B. R. Mitchell (1992), 1989-1997

IFS 1998; Italy - 1880-1988, B. R. Mitchell (1992), 1989-1997 IFS 1998; Japan - 1880-1975, B.

R. Mitchell, 1976-1997, IFS Yearbooks; Netherlands – 1900-1988, B. R. Mitchell (1992), 1991-

1997 IFS 1998; Norway –1880-1988, B. R. Mitchell (1992), 1989-1997 IFS 1998; Spain - 1880-

1953 Historical Statistics of Spain, Siglos XIX-XX, 1989 (Fundacion Banco Exterior), 1959-1988

- B. R. Mitchell (1992), 1989-1997 IFS 1998; Sweden – 1880-1988 B. R. Mitchell (1992), 1989-

1997 IFS 1998; U.K. – 1880-1988 B. R. Mitchell (1992), 1989-1997 IFS 1998; U.S.A – 1880-

1988 B. R. Mitchell (1993), 1989-1997 IFS 1998.


Exports, Imports and Trade Balance - Argentina – 1880-1988 B. R. Mitchell (1993), 1989-

1997 IFS 1998; Australia – 1880-1988 B. R. Mitchell (1992), 1989-1997 IFS 1998; Canada –

1880-1988 B. R. Mitchell (1993), 1989-1997 IFS 1998; Denmark – 1880-1988 B. R. Mitchell

(1992), 1989-1997 IFS 1998; Finland – 1880-1988 B. R. Mitchell (1992), 1989-1997 IFS 1998;

France – 1880-1988 B. R. Mitchell (1992), 1989-1997 IFS 1998; Germany – 1880-1988 B. R.

Mitchell (1992), 1989-1997 IFS 1998; Italy – 1880-1988 B. R. Mitchell (1992), 1989-1997 IFS

1998; Japan – 1880-1988 B. R. Mitchell(1992), 1989-1997 IFS 1998; Netherlands – 1880-1988

                                                                                           45
B. R. Mitchell (1992), 1989-1997 IFS 1998; Norway – 1880-1988 B. R. Mitchell (1992), 1989-

1997 IFS 1998; Spain - 1880-1988 B. R. Mitchell (1992), 1989-1997 IFS 1998; Sweden – 1880-

1988 B. R. Mitchell (1992), 1989-1997 IFS 1998; U.K. – 1880-1988 B. R. Mitchell (1992), 1989-

1997 IFS 1998; U.S.A – 1880-1988 B. R. Mitchell (1993), 1989-1997 IFS 1998. Interpolation

techniques were used to complete the series in the following cases: Argentina during 1880-1883,

Australia 1982-1983, Germany 1914-1921 and 1944-1948, Japan 1880-1885 and 1944-1945, and

Spain 1936-1939.


Exchange Rates – Argentina – 1884-1912, Gerardo della Paollera (1988).; 1913-1984, Domingo

F. Cavallo and Yair Mundlak.; 1985-1990: World Currency Yearbook.; Australia - data supplied

by David Pope (Australian National University), 1939-1946 Global Financial Data; Canada-

1880-1914, Gold Standard, rate $1cdn =$1 us, 1919-1960 Federal Reserve Board (1943 and

1976), 1940-1945 Global Financial Data, Banking and Monetary Statistics 1 and 2, 1961-1989

Economic Report of the President 1991, 1989- 1997 IFS 1998; Denmark; Finland; France;

Germany; Italy; Japan; Netherlands - 1880-1914: data supplied by Marc Flandreau, Sciences-Po,

Paris; 1915-1940: International Monetary Fund; 1940-1959 (France), Germany (1915-1923),

1936-1946 (Spain), 1939-1945 (UK): Global Financial Data; 1948-1990: IFS 1973, 1987 and

1992; Norway ; Spain; Sweden - 1880-1914: data supplied by Marc Flandreau, Sciences-Po,

Paris; 1915-1947: International Monetary Fund; 1948-1997: IFS, 1973, 1987 and 1998; U.K..

Interpolation techniques were used to complete the series for Argentina during 1880-1883 and

1939-1946.




                                                                                            46
                                         References

Balassa, Bela, 1964, “The Purchasing Power Parity Doctrine: A Reappraisal,” Journal of
       Political Economy, 72, 584–96.

Benigno, Gianluca, and Christoph Thoenissen, 2003, “Equilibrium Exchange Rates and
      Supply-Side Performance,” Economic Journal, 113, 103-24.

Bergin, Paul R., 2004, “How Well Can the New Open Economy Macroeconomics
       Explain the Exchange Rate and Current Account?” Mimeo, University of California at
       Davis.

Bergin, Paul, Reuven Glick, and Alan M. Taylor, 2006, “Productivity, Tradability, and
       the Long-Run Price Puzzle,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 53, 2041-2066.

Bordo, Michael, 1993, “ The Bretton Woods International Monetary System: an Historical
       Overview” in Michael Bordo and Barry Eichengreen ( eds) A Retrospective on the
       Bretton Woods International Monetary System: Lessons for International Monetary
       Reform, Chicago University of Chicago Press for the NBER. 3-98.

Bordo ,Michael, Barry Eichengreen and Jong Woo Kim, 1998, “ Was There Really an Earlier
       Period of International Financial Integration Comparable to Today?” Bank of Korea, The
       Implications of Globalization of World Financial Markets. Seoul.

Canzoneri, Matthew B., Robert E. Cumby, and Behzad Diba, 1999, “Relative Labor Productivity
      and the Real Exchange Rate in the Long Run: Evidence for a Panel of OECD Countries,”
      Journal of International Economics, 47, 245–66.

Chinn, Menzie and Louis Johnston, 1996, “Real Exchange Rate Levels, Productivity and
       Demand Shocks: Evidence from a Panel of 14 Countries,” NBER Working Paper No.
       5709.

Chong, Yanping, Oscar Jorde and Alan M. Taylor, 2012, “The Harrod–Balassa–Samuelson
      Hypothesis: Real Exchange Rates and Their Long‐Run Equilibrium,” International
      Economic Review, 53(2), 609-634.

Choudhri, Ehsan U. and Mohsin S. Khan, 2005, “Real Exchange Rates in Developing
      Countries: Are Balassa-Samuelson Effects Present?” IMF Staff Papers, 52, 387-409.

Choudhri, Ehsan U. and Lawrence L. Schembri, 2010, “Productivity, the Terms of Trade and the
      Real Exchange Rate: The Balassa-Samuelson Hypothesis Revisited,” Review of
      International Economics. 18, 924-936.


                                                                                            47
Choudhri, Ehsan U. and Antonio Marasco, 2013, "Heterogeneous Productivity and the Gains
      from Trade and FDI," Open Economies Review, 24( 2), 339-360.

Choi Chi-Young, Nelson C. Mark and Donggyu Sul (2006), “Unbiased Estimation of the Half-
      Life to PPP Convergence in Panel Data,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 38
      (June), 921-938.

Corsetti, Giancarlo, Luca Dedola and Sylvain Leduc, 2008, “International Risk Sharing
       and the Transmission of Productivity Shocks,” Review of Economic Studies, 75, 443-473.

Driscoll, John C. and Aart C. Kraay, 1998, Consistent Covariance Matrix Estimation with
       Spatially Dependent Panel Data, Review of Economics and Statistics, 80, 549-560.

Eichengreen, Barry, 1992, Golden Fetters: The Gold Standard and the Great Depression 1919-
      1939, New York ,Oxford University Press

Engel, Charles, 1999, “Accounting for US Real Exchange Rate Changes,” Journal of Political
       Economy, 107, 507-38.

Feenstra, Robert C. , Maurice Obstfeld and Katheryn N. Russ, 2012, “In Search of the
       Armington Elasticity,” mimeo.

Froot, Kenneth A. and Kenneth Rogoff , 1995, “Perspectives on PPP and Long-Run Real
       Exchange Rates,” in Grossman, Gene M. and Kenneth Rogoff (eds.), Handbook of
       International Economics, Vol. 3 (Amsterdam: Elsevier), 1647-1688.

Ghironi, Fabio and Marc J. Melitz, 2005. “International Trade and Macroeconomic Dynamics
       with Heterogeneous Firms,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120, 865–915.

Gubler, Matthias and Sax, Christoph, 2013, “Skill-Biased TechnologicalChange and the Real
       Exchange Rate,” Mimeo, University of Basel.

Harrod, Roy, 1933, International Economics (London: Nisbet and Cambridge University Press).

Hoeckle, Daniel, 2007, “Robust Standard Errors for Panel Regressions with Cross-sectional
      Dependence”, The Stata Journal, 7, pp.281-312 .

Im, K. S., M. H. Pesaran, and Y. Shin. 2003. Testing for unit roots in heterogeneous panels.
       Journal of Econometrics 115: 53-74.

Imbs, Jean and Isabelle Mejean, 2011, “Elasticity Optimism,” mimeo.

Imbs, Jean, Haroon Mumtaz, Martin o. Ravn and Helene Rey, 2005, “PPP Strikes Back:
       Aggregation and the Real Exchange Rate,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120
       (February), 1-43.


                                                                                               48
Jacks, David S., Christopher M. Meissner and Dennis Novy, 2009, “Trade Booms, Trade Busts,
       and Trade Costs,” NBER Working Paper No. 15267.

Krugman, Paul, 1980, “Scale Economies, Product Differentiation and the Pattern of Trade,”
     American Economic Review, 70, 950-9.

Lee, Jaewoo, and Man-Keung Tang, 2007, “Does Productivity Growth Appreciate the Real
       Exchange Rate,” Review of International Economics, 15, 164-187.

Levin, A., C.-F. Lin, and C.-S. J. Chu. 2002. Unit root tests in panel data: Asymptotic and finite-
       sample properties. Journal of Econometrics 108: 1-24.

Lothian, James R. and Mark P. Taylor, 2008, “Real Exchange Rates Over the Past Two
       Centuries: How Important Are the Harrod-Balassa-Samuelson Effects?” Economic
       Journal, 118 (October), 1742-1763.

Lubik, Thomas, and Frank Schorfheide, 2005, “A Bayesian Look at New Open Economy
       Macroeconomics,” Mimeo. Johns Hopkins University and University of Pennsylvania.

Melitz, Marc J., 2003, “The Impact of Trade on Aggregate Industry Productivity and Intra-
        Industry Reallocations,” Econometrica, 71(6), 1695-1725.

MacDonald, Ronald, (1995),"Long-run Exchange Rate Modeling: A Survey of the Recent
     Literature", International Monetary Fund, Staff Papers, Vol 42, No. 3, 437-489.

Macdonald, Ronald and Luca Antonio Ricci, 2005, “The Real Exchange Rate and the Balassa-
     Samuelson Effect: The Role of the Distribution Sector,” Pacific Economic Review, 10,
     29-48.

MacDonald, Ronald and Luca Ricci (2006), "Real Exchange Rates, Imperfect Substitutability,
     and Imperfect Competition", Journal of Macroeconomics, 29 639-982.


Obstfeld, Maurice and Alan Taylor “ The Great Depression as a Watershed: International Capital
       Mobility Over the Long-Run” in Michael Bordo, Claudia Goldin and Eugene White (eds)
       The Defining Moment: The Great Depression and the American Economy in the
       Twentieth Century, Chicago, University of Chicago Press for the NBER, 353-402.


Pesaran, Hashem (2003), A Simple Panel Unit Root Test in the Presence of Cross Section
       Dependence, Cambridge Working Papers in Economics 0346, Faculty of Economics
       (DAE), University of Cambridge

Pesaran, Hashem and Ronald Patrick Smith (1995), Estimating long-run relationships from
       dynamic heterogeneous panels. Journal of Econometrics, 68, 79-113.


                                                                                                49
Pesaran, Hashem, Yeungcheol Shin and Ronald Patrick Smith (2004). Pooled mean group
       estimation of dynamic heterogeneous panels. ESE Discussion Papers No. 16

Ricci, Luca Antonio, Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti, and Jaewoo Lee, 2008, “Real Exchange
        Rates and Fundamentals: A Cross-Country Perspective,” IMF Working Paper No.
        WP/08/13.

Rogoff, Kenneth, 1996, “The Purchasing Power Parity Puzzle,” Journal of Economic
       Literature, 34, 647-668.

Samuelson, Paul A., 1964, “Theoretical Notes on Trade Problems,” Review of Economics and
      Statistics, 46, 145–54.

Sheng, Yu and Xu, Xinpeng, 2011, “Real exchange Rate, Productivity and Labour Market
       Frictions,” Journal of International Money and Finance, 30, 587-603.

Taylor, Mark P., David A. Peel and Lucio Sarno, 2001, “Non-Linear Mean Reversion in Real
       Exchange Rates: Towards a Solution to the Purchasing Power Parity Puzzles,”
       International Economic Review, 42 (November), 1015-1042.

Taylor, Alan M. and Mark P. Taylor, 2004, “The Purchasing Power Parity Debate,” Journal of
       Economic Perspectives, 18 (Fall), 135-158.




                                                                                             50
Figure 1. Real Exchange Rates relative to the US, Real per Capita GDP relative to the US, Trade
                 Balance to GDP relative to the US, 1880-1997, 14 Countries




                                                                                            51
52
53
54
55
56
57
           Figure 2. Model Predictions of the Productivity Coefficient


1.5


  1

                     Beta = 0.4
0.5                                                  Beta = 0.8

  0
       1             1.2          1.4          1.6           1.8         2
‐0.5


 ‐1
                                        Eta
‐1.5




                                                                             58
                        Table 1. Univariate and Panel Unit Root Tests (1880-1997)

                                                             Univariate Unit Root Tests
                                                       q                y-y*             b-b*
                                                         Trend              Trend            Trend
                                                   μ       τ        μ          τ     μ         τ
Argentina                                        -0.20   -1.09    -0.95      -2.77 -0.06     -1.49
Australia                                        -2.93   -3.57    -0.57      -1.01 -3.71     -3.83
Canada                                           -0.60   -1.07    0.17       -2.28 -1.54     -2.32
Denmark                                          -1.59   -2.28    -2.97      -3.02 -1.50     -3.11
Finland                                          -2.64   -4.57    -0.48      -1.76 -1.66     -2.22
France                                           -4.16   -4.18    -2.35      -2.80 -2.22     -3.55
Germany                                          -3.48   -3.55    -1.60      -1.76 -1.29     -1.50
Italy                                            -3.49   -3.52    -1.40      -1.64 -1.81     -1.94
Japan                                            -1.54   -1.57    -0.38      -1.72 -0.97     -1.48
Netherlands                                      -2.31   -2.79    -2.07      -2.17 -0.32     -1.86
Norway                                           -2.22   -3.67    -1.31      -2.58 -1.11     -1.71
Spain                                            -1.66   -1.74    -0.83      -1.08 -2.28     -2.70
Sweden                                           -2.22   -4.05    -0.93      -3.64 -0.20     -2.24
UK                                               -1.69   -1.88    -0.80      -1.66 -0.69     -3.89
                                                               Panel Unit Root Tests
                                                       q                y-y*             b-b*
                                                         Trend              Trend            Trend
Levin Lin Chu            Adj-t*                  -3.36   -7.63    -1.35      -2.37 -6.42    -11.01
Im Pesaran Shin          W-t-bar                 -6.05   -8.37    -1.55      -3.48 -8.63    -11.78
Pesaran                  Z[t-bar]                -2.06   -3.82    -1.36      -4.08 -6.58     -5.81
Notes: Univariate Unit Root Tests are based on Elliot, Rotenberg and Stock (1996) with optimal lag order (not reported) is
calculated using the Modified AIC criterion proposed by Ng and Perron (2000). Levin, Lin, Chu and Im, Pesaran and Shin tests
are based on demeaned data to account for cross-sectional dependence. Pesaran’s test is robust to cross-sectional dependence.
Italics denote rejection at 10%, Bold denote rejection at 5%, Italics and Bold denote rejection at 1%.




                                                                                                                            59
                            Table 2. Panel Unit Root Tests (sub-periods)

                                                                          1880-1913
                                                       q                      y-y*                         b-b*
                                                           trend                                                  trend
Levin Lin Chu         Adj- t*                -1.56         -1.37         -0.26      -0.97          -4.07          -3.37
Im Pesaran Shin       W-t-bar                -2.17         -1.63         -0.18      -1.89          -4.19          -3.99
Pesaran               Z[t-bar]               -2.84         -1.24          0.49      -1.36          -0.69           0.76
                                                                          1913-1945
                                                       q                       y-y*                        b-b*
                                                           trend                                                  trend
Levin Lin Chu         Adj- t*                   0.34           1.15        3.60     3.05           -3.29          -3.20
Im Pesaran Shin       W-t-bar                  -2.17          -2.13        2.67     1.38           -4.59          -4.59
Pesaran               Z[t-bar]                  0.08          -0.85        2.95     2.30           -2.72           0.10
                                                                          1946-1971
                                                       q                      y-y*                         b-b*
                                                           trend                                                  trend
Levin Lin Chu         Adj- t*                  -5.49           0.75        -9.44 -14.14             -6.91           -4.64
Im Pesaran Shin       W-t-bar                  -8.51          -5.82        -8.13 -10.13             -8.06           -7.85
Pesaran               Z[t-bar]                 -6.97          -3.54        -4.89    -3.78           -3.18           -3.49
                                                                          1972-1997
                                                       q                       y-y*                        b-b*
                                                           trend                                                  trend
Levin Lin Chu         Adj- t*                  -2.35         0.010          -2.1        4.47         1.02            1.52
Im Pesaran Shin       W-t-bar                  -3.02          -3.09       -1.70        -1.89        -2.07           -4.25
Pesaran               Z[t-bar]                 -1.65         -1.912      -1.860       -0.173        -1.82           -0.79
   Notes: Italics denote rejection at 10%, Bold denote rejection at 5%, Italics and Bold denote rejection at 1%. Levin, Lin,
   Chu and Im, Pesaran and Shin tests are based on demeaned data to account for cross-sectional dependence. Pesaran’s
   test is robust to cross-sectional dependence



                               Table 3. Real Exchange Rate Half Lives

Test                  1880-1997 1880-1913 1914-1945 1946-1971 1972-1997
Uncorrected              6.9       3.1       3.8       1.7       2.8
Nickell                  6.6       3.1       4.7       1.1       5.6
Time                     3.6       1.5       1.9       0.5       1.9
Nickell and Time Bias
corrected
        H0.025           3.4       1.4       1.9       0.5       1.9
          H0.5           4.1       1.8       2.6       0.6       2.9
        H0.975           5.3       2.3       4.2       0.8       5.7
   Notes: Following Choi, Mark and Sul (2006), H0.025, H0.5, and H0.975 are the 2.5, 50, and 97.5 percentiles
   of the half-life distribution

                                                                                                                            60
                Table 4. Individual and Panel DOLS (1880-1997)

                                                                                            trend
Country                                       y-y*               t-stat             y-y*            t-stat

Argentina                                    1.67                4.70               -1.00           -1.87
Australia                                    0.27                1.11                0.08            0.35
Canada                                      -0.27                -3.33               0.06            0.31
Denmark                                      0.63                1.25                0.53            1.57
Finland                                      0.12                1.22               -0.19           -1.58
France                                       0.10                1.03                0.18            1.31
Germany                                      0.66                2.58                0.73            2.73
Italy                                        0.03                0.19               -0.06           -0.54
Japan                                       -0.11                -0.80               0.05            0.20
Netherlands                                  0.23                1.25                0.34            2.57
Norway                                       0.32                1.28                0.32            1.01
Spain                                        0.19                1.14                0.39            2.39
Sweden                                       0.44                2.80               -0.30           -1.48
UK                                           0.22                1.70                0.34            1.29
                                             y-y*                  τ                 y-y*             τ
GM                                           0.19                 5.87               0.22            3.86
                                             y-y*                t-stat              y-y*           t-stat
Panel DOLS                                   0.13                 2.30               0.17            1.98
Notes: The DOLS equations are specified as:
                                              p
 qit  0  i   t  1  y  y *it         y  y *
                                            k  p
                                                     ik                it k
                                                                                 it .   The Group Mean

                              N                           N
estimates are   GM  N 1  ˆ1i and   N 1/2  tˆ1i . To account for cross-sectional
                             i 1                         i 1
dependence, time dummies are included in the PDOLS regressions and series are cross-sectionally
demeaned before applying the GM estimator. Univariate DOLS and GM significance is based on
heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation consistent standard errors. Panel DOLS significance is based
on the Driscoll and Kray (1998) standard errors, which are heteroskedasticity consistent and robust
to general forms of cross-sectional (spatial) and temporal dependence (see Hoeckle, 2007).
.




                                                                                                             61
                                                                     Table 5. Panel DOLS (Sub-samples)

                               1880-1913                                 1914-1945                                         1946-1971                           1972-1997
Estimator                                    trend                                     trend                                            trend                              trend
                   y-y*        τ          y-y*        τ      y-y*        τ      y-y*              τ      y-y*              τ       y-y*          τ    y-y*     τ      y-y*         τ
GM                 0.15      8.27         0.25      7.90     -0.19     -6.94    -0.17           -4.83    -0.07           -0.14    -0.33      -4.96    0.81   10.81    0.20     4.96
                   y-y*      t-stat       y-y*      t-stat   y-y*      t-stat   y-y*            t-stat   y-y*            t-stat    y-y*      t-stat   y-y*   t-stat   y-y*     t-stat
Panel DOLS
                   0.13      2.72         0.17      2.12     -0.42     -4.33    -0.31           -2.92    0.12            1.23      0.02      0.07     1.18   7.26     0.58     2.88
                                                                                         p
Notes: DOLS equations are specified as: qit       0  i   t  1  y  y *it        y  y *
                                                                                       k  p
                                                                                                 ik              it k
                                                                                                                           it . GM are group
                                      N                       N
mean estimates, where   GM  N 1  ˆ1i and   N 1/2  tˆ1i . To account for cross-sectional dependence, time dummies are included in the PDOLS regressions and series
                                      i 1                    i 1
are cross-sectionally demeaned in the GM estimator. GM significance is based on heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation consistent standard errors for the underlying univariate
regressions. Panel DOLS significance is based on the Driscoll and Kraay (1998) standard errors, which are heteroskedasticity consistent and robust to general forms of cross-
sectional (spatial) and temporal dependence (see Hoeckle, 2007).




                                                                                                                                                                                   62
                                          Table 6. Panel residuals half-lives.
                         1880-1997             1880-1913             1914-1945              1946-1971            1972-1997
                      no fd       fd         no fd     fd          no fd      fd         no fd       fd       no fd      fd
          y-y*        0.10       0.13        0.06     0.13         -0.37    -0.42         -.18      0.12      1.07      1.18

          LLC         -4.1        -2.47      -1.96      -3.52      -0.79      -1.86      2.59       -6.83     -2.66         -3.10
          Adj t*
  No
 trend    HL0.025      3.5        4.1          1.8      0.9         1.2      1.2          0.5      0.4         1.4       1.5
          HL0.5        4.2        5.0          2.4      1.1         1.6      1.6          0.7      0.5         1.9       1.9
          HL0.975      5.2        6.4          3.3      1.3         2.2      2.2          0.8      0.7         2.6       2.7
                         1880-1997              1880-1913            1914-1945             1946-1971             1972-1997
                      no fd       fd          no fd     fd         no fd      fd         no fd      fd        no fd      fd
          y-y*        0.03       0.17        -0.003    0.17        -0.25    -0.31        -0.42     0.02       0.72      0.58

           LLC          -7.19        -4.45    -2.71      -3.93      -1.59       -2.21     -6.86       -7.39     -2.35       -3.78
 Trend     Adj t*
           HL0.025       1.8          1.9      0.8        0.4        1.0         0.8       0.4         0.3       0.7         0.7
           HL0.5         2.1          2.2      1.0        0.6        1.3         1.0       0.5         0.4       0.9         0.9
           HL0.975       2.5          2.6      1.4        0.7        1.7         1.4       0.7         0.6       1.3         1.2
Notes:   Italics denote rejection at 10%, Bold denote rejection at 5%, Italics and Bold denote rejection at 1%.
         PDOLS significance is based on the Driscoll and Kraay (1998) standard errors. Time effects are included in the
         regressions. Following Choi, Mark and Sul (2006), H0.025, H0.5, and H0.975 are the 2.5, 50, and 97.5 percentiles
         of the half-life distribution




                                                                                                                               63
                                            Table 7. Error Correction Specification
                                    Variable        1880-1997        1880-1913         1914-1945        1946-1971           1972-1997

                                       y-y*            0.053            0.201            -0.393           0.248                1.24

                   No Trend                           -0.141           -0.192           -0.288           -0.461              -0.286

                                       HL               4.6              3.3                2               1.1                 2.1
PMG                                    y-y*            0.196            0.127            -0.399           0.363                1.30


                     Trend
                                                      -0.151           -0.215           -0.288           -0.485              -0.296

                                       HL               4.2              2.9                2                1                   2

                                       y-y*            0.174            -0.034           -0.452           0.215               -0.146

                   No Trend                           -0.167           -0.252           -0.335           -0.554              -0.335

                                       HL               3.8              2.4               1.7              0.9                 1.7
MG
                                       y-y*            -0.022           0.006            -0.433           -0.108               0.393

                     Trend                            -0.221           -0.354           -0.403           -0.650              -0.432

                                       HL               2.8              1.6               1.3              0.7                 1.2

                   No Trend           χ2(1)             0.63             1.08             0.06             0.01                1.64
Hausman Test
                     Trend            χ2(2)             3.72             2.20             3.46             1.58                7.64

Notes: Half Life (HL) estimates are based on the parameter  . Italics denote rejection at 10%, Bold denote rejection at 5%, Italics
and Bold denote rejection at 1%. Series are demeaned to account for cross-sectional dependence. The Mean Group (MG) estimates
are simple unweighted averages of the N individual regressions. The pooled mean group (PMG) estimator constrains the long-run
elasticity to be equal across countries. Pooling is consistent and efficient if restrictions are true, but inconsistent if the true model is
heterogeneous. MG is consistent in any case. The Hausman test is performed under the null that the difference in coefficients is not
systematic. Pooling seems always consistent and efficient except for the post Bretton Woods period, when a trend is included.




                                                                                                                                       64
