                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      PAYING ON THE MARGIN FOR MEDICAL CARE:
                     EVIDENCE FROM BREAST CANCER TREATMENTS

                                             Liran Einav
                                            Amy Finkelstein
                                            Heidi Williams

                                         Working Paper 20226
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w20226


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2014


We are grateful to Dan Silverman, three anonymous referees, Jon Gruber, Jon Skinner, and Doug Staiger
for helpful comments, to Yufei Wu for excellent research assistance, and to the National Institute on
Aging (Einav and Finkelstein, R01-AG032449) and National Science Foundation (Williams, 1151497)
for financial support. The collection of the cancer incidence data used in this study was supported
by the California Department of Public Health as part of the statewide cancer reporting program mandated
by California Health and Safety Code Section 103885; the National Cancer Institute’s Surveillance,
Epidemiology and End Results Program under contract HHSN261201000140C awarded to the Cancer
Prevention Institute of California, contract HHSN261201000035C awarded to the University of Southern
California, and contract HHSN261201000034C awarded to the Public Health Institute; and the Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention’s National Program of Cancer Registries, under agreement U58DP003862-01
awarded to the California Department of Public Health. The ideas and opinions expressed herein are
those of the authors and endorsement by the State of California Department of Public Health, the National
Cancer Institute, and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention or their Contractors and Subcontractors
is not intended nor should be inferred. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w20226.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Liran Einav, Amy Finkelstein, and Heidi Williams. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Paying on the Margin for Medical Care: Evidence from Breast Cancer Treatments
Liran Einav, Amy Finkelstein, and Heidi Williams
NBER Working Paper No. 20226
June 2014, Reviased April 2015
JEL No. H44,I13,I18

                                              ABSTRACT

We present a simple graphical framework to illustrate the potential welfare gains from a “top-up” health
insurance policy requiring patients to pay the incremental price for more expensive treatment options.
We apply this framework to breast cancer treatments, where lumpectomy with radiation therapy is
more expensive than mastectomy but generates similar average health benefits. We estimate the relative
demand for lumpectomy using variation in distance to the nearest radiation facility, and estimate that
the “top-up” policy increases social welfare by $700-2,500 per patient relative to two common alternatives.
We briefly discuss additional tradeoffs that arise from an ex-ante perspective.


Liran Einav                                          Heidi Williams
Stanford University                                  Department of Economics, E17-222
Department of Economics                              MIT
579 Serra Mall                                       77 Massachusetts Avenue
Stanford, CA 94305-6072                              Cambridge MA 02139
and NBER                                             and NBER
leinav@stanford.edu                                  heidiw@mit.edu

Amy Finkelstein
Department of Economics, E17-228
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
afink@mit.edu
                                                                                                                          1


1    Introduction

Medical expenditures in the United States are high and increasing. Policy and academic discussions of
strategies to reduce health care spending have largely focused on increasing cost sensitivity either on the
demand side through consumer cost-sharing, or on the provider side by making providers the residual
claimant on cost savings. A natural economic solution which has not received as much attention is a
“top-up” design in which health insurance contracts would cover the cost of a baseline treatment, and
patients could choose to pay the incremental cost of more expensive treatments out of pocket.
    This type of “top-up” design contrasts with the standard “full coverage” insurance design that is typical
in the United States, where consumers face essentially no incremental cost of choosing a more expensive
treatment (other than perhaps some minimal consumer cost-sharing). Other high-income countries have
taken an alternative approach: individual medical treatments deemed “cost-effective” are fully covered,
and treatments deemed not to be cost effective are not covered at all. In the United Kingdom, for example,
the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) determines which medical technologies will
be covered by the National Health Service (NHS), using – in recent years – a threshold of around $50,000
per quality-adjusted year of life saved (McCabe, Claxton and Culyer, 2008). This threshold rule results in
the NHS not covering some medical treatments. For example, in 2010 NICE refused coverage for the drug
Avastin as a treatment for metastatic colorectal cancer on the basis that the drug improved average life
expectancy by only six weeks (relative to the preexisting standard of care) at a cost of around $115,000
per quality-adjusted year of life saved.1 As a result, patients in the UK who want to choose a treatment
like Avastin must pay the full cost of that treatment. Such UK-style “no top-up” designs have recently
been introduced in Australia, France, and Germany (Chalkidou and Anderson, 2009), and received a great
deal of negative publicity in the US under the name of “death panels” during the debate over the 2010
Affordable Care Act.2
    Relative to either the US “full coverage” or the UK “no top up” regimes, a “top-up” design provides
a natural middle ground. In a “top-up” setting, individuals are allowed coverage of the more expensive
treatment, but are required to pay out of pocket the incremental cost (relative to the fully covered baseline
treatment). By making patients internalize treatment costs on the margin, such a top-up design would
result in more efficient sorting of patients across treatments. Conceptually, this simple point is not new.
It has been made in other contexts, such as public subsidies for education (Peltzman, 1973), pricing of
   1
     See http://www.nice.org.uk/media/E58/E7/2010182BevacizumabForColorectalCancerFinalGuidance.pdf and the
discussion in Chandra, Jena and Skinner (2011).
   2
     Such negative publicity notwithstanding, Pollack (2014) describes some groups of US medical specialists (in particular,
for cardiology and oncology) who are recommending that costs be taken into account when developing medical guidelines;
insurance companies often use medical guidelines to determine reimbursement policies.
                                                                                                                           2


employer-provided health insurance plans (Enthoven and Kronick, 1989), public health insurance subsidies
(Cutler and Gruber, 1996; Gans and King, 2003; Baicker, Shephard and Skinner, 2012), and incentives for
patients to see specific providers within health insurance plans (Robinson and MacPherson, 2012). Closest
in spirit to our paper is the work of Chernew, Encinosa and Hirth (2000), who theoretically explore the
optimal “top up” insurance coverage for different treatments of a given disease, and quantitatively illustrate
the implications of their model by calibrating the key parameter values in the context of a binary treatment
choice facing prostate cancer patients.

    In this paper, we make two contributions to this line of work. First, we present a simple graphical
framework that illustrates the welfare consequences of alternative insurance designs for reimbursement of
different treatment choices. This simple framework helps visualize the key points made by the previous
literature, and at the same time highlights the relative demand curve for the more expensive treatment
as (arguably) the key underlying economic object of interest. As we show, knowledge of the relative
demand curve is critical to any attempt to assess the welfare consequences of alternative policy designs.
Our second, perhaps more important, contribution is to estimate this demand curve, and quantify the
resultant welfare effects of alternative policy designs in the specific context of treatment choices among
breast cancer patients.

    Most patients diagnosed with breast cancer receive surgery as an initial course of treatment. The key
treatment choice is between two types of surgery: mastectomy, which removes the cancerous breast, and
lumpectomy, which removes the tumor while preserving the breast and is generally followed by a course
of radiation therapy. While evidence from randomized clinical trials has suggested no average difference
in survival between mastectomy relative to lumpectomy with radiation (Fisher et al., 1985), mastectomy
tends to be considerably less expensive (Polsky et al., 2003).

    Public and private insurance in the US typically covers the costs of both treatments fully (or nearly
fully) so that patients do not internalize the difference in treatment costs. In principle (if not in practice),
under comparative effectiveness regulations – where the goal is stated as covering the lowest-cost option
attaining the best health outcome (Chandra, Jena and Skinner, 2011) – mastectomy would therefore be
covered by insurance whereas lumpectomy with radiation would not. Because the latter is a more costly
treatment with no evidence of superior average health outcomes, patients choosing it would face the full
cost of the treatment.3 In contrast, a top-up policy in this context is analogous to an indemnity insurance

   3
     Although the comparative effectiveness literature recognizes that health benefits may be heterogeneous, in principle (if
not in practice) that limitation could be solved by randomized clinical trials that are sufficiently powered to detect such
heterogeneity. Such approaches could not however, even in principle, address heterogeneity in preferences over non-health
aspects of treatment. Recent work in social insurance has emphasized the potential importance of heterogeneous preferences
both conceptually (Feldstein, 1995) and empirically (Einav, Finkelstein and Schrimpf, 2010).
                                                                                                                      3


policy that pays out if a patient is diagnosed with breast cancer, at a fixed sum equal to the cost of a
mastectomy.

       The key empirical object needed to evaluate the welfare consequences of these three insurance designs
is the (relative) willingness to pay curve for the more expensive treatment option, which in this case
is lumpectomy. We make a (standard) revealed preference assumption, and use the demand curve for
welfare analysis. Because we know of no useful variation in the relative price for lumpectomy, we estimate
this demand curve using variation across patients in the distance between their residence at the time
of diagnosis and the nearest radiation clinic. A standard course of post-lumpectomy radiation therapy
requires 25 round-trips to a radiation facility, spread over 5 weeks. Our key economic assumptions are
that travel time can be monetized and that preferences for reduction in travel time are analogous to
preferences for any other equivalent price difference. These assumptions allow us to use the variation in
distance to the radiation facility as if it were variation in the relative price of lumpectomy, thus identifying
the demand curve.

       We analyze administrative cancer registry data on the characteristics and treatment choices of over
300,000 breast cancer patients initially diagnosed in California between 1997 and 2009, linked to data on
the location of radiation treatment facilities over the same time period. Building on similar results in the
medical literature (Schroen et al., 2005), we document that women living further away from radiation
facilities at the time of their breast cancer diagnosis are more likely to choose mastectomies rather than
lumpectomies. Our key econometric assumption is that there are not omitted patient characteristics
correlated with both distance and demand for lumpectomy.4 We observe a rich set of patient demographic
and clinical characteristics and find that while some of these variables vary with distance, the magnitude
of the relationship between treatment choice and travel time is not very sensitive to their inclusion. Our
baseline estimates imply that a 10 minute increase in one-way travel time (approximately two-thirds of a
standard deviation in our data) reduces the probability of a lumpectomy by about 0.7 to 1.1 percentage
points, relative to a baseline lumpectomy rate of about 58 percent.

       We then use the estimated demand curve to illustrate how the welfare effects of alternative insurance
designs can be quantified, albeit highly out of sample relative to our observed variation in the implied
price. We estimate, for example, that the efficient “top-up” policy – in which patients pay $10,000 on
the margin for a lumpectomy – increases the lumpectomy rate by 15-25 percentage points relative to the
UK-style “no top-up” regime, and decreases the lumpectomy rate by 35-40 percentage points relative to
the US-style “full coverage” regime. Our estimates suggest total welfare gains from the “top-up” policy

   4
   The use of distance between patients and providers as identifying variation for health care treatment is reasonably
common, and dates back in the health economics literature at least to the work of McClellan, McNeil and Newhouse (1994).
                                                                                                                      4


of between $700 and $1,800 per patient relative to a “no top-up” UK-style policy and between $700 and
$2,500 per patient relative to a “full coverage” US-style policy.


      The preceding welfare analysis considers the (ex post) efficiency of treatment choice under different
insurance designs. In the final section of the paper, we briefly consider the additional tradeoffs faced when
the welfare analysis is done from an ex-ante perspective, thus accounting for differential risk exposure
across regimes. Qualitatively, the top-up policy continues to dominate the UK-style no top-up policy,
but the relative ranking of the top-up policy and the US-style full coverage policy is now ambiguous.
We present a simple and highly stylized calibration which shows that, for high enough levels of risk
aversion, ex-ante welfare can be higher under a US-style full coverage policy than under a top-up policy
that produces the ex-post efficient treatment decisions. This exercise is conceptually quite similar to that
performed by Chernew, Encinosa and Hirth (2000) for prostate cancer, except that in our case the key
input to this exercise – the relative demand curve for lumpectomy – is estimated rather than assumed.


      In addition to offering a tractable source of empirical variation with which to estimate the relative
demand for different treatments, the breast cancer context presents two useful, simplifying features from
an analytic perspective. First, this context focuses attention on a binary treatment choice, which cleanly
maps to the graphical framework we present. Second, the fact that average survival does not differ
across the two treatments allows us to focus on the difference in treatment costs and to abstract from
any attempt to monetize quality adjusted years of life. However, it is important to note that the same
qualitative analysis could be done for other treatments, including those with differences in health benefits.
We conclude the paper by briefly discussing how one could carry out a similar type of analysis in other
settings, including contexts in which the more expensive treatment provides incremental average health
benefits or other attributes valued by the social planner, as long as the social planner is willing and able
to attribute a given monetized value to these other benefits.5


      The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 details our empirical setting – treatments for breast
cancer – and describes our data. Section 3 outlines our conceptual framework, and describes our empirical
strategy. Section 4 presents our main results. Section 5 briefly discusses implications for ex-ante welfare.
Section 6 concludes by discussing how one could carry out a similar type of analysis in other settings.




  5
      The UK’s NICE/NHS policy discussed above provides one example of how health benefits may be monetized in practice.
                                                                                                                           5


2        Setting and data

2.1       Treatment choices for breast cancer

Our analysis is focused on the treatment choice made by breast cancer patients.6 Most patients diagnosed
with breast cancer have surgery to attempt to remove the cancer from the breast; in our data, 95 percent
of women diagnosed with breast cancer receive surgery as an initial course of treatment. For women
receiving surgery, the key treatment choice is between two alternatives, lumpectomy and mastectomy.
Lumpectomies are breast-conserving surgeries that remove the cancer but not the breast itself, and are
generally followed by a course of radiation therapy. Mastectomies, in contrast, remove the entire cancerous
breast and are generally not followed by a course of radiation therapy. Other forms of treatment such as
chemotherapy are commonly administered either before or after (or both) either type of surgery.
        In terms of clinical effectiveness, the key comparative evidence on these treatments comes from the
National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project (NSABP) B06 clinical trial, which enrolled women
with stage I and stage II breast tumors. The initial results of this trial were released in 1985 (Fisher
et al., 1985), with subsequent follow-up results (with longer-term mortality outcomes) published in 1989
(Fisher et al., 1989), 1995 (Fisher et al., 1995), and 2002 (Fisher et al., 2002). The results of this clinical
trial suggested there were no detectable differences in survival outcomes across random assignment to
more invasive (total mastectomy) versus less invasive (lumpectomy with or without radiation therapy)
treatments.7
        In terms of overall financial costs (shared by both patients and insurers), there is a consensus that
lumpectomy with radiation is more expensive than mastectomy. Mastectomy is cheaper primarily because
of the add-on cost of the radiation therapy which accompanies lumpectomies. A common argument is that
the more relevant costs are not those associated with the initial course of treatment, but rather the total,
subsequent “lifetime” costs over the following years. While comparing these longer-run costs of the two
treatments is more difficult due to various selection concerns – for example, co-morbidities that vary with
treatment choice – the evidence on lifetime costs also strongly suggests that mastectomy is cheaper, even
after attempting to correct for potential selection bias. For example, Polsky et al. (2003) compare five-year
total Medicare payments across Medicare patients with breast cancer receiving lumpectomy relative to
mastectomy: the unadjusted difference between mastectomy and lumpectomy was $8,389 (relative to a
baseline of $40,130 for mastectomy), the risk-adjusted difference was $13,775 (relative to a baseline of
    6
     Many of the clinical details in this section are drawn from the National Cancer Institute’s guide to the treatment of
breast cancer; see http://www.cancer.gov/cancertopics/pdq/treatment/breast/Patient/.
   7
     These trials have also not uncovered evidence of a difference in disease-free survival (which measures recurrence of the
cancer).
                                                                                                                             6


$38,623 for mastectomy), and the propensity score-adjusted difference was $14,054 (relative to a baseline
of $38,664).8 In all three versions of their analysis, the 95-percent confidence intervals can reject cost
differences smaller than $4,500.9
       An additional difference in cost between the two treatments, which our empirical exercise will focus
on, is the time cost of traveling to receive post-surgery radiation therapy associated with lumpectomy.10
A standard course of radiation therapy requires 25 treatments spread over 5 weeks.11 Motivated by this
substantial time commitment required for radiation therapy, several papers in the medical literature have
explored whether women living further away from radiation facilities are more likely to choose to have
mastectomies rather than lumpectomies with radiation. For example, Schroen et al. (2005) use data
from the Virginia cancer registry from 1996-2000 (∼20,000 patients) and document that the probability
of patients choosing mastectomy increases with distance from the radiation facility: in their full sample,
43% of women choose mastectomy if they live within 10 miles of a radiation facility, whereas among
women living more than 50 miles from a radiation facility the share is 58%.12 Our empirical work will
build on this medical literature by confirming a relationship between distance from radiation facilities and
treatment choice in a much larger sample of over 300,000 patients in California, and using this variation
to estimate a demand curve for lumpectomy. This estimated demand curve will in turn be the key input
into policy counterfactual exercises investigating how patients might respond to changes in the financial
   8
      It is worth noting that the relative costs of mastectomy and lumpectomy have changed somewhat over time as post-
mastectomy breast reconstruction surgery has become more common. At the start of our data in the mid-1990s, which
roughly matches the timing of the data used by Polsky et al. (2003) (which includes women diagnosed with cancer between
1992-1994), the share of breast cancer patients receiving early or immediate breast reconstruction post-mastectomy has
been estimated to be around 8 percent (Morrow et al., 2001). A study of California patients near the time period at the
end of our sample documented that post-mastectomy breast reconstruction rates were less than 30 percent (Kruper et al.,
2011). While some lumpectomy patients also receive post-lumpectomy breast reconstruction surgery, in general this trend
towards increasing rates of post-mastectomy breast reconstruction has likely pushed the relative prices of mastectomy and
lumpectomy closer together over the time period of our data. Unfortunately, we are unaware of a study like the Polsky et
al. (2003) that has formally compared the total costs of the two procedures in more recent data. An informal survey of costs
for post-mastectomy breast reconstruction suggested a range of $5,000-$10,000, which – scaled by the roughly 20 percentage
point change in the share of women receiving post-mastectomy breast reconstruction over the time period of our data –
seems too small to substantively change the ballpark cost differentials that we consider in our counterfactuals later in this
paper.
    9
      In our illustrative quantitative welfare analyses below, we assume that the higher payments for lumpectomy relative to
mastectomy reflect differences in underlying resource costs (i.e. social marginal cost). To the extent that prices paid are
distorted relative to social marginal costs, our results below would naturally need to be adjusted.
   10
      While our cancer registry data offers an incomplete set of information on cancer treatments, as observed in our data more
than 60 percent of patients choosing lumpectomy receive radiation therapy during their initial course of treatment, compared
to less than 20 percent of mastectomy patients. As one point of comparison, 38 percent of women choosing mastectomy also
receive chemotherapy in our data, as do 25 percent of women choosing lumpectomy. Differences in radiation therapy as well
as other cancer treatments such as chemotherapy will both be captured in the total cost estimates cited above.
   11
      See this US National Cancer Institute Cancer Bulletin from 2010:                     http://www.cancer.gov/aboutnci/
ncicancerbulletin/archive/2010/022310/page2.
   12
      Nattinger et al. (2001) and Celaya et al. (2006) document similar patterns in the SEER cancer registry (1991-1992,
∼17,000 patients) and the New Hampshire cancer registry data (1998-2000, ∼3,000 patients), respectively. Athas et al.
(2000) investigate this relationship in the New Mexico tumor registry data (1994-1995, ∼1,000 patients) and do not find
evidence of a similar relationship, although they do find that the probability of receiving radiation post-lumpectomy falls
with distance from a radiation facility.
                                                                                                                               7


costs of treatments induced by different health insurance contract designs.


2.2      Data

Our empirical analysis uses two datasets from the state of California: a patient-level cancer registry
dataset, and data on radiation treatment facility locations.
       Our patient-level data is drawn from the California Cancer Registry (CCR), a program of the California
Department of Public Health. The CCR was established in 1985, and every cancer diagnosis made in
California from 1988 forward is required by law to be reported to the CCR.13 Data are collected directly
from cancer patients’ medical records at the time of the cancer diagnosis, rather than by interviewing
patients. Available variables in the CCR research database include demographic covariates such as age,
race, and sex; diagnostic information such as cancer type and stage of disease; and treatment information
on the first course of treatment received by the patient (if any). A key advantage of the CCR research
database relative to other cancer registry databases such as the SEER cancer registry is that the CCR
data include patients’ exact address of residence at the time of diagnosis, which enables our empirical
analysis to rely on a more precise measure of how far patients live from radiation treatment facilities than
would be possible if we only observed county of residence, as is available in the SEER data.
       Our data on radiation treatment facility locations comes from the private firm IMV. IMV aims to
identify all hospital and non-hospital sites in the US performing radiation therapy, and queries these
sites with a telephone survey. The sampling frame for the telephone survey is constructed from several
sources, including federal and state nuclear licensing lists.14 We obtained data on the full sampling frame
of California sites, including exact street address for all institutions, for all available survey years (1996
to 2011).15 Because survey response rates vary across years (ranging from 45 to 87 percent), we use all
institutions in the sampling frame as our set of facilities of interest, regardless of whether the institution
responded to the survey.
       We restrict the CCR data to female breast cancer patients diagnosed between 1997 and 2009, which
covers all years after the first IMV survey (1996) and until the last year of the CCR cancer registry
  13
     See http://www.ccrcal.org/pdf/Reports/Physicians.pdf for more details on these reporting requirements, which fall
under California Health and Safety Code 103885.
  14
     Specifically, IMV reports that it identifies candidate sites from nuclear licensing lists compiled by the Nuclear Regulatory
Commission, lists from state licensing agencies, the American Hospital Association Guide to the Health Care Field database,
internal IMV lists, previous IMV data collections, and internal IMV internet research. Because many radiation facilities are
based at non-hospital sites, the IMV data are preferable to relying solely on hospital-based datasets such as the American
Hospital Association annual survey data. The IMV data have been used in several previous papers, such as Baker (2001),
Baker and Atlas (2004), and Baker, Atlas and Afendulis (2008).
  15
     Surveys are conducted approximately every one to two years over this time period. Specifically, IMV’s data collection
periods are 1996 (covering 2/96 to 1/97), 1998 (covering 3/98 to 9/98), 2000 (covering 3/00 to 10/00), 2001 (covering 11/01
to 7/02), 2003 (covering 11/02 to 1/04), 2004 (covering 8/04 to 12/05), 2006/08 (covering 9/06 to 10/08), and 2010/11
(covering 12/09 to 11/11).
                                                                                                           8


data (2009). Following sample restrictions used in National Cancer Institute analyses of breast cancer
registry data (Gloeckler Ries and Eisner, 2007), we exclude cases identified through autopsy and death
certificate only (<0.5% of observations), and cases where the age at diagnosis was less than 20 (<0.1% of
observations). Given our empirical strategy, we also limit the sample to patients with non-missing data
on treatment (<0.3% of observations) and non-missing data on residence at the time of diagnosis (<0.2%
of observations).
    For ease of presentation, because our primary analysis is focused on the choice between lumpectomy
and mastectomy, we also omit from the baseline sample the 5.8 percent of the cases in which the patient
chose neither of these two surgical treatments. Our results are not sensitive to this sample selection, and
the appendix presents analogous results for the full sample (Appendix Table A.1).
    Finally, combining these two datasets, for each patient we computed (using Google Maps in summer of
2012) the distance between her residence at the time of diagnosis and the nearest facility offering radiation
treatment as recorded in the IMV sampling frame as of January 1st in the year of diagnosis. Our baseline
analysis uses driving time, while the appendix reports results that are based on driving distance and
spherical distance; our results are not sensitive to the choice of distance measure (see Appendix Figures
A.1 and A.2, and Appendix Tables A.2 and A.3).
    To summarize, our baseline sample covers 323,612 breast cancer patients that were diagnosed between
1997 and 2009 and chose either mastectomy or lumpectomy as their initial treatment, with each patient
matched to her nearest radiation facility.



3    Conceptual framework and empirical strategy

Consider a woman i recently diagnosed with breast cancer, facing a binary choice between receiving a
mastectomy (M ) or receiving a lumpectomy together with radiation therapy (L). The key input into
the analysis of the welfare effect of alternative reimbursement policies in our revealed preference-based
approach is the relative valuation (or willingness to pay) for L, given by


                                              vi ≡ vi,L − vi,M ,                                         (1)


and its distribution across cancer patients, which is given by the cumulative distribution function F (vi ).
That is, our main empirical object of interest can be summarized by the demand curve for lumpectomy,
which is illustrated in Figure 1, and is given by F −1 (·). Variation in the relative valuation of L across
patients may reflect heterogeneity in relative health benefits, or heterogeneity in relative valuation of
                                                                                                             9


non-health attributes of the two treatments, or both.
   Abstracting from income effects, this demand curve F −1 (·) is sufficient to evaluate the welfare effects
of alternative policy structures. Note that our discussion of welfare and efficiency here refers to efficiency
of treatment choice, or ex-post efficiency, a point we return to in Section 5. With that in mind, the efficient
policy is to cover both treatments, but to require cancer patients to incur the incremental costs associated
with lumpectomy. We denote this policy by “top-up” in Figure 1, which denotes the incremental (social)
cost of L by c, and the incremental price the patient faces for L by p. The top-up policy sets p = c. The
resultant allocation, point E in Figure 1, occurs when F −1 (·) = c. Since patients internalize the social
marginal cost of treatment, the allocation is efficient; all patients whose incremental willingness to pay for
lumpectomy (vi ) is above the social marginal cost of the lumpectomy (c) would choose it, and all those
for whom vi < c would not.
   The US-style “full coverage” policy is given by point D in Figure 1; cancer patients can choose between
M and L and do not face any of the incremental financial cost associated with L (p = 0). Because
lumpectomy is more expensive than mastectomy, this policy produces inefficient treatment decisions. A
set of cancer patients whose relative valuation for L is lower than c inefficiently choose L because they do
not pay the cost c (paid by the insurer) associated with it. This welfare loss is summarized in Figure 1
by the triangle CDE.
   Finally, we consider a third possible policy (denoted “No top-up” in Figure 1) in which the insurance
policy covers only the choice of the cheaper treatment M . In this situation, cancer patients may still
choose L, but if they do so will have to pay its entire cost out of pocket. As detailed in the introduction,
the UK uses this type of “no top-up” insurance regime, and other high-income countries have been moving
towards similar frameworks. In our setting, such a “no top-up” policy would cover the patient’s full cost
of mastectomy, but would not reimburse any costs if the patient chooses lumpectomy. This would lead
to a welfare loss that is summarized in Figure 1 by triangle ABE: a set of cancer patients who prefer
lumpectomy would opt into mastectomy in order to avoid the financial cost, despite the fact that vi > c,
thus implying that a choice of L would have been socially efficient. This is analogous to the classic welfare
analyses of requiring individuals who opt out of the public schools to pay the full cost of private schooling
(Peltzman, 1973) or requiring individuals who opt out of public insurance to pay the full cost of private
insurance (Cutler and Gruber, 1996).
   In the rest of the paper we explore these tradeoffs quantitatively. Figure 1 makes clear that the key
empirical object for welfare analysis is the demand curve for lumpectomy (relative to mastectomy). The
demand curve is derived from vi , individuals’ incremental willingness to pay for L. Our empirical strategy
is therefore focused on estimating this demand curve.
                                                                                                          10


    Estimation of the demand curve requires identifying variation in the relative price of lumpectomy.
Motivated by the medical literature discussed in Section 2.1, which has documented an empirical rela-
tionship between distance from radiation facilities and breast cancer treatment choices, we use variation
across patients in the distance to the nearest radiation facility in order to estimate the demand curve.
Specifically, we normalize patient i’s utility from mastectomy to zero and assume that her (relative)
utility from lumpectomy is given by




                                              ui ≡ αi − βi (θi di + p),                                  (2)

where αi and βi are the (potentially patient-specific) preference parameters, di is the distance of patient
i to the nearest radiation facility, and p is the incremental price she would need to pay for lumpectomy
(relative to mastectomy). Distance is denominated in miles or travel hours while price is denominated in
dollars, so the parameter θi captures the opportunity cost of time, and thus serves as a simple conversion
factor that allows us to monetize distance/time. The patient would choose lumpectomy if and only if
ui > 0. From the econometrician’s perspective, we obtain


                                          P r(Lumpectomy) = P r(ui > 0).                                 (3)




    An important assumption in this specification, and one that is crucial for our empirical strategy, is
that θi can be calibrated using external information so that, conditional on θi , price and (monetized)
distance have the same effect on individual utility. This assumption allows us to estimate the distribution
of αi and βi in the data using variation in distance only, but then use the estimated distributions to assess
the impact of counterfactual policy designs that change price. Because the out-of-pocket price from either
treatment is effectively zero in our California data, this assumption or the choice of θi does not affect
estimation; it only becomes relevant in the counterfactual exercises. To see this, replace p = 0 in equation
(2), and define βi′ = βi θi , to obtain
                                                  ui ≡ αi − βi′ di ,                                     (4)

which has a familiar form. We assume that αi = x′i γiα + εi and that βi = x′i γiβ + uβi and that εi follows a
type I extreme value distribution. These assumptions lend themselves to a standard logit regression when
uβi = 0 and to a random-coefficient logit model otherwise.
                                                                                                                        11


4         Results

4.1        Summary statistics and initial evidence

Table 1 presents some summary statistics for the baseline sample. We aggregate the detailed treatment
information in the cancer registry data into indicator variables for whether the patient received a lumpec-
tomy or a mastectomy as their initial course of treatment: 58% of women receive lumpectomy and 42%
receive mastectomy.16 A standard course of radiation consists of 25 round trips. Patients would need, on
average, to drive eight miles (11 minutes) each way to the nearest radiation facility. However, there is a
fair amount of variation along this dimension, with many patients living within a few minutes of a facility,
while others would be required to drive more than half an hour each way for each treatment.
         An attraction of our data is the availability of a relatively rich set of covariates measuring patient
demographics and clinical characteristics. Specifically, we observe patient age, race, marital status, and
some information on type of insurance coverage. While the data lack individual-level measures of co-
variates such as income or educational attainment, the cancer registry data matches on these and other
characteristics at the census-block level. In terms of clinical covariates measuring cancer severity, we
observe data on the two primary measures of the extent of the disease at the time of diagnosis which are
used by physicians to guide patient treatment decisions: stage and grade. In situ corresponds to an early
stage (sometimes called “pre-cancer”), and local, regional, and remote correspond to increasing extents of
disease.17 Grade is an alternative measure of the extent of disease at the time of diagnosis, with higher
values corresponding to increasing extents of disease.18
         Table 2 splits the sample by above and below median travel time from a radiation facility. Women
who live further from a radiation facility are more likely to receive mastectomies and less likely to receive
lumpectomies. However, as in Schroen et al. (2005) and other previous work, women closer to and further
from radiation facilities also appear to differ on observable characteristics. In terms of demographic
characteristics, women living closer to radiation facilities tend to be older, less likely to be white, less likely
to be married, and more likely to have Medicaid as a primary payment source.19 In terms of neighborhood
characteristics, women living closer to radiation facilities tend to live in slightly poorer neighborhoods (as
measured by income), but also in areas with slightly higher median home values. In terms of clinical
characteristics, the above- and below-median distance samples appear relatively more balanced on stage
    16
      Only the initial course of treatment is recorded in the cancer registry data. Our coding of lumpectomy and mastectomy
follows Roetzheim et al. (2008).
   17
      For more details, see the SEER training website: http://training.seer.cancer.gov/ss2k/staging/review.html.
   18
      For more details, see the SEER instructions for coding grade: http://seer.cancer.gov/tools/grade/.
   19
      The California cancer registry data also includes information on non-Medicaid payment sources: around 16% of women
are covered by Medicaid, 26% by Medicare, 56% by private payers, and the small remainder (<2%) self-pay or other sources.
                                                                                                          12


and grade of disease: while several of the differences in grade indicators are statistically significant, no
clear pattern emerges in terms of one group being in “better” health in terms of cancer progression at the
time of diagnosis. Overall, Table 2 provides preliminary support for the idea that distance may affect
treatment choices among breast cancer patients, but also highlights the need to examine the robustness of
this relationship to conditioning on demographic, neighborhood, and clinical characteristics, as distance
to radiation facility is clearly correlated with other patient characteristics which may themselves affect
treatment choice.

   To explore how travel distance to a radiation facility affects the treatment choice of breast cancer
patients in our sample, Figure 2(a) plots the probability of mastectomy and the probability of lumpectomy
by travel time to the nearest radiation facility. The histogram in light gray displays the number of
observations (patients) in each travel time bin in our sample. These raw data on treatment choices
display the expected pattern: women who live further from radiation facilities are more likely to receive
mastectomies and less likely to receive lumpectomies.

   Figure 2(b) investigates whether this relationship between distance and treatment choice can be ex-
plained by the differences in demographic or health characteristics of the patients that we saw in Table
2. It presents a series of plots which residualize the y-axis (lumpectomy) for various covariates; to retain
comparability with Figure 2(a) we do not residualize the x-axis (distance), but our regression specifications
below which condition out these covariates paint a similar picture. The first line (dashed and square de-
noted) presents the de-meaned lumpectomy rates for each travel time bin as a point of comparison. The
other two lines show the residualized lumpectomy estimates after sequentially adding more covariates.
The second line (solid and triangle denoted) conditions out patient characteristics, and the third (dashed
and circle denoted) adds neighborhood-level covariates and clinical characteristics. Consistent with what
we will document in the regression specifications below, Figure 2(b) suggests that the overall relationship
between treatment choice and travel time is not very sensitive to the inclusion of these covariates.



4.2   Treatment choices by distance

Table 3 quantifies the treatment-distance relationship, estimating different specifications of the logit re-
gression in equation (4). For ease of interpretation, Table 3 reports our estimate of the average marginal
effect on lumpectomy probability of a ten-minute increase in (one way) travel time, with bootstrapped
standard errors clustered at the county level (50 iterations); recall from Table 1 that this ten-minute
increment is about two-thirds of a standard deviation of travel time in our sample. We also report the
standard deviation of this effect across patients. In the appendix, we report the parameter estimates (and
                                                                                                            13


their standard errors) that give rise to these average marginal effects (see Appendix Table A.4).

   Column (1) of Table 3 reports the simplest specification, where we estimate a logit model of whether
the patient chose lumpectomy on travel time with no controls. Using the notation of Section 3, column
(1) assumes that neither αi nor βi are affected by any patient-specific variables. Columns (2), (3), and
(4) retain the same (homogenous logit) assumption for βi but increasingly add covariates that shift αi ,
thus affecting the mean utility from lumpectomy. In column (5) we also allow these observables to change
βi by adding interaction terms between these covariates and distance. Finally, column (6) reports results
from a specification that allows random coefficients on distance: it assumes that βi follows a lognormal
distribution, thus relaxing the assumption of uβi = 0 that is assumed in all other specifications.

   The effect of distance is statistically significant and is quantitatively reasonably stable across all
specifications, as would be expected given the patterns we documented in Figure 2. The specification
of column (6) leads to the largest effect, but this estimate is quite noisy (as the estimated parameters
that govern the distribution of the random coefficient are imprecisely estimated; see Table A.4). Overall,
we find that having the nearest radiation facility ten minutes further from the patient’s residence makes
her less likely to choose lumpectomy by about 0.7 to 1.1 percentage points (or about 1.2 to 1.9 percent
relative to the mean lumpectomy probability of 58 percent). Observable characteristics do not appear to
have an important effect on this distance estimate, as can be seen from the fact that the heterogeneity in
this estimate does not change much in column (5) relative to the preceding columns.

   Taken together, these estimates suggest a reasonably robust relationship between the distance from
womens’ place of residence at the time of their diagnosis with breast cancer to the nearest radiation
treatment facility, and their choice of cancer treatments. In the appendix, we show that these basic
results are robust to a variety of alternative specifications, including alternative (mileage-based rather than
time-based) measures of distance (Appendix Figures A.1 and A.2, and Appendix Tables A.2 and A.3),
non-linear parameterizations of distance (Appendix Table A.5), and estimation with linear probability
models (Appendix Table A.6). In the next section, we build on these estimates to use this distance
measure as a shifter in the effective relative price women face for breast cancer treatments in order to
investigate how breast cancer patients would respond to various (out of sample) policy counterfactuals.



4.3   Policy counterfactuals: estimating treatment choices and ex-post welfare

Following the conceptual framework depicted in Figure 1, our estimated demand curve for lumpectomy
allows us to perform quantitative exercises of the impact of alternative insurance designs which vary the
price the consumer faces for L. .To see what the exercise is, one can think of each demand specification
                                                                                                                           14


as estimating a distribution of the willingness to pay for lumpectomy. To do so, we can use equation (2),
which defines patient i’s willingness to pay for lumpectomy to be

                                                             αi
                                                      vi ≡      − θi di ,                                                 (5)
                                                             βi

and, as before, denote the estimated demand by the distribution F (vi ). A given demand specification
provides estimates for the joint distribution of αi and βi , and di is observed. We assume throughout this
section that θi is equal to $1,150 for all patients. To arrive at this estimate for θi , we rely on the fact (see
Section 2.1) that a typical course of radiation therapy treatment involves 25 round trips to the radiation
facility, and that the average hourly wage as reported by the Bureau of Labor Statistics is just over 23
dollars (so 23 · 25 · 2 = $1, 150).20 Of course, one could (and should) raise plausible concerns that the
opportunity cost of time may be heterogeneous across patients, or that the opportunity cost of time of a
breast cancer patient may be higher or lower than that of a healthy working individual.21 Fortunately,
the transformation is sufficiently simple and transparent that one could fairly easily use our results to
obtain quantitative estimates that rely on alternative values of θi .
       Equipped with an estimate of F (vi ) and given an (incremental) price of lumpectomy p defined by the
insurance design, the share of patients choosing lumpectomy is given by 1 − F (p) and consumer surplus
(per patient, relative to everyone being forced to choose mastectomy) is given by (1 − F (p))E(vi |vi > p).
The total incremental cost is given by (1 − F (p))c.
       Figure 3 illustrates the nature of this exercise. In Figure 3(a) we plot the implied demand system
for lumpectomy using the simplest specification - column 1 of Table 3 - and in Figure 3(b) we plot the
implied demand system for lumpectomy using our richest specification - column (6) of Table 3. These
figures are the empirical analogs to our conceptual Figure 1, and we indicate the analogous points along
them. We also use Figure 3 to illustrate the variation (in distance) used to estimate the demand function
by plotting the empirical distribution of the monetized distance (that is, distance in hours multiplied by
θ = $1, 150), illustrating the point we emphasized in the introduction: our key counterfactual exercises
are quite far out of sample, and therefore should be treated with caution. For this illustrative purpose,
we use the information discussed in Section 2.1 to approximate the incremental cost of lumpectomy (c)
at $10,000 and the total cost of lumpectomy at $50,000, which is the incremental cost together with the
  20
      Specifically, this Bureau of Labor Statistics figure is for average hourly earnings in October 2012: http://www.bls.gov/
news.release/empsit.t19.htm.
   21
      For example, two recent papers (Gowrisankaran, Nevo and Town, 2015; Ho and Pakes, 2014) estimate the relationship
between distance and patients’ hospital choice. Unlike us, each of these papers has available a separate source of variation
in price, and hence can compare the distance and price coefficients. Their results suggest much more important distance
effects than the 23 dollars per hour benchmark we assume, although of course distance may play a very different role for a
“one time” hospital visit than for a repeated trip to a radiation facility for a “routine” course of radiation.
                                                                                                           15


baseline cost of $40,000 for mastectomy.
   Figure 3(a) is based on specification (1) of Table 3, which does not include any controls. This speci-
fication indicates that the US-style “full coverage” policy (given by point D) in which consumers do not
pay on the margin for lumpectomy raises the lumpectomy rate by about 37 percentage points relative to
the efficient level (given by point E) of about 21 percent; the associated welfare cost is about $2,000 per
patient relative to the efficient allocation. Figure 3(b) is instead based on the richest model (column (6) of
Table 3), which allows heterogeneity in the response to price and thus make the demand curvature much
greater, leading to more elastic demand for small price changes but to a much lower elasticity for large
changes. This specification suggests that the US-style “full coverage” policy raises the lumpectomy rate
by only about 10 percentage points relative to the efficient level of 48 percent, with a resultant welfare
cost of about $710 per patient.
   Likewise, the estimates without controls in Figure 3(a) suggest that a UK-style “no top-up” policy
(given by point A) in which insurance only covers mastectomies and patients must pay the full cost of
a lumpectomy reduces the lumpectomy rate from about 21 percent under the efficient top-up policy to
nearly zero, and reduces welfare by about $1,400 per patient, relative to the efficient outcome. When we
use the richest model, Figure 3(b), however, a large fraction of the patients are estimated to be not very
price sensitive, so lumpectomy rates fall by only about 4.5 percentage points from the efficient level of 48
percent, with a welfare cost of about $800 per patient relative to the efficient level.
   For completeness, Table 4 reports additional estimates for a variety of counterfactuals for each of the
six demand specifications reported in Table 3. The top panel reports the observed outcome (for p = 0),
which corresponds to our US-style full coverage benchmark. Each of the subsequent panels report a set
of estimates for a different (counterfactual) price for lumpectomy (retaining a zero price for mastectomy).
The first row of each panel reports the demand response; that is, the reduction in lumpectomy share
(relative to the observed level) from the increase in price. The second row of each panel reports the (per
patient) reduction in consumer surplus (relative to the observed level). The change in surplus consists of
two components: a set of “marginal” patients change their choice to mastectomy as a result of the price
change, and their change in consumer surplus is given by integrating under this portion of the demand
curve; and a set of “inframarginal” patients, who have high willingness to pay for lumpectomy, do not
change their choices, but now face a higher price which reduces their surplus. The third row of each panel
uses a cost of $10,000 for the incremental costs of lumpectomy to report the change in insurer profit, which
consist of not paying for lumpectomies for the “marginal” patients and (except for the case of mandate)
from charging an incremental price for lumpectomies from the “inframarginal” patients. Finally, the fourth
row of each panel reports the overall change in welfare by adding up the change in consumer surplus and
                                                                                                                              16


the change in insurer profits. We chose the counterfactuals to illustrate price changes of $5,000 as a figure
that is close to the lower 95% confidence interval of cost differences from Polsky et al. (2003), and is a
smaller change that is less out of sample; $10,000 as a figure that is close to the midpoint of the cost
difference range from Polsky et al. (2003); and $50,000 as a figure that is close to the “full” (no top-up)
cost based on the figures from Polsky et al. (2003).



5         Ex ante efficiency

Our analysis thus far has focused on the impact of alternative insurance designs for the (ex-post) efficiency
of treatment choice, taking as given the extent of the patient’s risk exposure. We would be remiss, however,
to analyze the welfare consequences of insurance designs without considering their impact on risk exposure
and hence ex-ante utility. We briefly do so here.


5.1         A simple calibration

The different insurance designs have different implications for ex-ante risk exposure, making the qualitative
ranking of ex-ante efficiency between the US policy and the top-up policy a priori ambiguous. This is
because the “top up” policy – which produces the (ex-post) efficient treatment decision – leaves the
consumer exposed to risk ex ante. To see this, note that under a “top up” policy in which individuals can
pay on the margin for L, risk exposure is increasing in vi (up to c).
         To evaluate ex-ante utility of a given individual, the key empirical object will once again be the
individual’s willingness to pay for lumpectomy relative to mastectomy vi , which we assume is known to
the individual at the beginning of the coverage year. In addition, we assume individuals are expected-
utility maximizers with CARA utility w(x) = −exp(−rx) with a (homogeneous) coefficient of absolute
risk aversion r, and (homogeneous) annual probability of illness ρ. Assuming mastectomy is fully covered
and the lumpectomy out-of-pocket price is p, the individual is faced with a risk of losing min(p, vi ) with
probability ρ. She will either choose lumpectomy and face a financial risk of p, or choose mastectomy and
incur a monetized risk of vi , whichever is smaller.
         The individual’s ex-ante utility is given by (the negative of) πi , which is the solution to: w(x − πi ) =
(1 − ρ)w(x) + ρw(x − min(p, vi )). For vi > 022 this yields:


                                              1
                                          πi = log[ρ · exp(r · min(vi ; p)) + 1 − ρ)].                                       (6)
                                              r
    22
         For vi < 0 the individual will always choose M and be fully insured under any of the insurance arrangements we consider.
                                                                                                                          17


The price p depends on the insurance design.
       We can now consider the ex-ante utility properties of the three policies we have explored so far. The
“full coverage” (US) policy sets p = 0; it removes ex-ante risk exposure (πi = 0) and maximizes consumer
surplus (−πi ) but, as discussed, produces ex-post socially inefficient treatment choices. Under the “top
up” policy p = c, and although, as shown, it produces ex-post efficient treatment choices, equation (6)
indicates that it leaves the individual exposed to ex-ante risk (πi > 0). The “no top up” UK policy sets
p = T C, the total cost of L; it therefore not only produces ex-post inefficient treatment choices but also
exposes the individual to ex-ante risk. Moreover, since T C > c – by definition the total cost of L is greater
than the incremental cost – it is clear from equation (6) that consumer surplus is lower (πi is higher) under
the UK policy than the top-up policy. The higher social welfare ranking of the top-up policy relative to
the UK policy is thus preserved when ex-ante utility is considered. The relative social welfare ranking
of the US policy and the top-up policy is a priori unclear as is the relative ranking of the US and UK
policies; all else equal, the US policy’s relative ranking is increasing in risk aversion r.
       To quantitatively assess ex-ante social welfare under the alternative insurance designs, equation (6)
makes clear that in addition to the demand curve F (vi ) that we have already estimated, we also need
values for the risk of breast cancer (ρ) and the coefficient of absolute risk aversion (r). Table 5 reports the
results from an illustrative calibration exercise. We assume a homogeneous annual risk of breast cancer
for a 60 year old female of ρ = 0.48%.23 We calibrate r based on a range of estimates reported in Table
6 of Cohen and Einav (2007). We use the estimates of F (vi ) from the simplest empirical specification
reported in column (1) of Table 3.
       Table 5 reports the results. The three different panels (A through C) report results for three different
assumptions regarding r. Column (1) reports the results for the “full coverage” (US) policy. Row 1 (in all
three panels) reports the share of breast cancer patients choosing L, which under the US policy is simply
the share of patients with vi > 0 and does not depend on the level of risk aversion. The other rows of
column (1) are normalized to zero, as we use the US policy as a benchmark against which we measure the
effects of other policies.
       Column (2) of Table 5 reports the results for the “no top up” (UK) policy. The share of L (again
shown in row 1 of each panel) drops almost to zero once patients are required to pay the total cost of
$50,000. This leads to insurer cost savings of $50,000 for the small share of people who still choose L, and
$10,000 for anyone who previously chose L but now chooses M (multiplied by the probability of breast
cancer, ρ); row 2 in each panel indicates that this results in insurer costs savings of $5,443. The no top
  23
    In our California cancer registry data in 2000, there were 585 60-year-old females diagnosed with breast cancer. Dividing
this number by the total population of 60-year-old females in California as of 1-July 1999 (120,668; http://www.census.
gov/popest/data/state/asrh/1990s/tables/st-99-10.txt) gives p = 0.48%.
                                                                                                             18


up policy, however, exposes patients to risk, and their utility loss depends on their level of risk aversion,
which varies across the panels in the table. Row 3 in each panel reports the loss in consumer surplus
relative to full coverage; we measure this by the change in πi , as defined in equation (6). Note that this
loss in consumer surplus is associated with all individuals in the population, not only with those who
are subsequently diagnosed with breast cancer, so even a small magnitude of π could be magnified once
it affects the entire population of potential breast cancer patients. Naturally the reduction in consumer
surplus is increasing in risk aversion r. Finally, row 4 in each panel reports the total social cost relative to
full coverage, by adding up the corresponding reduction in consumer surplus relative to full coverage (row
3) and the corresponding social cost relative to full coverage (row 2). The results indicate that despite
the cost saving associated with the UK “no top up” policy, the increased risk exposure is much greater, so
overall it appears that in this setting the US “full coverage” policy dominates even for mild level of risk
aversion.

   Column (3) of Table 5 reports the results for the (ex-post) efficient top-up policy. The share of L
is significantly lower (0.35 relative to 0.53) once patients are required to pay $10,000 for L, but many
patients still choose to do so. The insurer cost savings are similar to those in the UK policy because under
the top-up policy it is the patient who pays for the incremental costs. Interestingly, the results indicate
that the (total) efficiency ranking of the top-up policy relative to the US-style full coverage policy (row 4)
depends on risk aversion. For the lowest value of risk aversion we consider, social welfare is higher under
the top-up policy, but for higher values of risk aversion it is higher under the US-style full coverage policy.
This illustrative analysis suggests that focusing solely on ex-post efficiency could miss an important part
of the picture, and that the ex-ante risk exposure generated by top-up policies could be much more costly
than the allocative efficiencies these policies may provide.



5.2   Additional potential insurance designs

Since the top-up policy does not necessarily dominate the full coverage policy from an ex-ante perspective,
it is interesting to consider other potential insurance contract designs. The “first-best” policy naturally
creates no ex-ante risk exposure and achieves the ex-post efficient treatment choice. This could be imple-
mented by offering a continuum of indemnity insurance policies x ∈ (0, c], which, in the event of illness,
cover mastectomy costs and pay each patient a lump sum of x , and then allow individuals to pay the
incremental cost of L out of pocket. In a competitive equilibrium a policy that pays x would be priced
at ρx and will be bought by individuals with willingness to pay vi = x for x < c and by individuals with
willingness to pay vi ≥ c for x = c, leaving individuals unexposed to risk. Such a policy would eliminate
                                                                                                             19


both ex-ante and ex-post efficiency losses. From an ex-post perspective, patients would obtain the lump
sum, but only those patients with vi > c would choose lumpectomy, thus replicating the treatment effi-
ciency generated by the previous “top up” policy. From an ex-ante perspective, individuals would be fully
insured and would not be exposed to any risk, which is the efficient outcome (assuming, as is typical, that
the insurance provider is risk neutral). In row 4 of column (4) of Table 5, we report the gains in social
costs associated with this policy (relative to the full coverage policy).
   The first best is likely not practical. Typical insurance markets offer discrete rather than continuous
coverage, and coverage tends to be in the form of payment for treatment options, rather than lump sum
cash transfers. One might naturally consider therefore the possibility of a competitive insurance market
that would offer coverage for the social incremental cost of L in the event of illness. As shown in column (5)
of Table 5, this setting improves over the full coverage US policy for all the risk aversion levels we consider,
but does not achieve the first best. To see why, note that any individual with vi > c would purchase
the policy, face no ex-ante risk exposure and make efficient ex-post treatment decisions. However, some
individuals with vi < c (but sufficiently close to c) would also purchase the insurance to avoid financial
risk, and would therefore (inefficiently) choose L ex-post.
   In principle, one way to come even closer to the first best within a “practical” setting would be to offer
only partial “top up” coverage, and to search for the efficiency maximizing cost-sharing level of L. Yet,
once coverage for L is incomplete, a familiar problem of adverse selection would arise in which demand
for the partial “top up” coverage would be increasing in vi . This is not an issue when “top up” coverage is
full; in this setting, all 53% of patients with vi > 0 who are potential consumers of top-up coverage would
choose L with such coverage. Therefore, in the language of Einav, Finkelstein and Cullen (2010) – the
“average cost” curve in the market is flat, and adverse selection is not a problem. However, when top-up
coverage is incomplete, we would have adverse selection in our calibrated setting; a higher price for partial
top up coverage would increase the average vi of those who bought it and thus the set of people who use
it ex-post to purchase lumpectomy; in other words, the average cost curve would be downward sloping.
Quantitatively, however, adverse selection is relatively less important in this specific exercise: 35 percent
of patients would always purchase the policy (since they have vi > c), while 47 percent would never do
so (because vi < 0), so the potential change in average composition of top-up insurance buyers in terms
of their propensity to choose L ex post is limited by the fact that only 18 percent of the population has
0 < vi < c . This makes the efficiency cost of adverse selection in this setting less important, and echoes
recent empirical findings in the context of health insurance ( Einav, Finkelstein and Cullen, 2010; Bundorf,
Levin and Mahoney, 2012). Of course, this calibration exercise is extremely stylized, and evaluating this
trade-off more systematically would require, among other things, better estimates of r and ρ – as well as
                                                                                                                            20


potential heterogeneity in them and selection on them – for our population.



6         Conclusion

We present a simple framework to illustrate the welfare gains from a health insurance policy that allows
patients to pay the incremental price for more expensive treatment options. Such a policy efficiently sorts
low willingness-to-pay patients to the cheaper treatment option, in contrast with the current status quo
in the US where the incentives for such sorting are minimal. At the same time, this policy does not “over
price” the more expensive treatment, as is common in the UK and several other high-income countries;
UK-style policies allocate too many patients to the less expensive treatment. Our analysis of the choice
between lumpectomy and mastectomy for breast cancer patients provides an empirical illustration as to
how such a top-up policy could be evaluated, and what the quantitative welfare gains to such a policy
might be.
         Most of our analysis focused on analyzing the (ex-post) efficiency of treatment choices, taking the
overall level of risk exposure as given. In the last section of the paper, we also briefly discuss ex-ante
efficiency, noting that the top-up policy – unlike a US-style “full coverage” policy – exposes the individual
to ex-ante risk exposure. A stylized calibration exercise shows that for high enough levels of risk aversion
social efficiency can be higher under a US-style “full coverage” policy than a top-up policy since the gains
from reduction in risk exposure can outweigh the loss from ex-post inefficient treatment choices.
         Our empirical analysis in this paper focuses on a particular setting of two breast cancer treatments,
one of which is more costly with no evidence of superior average mortality outcomes. As noted in the
introduction of the paper, we chose this setting primarily for the empirical traction it provides for esti-
mating demand for alternative treatments. One noteworthy feature of this breast cancer application is
that it considers two forms of treatment that differ in cost, and over which individual consumers may have
different preferences, but which do not differ in terms of expected outcomes to which the social planner is
assumed to attach weight. Such a tradeoff may not be common, but it is not unique to our setting. Con-
sider, for example, the recent controversy around Sanofi’s new cancer drug Zaltrap, which was approved
by the US Food and Drug Administration in August 2012 to treat metastatic colorectal cancer, and was
priced at around $11,000 per month. In October 2012, a group of doctors at Memorial Sloan-Kettering
Cancer Center announced in a New York Times editorial that Memorial Sloan-Kettering would exclude
Zaltrap from its formulary because, they argued, there was no evidence that Zaltrap improved survival
relative to an alternative treatment (Avastin), which costs about half as much (Bach et al., 2012).24
    24
         While in this case the relevant decision was made by a hospital, others have argued that Medicare should, in a similar
                                                                                                                      21


    More importantly, while our empirical analysis of breast cancer assumes there is no incremental benefit
to the more expensive treatment that is valued by the social planner, it is straightforward to apply the type
of analysis we have done to settings in which the incremental value to society of an alternative treatment
for a disease is judged to be less than the incremental cost, even when that incremental value is positive.
Instead of considering alternative reimbursement schemes for more expensive treatment options with zero
incremental social value (e.g. no top-up in the UK, or the type of top-up policy we have analyzed in this
paper), one could instead simply analyze alternative (presumably subsidized) reimbursement structures
for more expensive treatment options whose incremental social value relative to their incremental cost
was judged to be below some socially-determined threshold. The analysis would be identical to the
analytical set-up outlined in our paper, except that the social incremental cost would be scaled down by
the monetized incremental social value provided by the more expensive treatment. Key to this exercise
would of course be monetization of the incremental benefits of the more expensive treatment: in order to
apply our empirical strategy, the analyst or the policymaker must agree on what benefits the alternative
treatment provides, and how to monetize their value.
    In our context of breast cancer, we focus on a benchmark comparative effectiveness policy which only
accounts for survival benefits. Of course, the policy maker could decide that other benefits, such as
“body integrity” (in the case of breast cancer), should count as well, and could include the monetized
value of these other benefits in the analysis. Such an extension would be conceptually straightforward.
The decision as to which patient outcomes constitute outcomes that should be internalized by the policy
maker, on the other hand, is far from obvious, and would presumably be guided by politics and subjective
normative views rather than by economics.




spirit, not make higher payments for services that have not demonstrated superior health benefits relative to alternative
options. (e.g. Pearson and Bach, 2010).
                                                                                                22


References
Athas, William F., Meg Adams-Cameron, William C. Hunt, Andrew Amir-Fazli, and
 Charles R. Key, “Travel Distance to Radiation Therapy and Receipt of Radiotherapy Following
 Breast-Conserving Surgery,” Journal of the National Cancer Institute, 2000, 92 (3), 269–271.

Bach, Peter B., Leonard B. Saltz, and Robert E. Wittes, “In Cancer Care, Cost Matters,” New
 York Times, 2012, 14 October.

Baicker, Katherine, Mark Shephard, and Jonathan Skinner, “Public Financing Of The Medicare
 Program Will Make Its Uniform Structure Increasingly Costly To Sustain,” Health Affairs, 2012, 32
 (5), 882–890.

Baker, Laurence C., “Managed Care and Technology Adoption in Health Care: Evidence from Magnetic
 Resonance Imaging,” Journal of Health Economics, 2001, 20 (3), 395 – 421.

   and Scott W. Atlas, “Relationship Between HMO Market Share and the Diffusion and Use of
  Advanced MRI Technologies,” Journal of the American College of Radiology, 2004, 1 (7), 478 – 487.

  , , and Christopher C. Afendulis, “Expanded Use Of Imaging Technology And The Challenge Of
  Measuring Value,” Health Affairs, 2008, 27 (6), 1467–1478.

Bundorf, Kate, Jonathan Levin, and Neale Mahoney, “Pricing and Welfare in Health Plan Choice,”
 American Economic Review, 2012, 102 (7), 3214–3248.

Celaya, Maria O., Judy R. Rees, Jennifer J. Gibson, Bruce L. Riddle, and E. Robert Green-
 berg, “Travel Distance and Season of Diagnosis Affect Treatment Choices for Women with Early-Stage
 Breast Cancer in a Predominantly Rural Population (United States),” Cancer Causes Control, 2006,
 17, 851–856.

Chalkidou, Kalipson and Gerard Anderson, “Comparative Effectiveness Research: Interna-
 tional Experiences and Implications for the United States,” http://www.academyhealth.org/files/
 publications/CER_International_Experience_09%20%283%29.pdf 2009. Academy Health.

Chandra, Amitabh, Anupam Jena, and Jonathan Skinner, “A Pragmatist’s Guide to Comparative
 Effectiveness Research,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2011, 25 (2), 27–46.

Chernew, Michael, William Encinosa, and Richard Hirth, “Optimal Health Insurance: The Case
 of Observable, Severe Illness,” Journal of Health Economics, 2000, 19 (5), 585–609.

Cohen, Alma and Liran Einav, “Estimating Risk Preferences From Deductible Choice,” American
 Economic Review, 2007, 97 (3), 745–788.

Cutler, David M. and Jonathan Gruber, “Does Public Insurance Crowd Out Private Insurance?,”
 Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1996, 111 (2), 391–430.
 ˙ Einav et al.

Einav, Liran , Amy Finkelstein, and Mark Cullen, “Estimating Welfare in Insurance Markets using
  Variation in Prices,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2010, 125 (3), 877–921.

Einav, Liran, Amy Finkelstein, and Paul Schrimpf, “Optimal Mandates and The Welfare Cost
  of Asymmetric Information: Evidence from The U.K. Annuity Market,” Econometrica, 2010, 78 (3),
  1031–1092.
                                                                                                   23


Enthoven, Alain and Richard Kronick, “A Consumer-Choice Health Plan for the 1990s,” New England
 Journal of Medicine, 1989, 320 (1), 29–37.

Feldstein, Martin, “The Economics of Health and Health Care: What Have We Learned? What Have
  I Learned?,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 1995, 85 (2), 28–31.

Fisher, Bernard, Carol Redmond, Roger Poisson, Richard Margolese, Norman Wolmark,
  Lawrence Wickerham, Edwin Fisher, Melvin Deutsch, Richard Caplan, Yosef Pilch, An-
  drew Glass, Henry Shibata, Harvey Lerner, Jose Terz, and Lynne Sidorovich, “Eight-Year
  Results of a Randomized Clinical Trial Comparing Total Mastectomy and Lumpectomy with or with-
  out Irradiation in the Treatment of Breast Cancer,” New England Journal of Medicine, 1989, 320 (13),
  822–828.

  , Madeline Bauer, Richard Margolese, Roger Poisson, Yosef Pilch, Carol Redmond, Ed-
  win Fisher, Norman Wolmark, Melvin Deutsch, Eleanor Montague, Elizabeth Saffer,
  Lawrence Wickerham, Harvey Lerner, Andrew Glass, Henry Shibata, Peter Deckers, Al-
  fred Ketcham, Robert Oishi, and Ian Russell, “Five-Year Results of a Randomized Clinical Trial
  Comparing Total Mastectomy and Segmental Mastectomy with or without Radiation in the Treatment
  of Breast Cancer,” New England Journal of Medicine, 1985, 312 (11), 665–673.

  , Stewart Anderson, Carol K. Redmond, Norman Wolmark, D. Lawrence Wickerham, and
  Walter M. Cronin, “Reanalysis and Results after 12 Years of Follow-up in a Randomized Clinical
  Trial Comparing Total Mastectomy with Lumpectomy with or without Irradiation in the Treatment of
  Breast Cancer,” New England Journal of Medicine, 1995, 333 (22), 1456–1461.

  , , John Bryant, Richard G. Margolese, Melvin Deutsch, Edwin R. Fisher, Jong-Hyeon
  Jeong, and Norman Wolmark, “Twenty-Year Follow-up of a Randomized Trial Comparing Total
  Mastectomy, Lumpectomy, and Lumpectomy plus Irradiation for the Treatment of Invasive Breast
  Cancer,” New England Journal of Medicine, 2002, 347 (16), 1233–1241.

Gans, Joshua and Stephen King, “Anti-insurance: Analysing the Health Insurance System in Aus-
 tralia,” Economic Record, 2003, 79 (247), 473–486.

Gloeckler Ries, Lynn A. and Milton P. Eisner, “Cancer Survival Among Adults: U.S. SEER Pro-
 gram, 1988-2001, Patient and Tumor Characteristics,” in Lynn A. Gloeckler Ries, John L. Young,
 Gretchen Keel, Milton P. Eisner, Yi Dan Lin, and Mari-Jospehe D. Horner, eds., Lynn A. Gloeck-
 ler Ries, John L. Young, Gretchen Keel, Milton P. Eisner, Yi Dan Lin, and Mari-Jospehe D. Horner,
 eds., National Cancer Institute, SEER Program, NIH Pub. No. 07-6215, Bethesda, MD, 2007, chapter
 Chapter 13: Cancer of the Female Breast, pp. 101–110.

Gowrisankaran, Gautam, Aviv Nevo, and Robert Town, “Mergers When Prices Are Negotiated:
 Evidence from the Hospital Industry,” American Economic Review, 2015, 105 (1), 172–203.

Ho, Kate and Ariel Pakes, “Hospital Choices, Hospital Prices, and Financial Incentives to Physicians,”
 American Economic Review, 2014, 104 (12), 3841–3884.

Kruper, Laura, Alicia Holt, Xin Xin Xu, Lei Duan, Katherine Henderson, Leslie Bernstein,
 and Joshua Ellenhorn, “Disparities in Reconstruction Rates After Mastectomy: Patterns of Care and
 Factors Associated with the Use of Breast Reconstruction in Southern California,” Annals of Surgical
 Oncology, 2011, 18 (8), 2158–2165.

McCabe, Christopher, Karl Claxton, and Anthony Culyer, “The NICE Cost-Effectiveness Thresh-
 old: What It Is and What That Means,” Pharmacoeconomics, 2008, 26 (9), 733–744.
                                                                                                     24


McClellan, Mark, Barbara J. McNeil, and Joseph P. Newhouse, “Does more intensive treatment
 of acute myocardial infarction in the elderly reduce mortality? Analysis using instrumental variables,”
 Journal of the American Medical Association, 1994, 272 (11), 859–859.

Morrow, Monica, Shirley Scott, Herman Menck, Thomas Mustoe, and David Winchester,
 “Factors Influencing the Use of Breast Reconstruction Postmastectomy: A National Cancer Database
 Study,” Journal of the American College of Surgeons, 2001, 192 (1), 1–8.

Nattinger, Ann Butler, Ronald T. Kneusal, Raymond G. Hoffmann, and Mary Ann Gilligan,
 “Relationship of Distance from a Radiotherapy Facility and Initial Breast Cancer Treatment,” Journal
 of the National Cancer Institute, 2001, 93 (17), 1344–1346.

Pearson, Steven and Peter Bach, “How Medicare Could Use Comparative Effectiveness Research In
 Deciding On New Coverage And Reimbursement,” Health Affairs, 2010, 29 (10), 1796–1804.

Peltzman, Sam, “The Effect of Government Subsidies-in-Kind on Private Expenditures: The Case of
 Higher Education,” Journal of Political Economy, 1973, 81 (1), 1–27.

Pollack, Andrew, “Cost of Treatment May Influence Doctors,” New York Times, 2014, 17 April.

Polsky, Daniel, Jeanne S. Mandelblatt, Jane C. Weeks, Laura Venditti, Yi-Ting Hwang,
 Henry A. Glick, Jack Hadley, and Kevin A. Schulman, “Economic Evaluation of Breast Cancer
 Treatment: Considering the Value of Patient Choice,” Journal of Clinical Oncology, 2003, 21 (3), 1139–
 1146.

Robinson, James C. and Kimberly MacPherson, “Payers Test Reference Pricing and Centers of
 Excellence to Steer Patients to Low-Price and High-Quality Providers,” Health Affairs, 2012, 31 (9),
 2028–2036.

Roetzheim, Richard G., Thomas N. Chirikos, Kristen J. Wells, Ellen P. McCarthy, Long H.
 Ngo, Donglin Li, Reed E. Drews, and Lisa I. Iezzoni, “Managed Care and Cancer Outcomes for
 Medicare Beneficiaries With Disabilities,” American Journal of Managed Care, 2008, 14 (5), 287–296.

Schroen, Anneke T., David R. Brenin, Maria D. Kelly, William A. Knaus, and Craig
  L. Slingluff Jr, “Impact of Patient Distance to Radiation Therapy on Mastectomy Use in Early-Stage
  Breast Cancer Patients,” Journal of Clinical Oncology, 2005, 23 (28), 7074–7080.
                                                                                                                              25




                            Figure 1: Conceptual framework: Treatment choice


           !"#$%&%"'()*
           +$,#%*-.*/*0+1*




           6-'()**                       7*
        5-2'*-.*/*


                                                                9*                   5*
  !"#$%&%"'()*
   5-2'*-.*/*0#1*                       8*

                                                                                       :*
                   4*                                                                                              /*23($%*
                                   /;-*'-+<=+*               /6-+<=+*                />=))*#-?%$(@%*


Notes: This figure illustrates conceptually the efficiency consequences of alternative insurance designs (i.e. prices for lumpec-
tomy (L) relative to mastectomy (M )). The efficient allocation is given by point E and the “top-up” insurance design under
which patients pay the incremental cost of L relative to M , and fraction Ltop-up choose L. Equilibrium under a US-style
“full coverage” insurance design in which individuals do not pay on the margin for L relative to M is given by point D,
where fraction Lfull coverage choose L. The welfare loss from this outcome relative to the efficient outcome is given by triangle
CDE. Equilibrium under a UK-style “no top-up” alternative insurance design in which only M is covered by insurance and
patients must pay the total cost for L is given by point A, where Lno top-up choose L and the welfare loss relative to the
efficient outcome is given by triangle ABE.
                                                                                                                                                    26


               Figure 2: Treatment choice by travel time to nearest radiation facility
                                                                                      (a) Raw data




                                                                                (b) Residualized data
                                                          0.05


                                                          0.04
                                                                                                                   De-meaned, no controls
                                                                                                                   Control for demographics
                                                          0.03
                                                                                                                   All controls
                      Lumpectomy probability (residual)




                                                          0.02


                                                          0.01


                                                          0.00


                                                          -0.01


                                                          -0.02


                                                          -0.03


                                                          -0.04


                                                          -0.05
                                                                  <3   3-6            6-9          9-12           12-15          15-18        >18
                                                                             Travel time (minutes) to nearest radiation facility


Notes: These figures plot the probability of treatment by travel time in minutes to the nearest radiation facility, measured
from the patients’ address of residence at the time of cancer diagnosis, for our baseline sample (N=323,612). Panel (a) plots
the raw data, and a histogram of the number of patients by travel time. Panel (b) plots the de-meaned lumpectomy rate
as well as two residualized versions. The first residualizes lumpectomy probability using patient characteristics. The second
adds neighborhood-level covariates from the 2000 Census and clinical covariates. All covariates are as described in the notes
to Table 1.
                                                                                                                          27


              Figure 3: Empirical analog of conceptual framework: Treatment choice
                                                   (a) Homogeneous logit




                                                (b) Random coefficient logit




Notes: These figures represent the empirical analog of Figure 1. The curves plot the implied demand system for lumpectomy
based on: in Panel (a), the estimates in column (1) of Table 3; and in Panel (b), the estimates in column (6) of Table 3.
The scatterplots in the lower right-hand corners of the graphs illustrate the variation (in travel time) used to estimate the
demand function by plotting the empirical distribution of the monetized distance (that is, distance in hours multiplied by
θ = $1, 150), using the 7 distance “bins” shown in Figure 2; this illustrates the point we emphasize in the text: our key
counterfactual exercises are quite far out of sample, and therefore should be taken with caution.
                                                                                                                               28


                                                 Table 1: Summary statistics

                                                                    Mean     Std. Dev.   5th Pct.    95th Pct.

                    Treatment choice:
                         Lumpectomy                                 0.579
                         Mastectomy                                 0.421

                    Distance to nearest radiation:
                         Driving time (minutes)                     10.9       14.3         2           32
                         Driving distance (miles)                   7.9        11.6        1.0         24.9
                         Spherical distance (miles)                 5.3        7.8         0.7         17.6
                    Demographics (at time of diagnosis):
                       Year of diagnosis                           2003.2      3.7        1997         2009
                       Age                                          60.8       13.8        40           83
                       Married                                     0.570
                       Medicaid coverage                           0.156
                       Race: Non-Hispanic White                    0.692
                       Race: Hispanic                              0.141
                       Race: Asian or Pacific                      0.101
                       Race: Other                                 0.066
                    Census-block characteristics (using 2000 census):
                        Share below twice poverty line          0.253         0.187       0.041       0.636
                        Median annual income                    58,908        28,525      24,063     110,595
                        Share with blue collar job              0.108         0.060       0.020       0.213
                        Share unemployed                        0.037         0.029       0.001       0.090
                        Median monthly rental rate              955.2         404.6        466        1,814
                        Median home value                      266,417       188,861      76,300     660,300
                        Average years of schooling               13.9          1.3         11.3        15.5
                    Clinical characteristics (at time of diagnosis):
                         Cancer Stage:
                              In Situ                                0.182
                              Local                                  0.533
                              Regional spread                        0.264
                              Remote spread                          0.017
                         Tumor grade:
                              1                                      0.190
                              2                                      0.379
                              3                                      0.278
                              4                                      0.047

Notes: This table displays the mean and - for non-binary variables - the standard deviation, 5th percentile, and 95th percentile
in our baseline sample (N=323,612). Distance is one-way distance. Our demographic covariates are year of diagnosis (here
continuous; indicator variables in our analyses, with 1997 as the omitted year); age (here continuous; indicator variables in
our analyses for below 40, 40-44, 45-49, 50-54, 55-59, 60-64, 65-69, 70-74, 75-79, and above 80, with below 40 as the omitted
group); marital status indicators (married; other/missing is omitted in our analyses); a Medicaid coverage indicator (=1 if
Medicaid covered part of the primary source of payment to the hospital); and race/ethnicity indicators (non-Hispanic White,
Hispanic, and Asian or Pacific; other/missing is omitted in our analyses). Our census block characteristics are drawn from
the 2000 census: percent of population within the census block group that is at or below 200% of the poverty line; median
household income within the census block group; proportion of those 16 years of age or over within the census block group
with a blue collar job; proportion of those 16 years of age or over within the census block group in the labor force that are
unemployed; median gross rent of renter occupied houses within the census block group; median gross home value of owner
occupied houses within the census block group; and average years of schooling in the census tract. Our clinical characteristics
are two measures of the extent of disease at the time of diagnosis: indicators for cancer stage (in situ, localized, regional, and
remote; missing stage is omitted in our analyses), and indicators for cancer grade (1, 2, 3, and 4; missing grade is omitted
in our analyses).
                                                                                                                   29




                Table 2: Summary statistics by above and below median travel time


                                                                            Mean
                                                                                                        P-val
                                                       Above median distance    Below median distance

        Treatment choice:
             Lumpectomy                                       0.569                     0.588           0.000
             Mastectomy                                       0.431                     0.412           0.000
        Distance to nearest radiation:
             Driving time (minutes)                            17.4                      4.4            0.000
             Driving distance (miles)                          13.2                      2.6            0.000
             Spherical distance (miles)                        8.8                       1.9            0.000
        Demographics (at time of diagnosis):
           Year of diagnosis                                  2003.2                    2003.1          0.000
           Age                                                 60.5                      61.1           0.000
           Married                                            0.608                     0.533           0.000
           Medicaid coverage                                  0.150                     0.163           0.000
           Race: Non-Hispanic White                           0.724                     0.660           0.000
           Race: Hispanic                                     0.128                     0.155           0.000
           Race: Asian or Pacific                             0.088                      0.114          0.000
           Race: Other                                        0.060                     0.071           0.000

        Census-block characteristics (using 2000 census):
            Share below twice poverty line                 24.004                       26.613          0.000
            Median annual income                           60,245                       57,572          0.000
            Share with blue collar job                      0.111                       0.104           0.000
            Share unemployed                               0.037                        0.037           0.007
            Median monthly rental rate                     952.6                        957.9           0.000
            Median home value                             253,002                      279,832          0.000
            Average years of schooling                      14.0                         13.9           0.000

        Clinical characteristics (at time of diagnosis):
             Cancer Stage:
                  In Situ                                     0.183                     0.182           0.386
                  Local                                       0.533                     0.533           0.981
                  Regional spread                             0.263                     0.265           0.388
                  Remote spread                               0.017                     0.017           0.573
             Tumor grade:
                  1                                           0.195                     0.186           0.000
                  2                                           0.376                     0.382           0.000
                  3                                           0.273                     0.284           0.000
                  4                                           0.048                     0.046           0.068


Notes: This table splits our baseline sample (N=323,612) by above and below median distance from a radiation facility,
presents the mean for each sub-sample, and presents the p-value from a test for a difference between these means (with
unadjusted standard errors). All covariates are as described in the notes to Table 1.
30




                                                                 Table 3: Treatment choice by travel time
                                                                             Homogeneous Logit                                        Heterogenous Logit
                                                                                                           Column (3) +
                                                                                        Column (2) +                         All controls, also
                                                                       Column (1) +                            clinical                              Column (4) +
                                                      No covariates                     Census block                          interacted with
                                                                       demographics                        characteristics                        random coefficients
                                                                                        characteristics                           distance
                                                                                                            (all controls)
                                                           (1)              (2)               (3)                 (4)               (5)                   (6)
               Average effect of a 10-minute
               increase in travel time                  -0.0077           -0.0100          -0.00704           -0.00729           -0.0108               -0.0254
               (standard error)                        (0.00056)         (0.00056)        (0.00049)          (0.00056)          (0.00064)             (0.00263)
               Standard deviation (across patients)
                                                        0.00004          0.00006           0.00003            0.00004            0.00007               0.02442
               of the above effect
     Notes: This table summarizes estimates from logit regressions estimating the relationship between breast cancer treatment choice of lumpectomy (mean = 0.58)
     and (one-way) travel time to the nearest radiation facility, measured from the patients’ address of residence at the time of cancer diagnosis, for our baseline sample
     (N=323,612). The outcome variable is an indicator variable, equal to 1 if the patient receives a lumpectomy. This table reports the estimated effect with respect to
     a ten-minute increase in one-way travel time by computing - for each patient in our sample - the predicted probability of a lumpectomy choice (given the estimated
     coefficients) and the way it would change if we made her drive 10 minutes longer; we then report the average marginal effect in the sample and its standard error
     (clustered at the county level, and based on 50 replications of the bootstrap), as well as the standard deviation of this effect across patients. Column (1) reports
     estimates from a logit model with no controls. Columns (2), (3), and (4) add covariates for demographics, Census block controls, and clinical controls successively.
     Column (5) adds interactions between these covariates and our distance measures, and Column (6) allows random coefficients on distance. All covariates are as
     described in the notes to Table 1.
                                                                     Table 4: Counterfactual analysis

                                                                                  Homogeneous Logit                                       Heterogenous Logit
                                                                                                               Column (3) +
                                                                                             Column (2) +                        All controls, also
                                                                         Column (1) +                              clinical                              Column (4) +
                                                     No covariates                           Census block                         interacted with
                                                                         demographics                          characteristics                        random coefficients
                                                                                             characteristics                          distance
                                                                                                                (all controls)
                                                          (1)                   (2)                (3)              (4)                 (5)a                  (6)b

           Observed choices ("Full coverage" benchmark)
               Lumpectomy share                         0.579                  0.579             0.579             0.579               0.579                0.579
                                                                                                                                               c
                Consumer surplus                         5,255                 4,066             5,796             5,899              9,559               6.84E+13

           !"#$%&'()*+++',-$'./01&23-04'56'789)'"-/$:;
                Change in lumpectomy share               -0.203                -0.257            -0.184            -0.177             -0.254                -0.076
                Change in consumer surplus               -2,385                -2,242            -2,434            -2,453             -2,125                -2,623
                Change in insurer profits                3,910                 4,180             3,815             3,780               4,163                3,275
                Overall change in welfare                1,525                 1,938             1,381             1,327               2,038                 652

           !"#$%&'(<+*+++',-$'./01&23-04'56'=8>'"-/$:;8'5?@-1'/1?'A&B2"0#$C;
                Change in lumpectomy share               -0.369                -0.438            -0.342            -0.335             -0.398                -0.096
                Change in consumer surplus               -3,826                -3,357            -3,996            -4,053             -3,234                -5,082
                Change in insurer profits                5,790                 5,790             5,790             5,790               5,790                5,790
                Overall change in welfare                1,964                 2,433             1,794             1,737               2,556                 708

           !"#$%&'()+*+++',-$'./01&23-04'56'978='"-/$:;8'5?D-E3-1'/1?'A&B2"0#$C;
                Change in lumpectomy share               -0.579                -0.579            -0.578            -0.578             -0.579                -0.149
                Change in consumer surplus               -5,253                -4,066            -5,791            -5,894             -9,559               -23,099
                Change in insurer profits                5,790                 5,790             5,830             5,830               5,790                22,990
                Overall change in welfare                 537                  1,724               39               -64               -3,769                 -109

           F#BG#3&'0#:3&23-04
                Change in lumpectomy share               -0.579                -0.579            -0.579            -0.579             -0.579                -0.579
                Change in consumer surplus               -5,255                -4,066            -5,796            -5,899             -9,559c             -6.84E+13
                Change in insurer profits                5,790                 5,790             5,790             5,790               5,790                5,790
                Overall change in welfare                 535                  1,724               -6               -109              -3,769              -6.84E+13


Notes: All reported changes (in lumpectomy share, consumer surplus, and total cost saving) are relative to the observed choices, for our baseline sample (N=323,612).
Counterfactuals involve various potential charges for lumpectomy (ranging from $5,000 to infinity). For each counterfactual we report in parentheses the equivalent
addition to one-way drive time (assuming 25 round trips valued at $23 per hour, as described in the text). The columns are as described in the notes to Table 3. All
covariates are as described in the notes to Table 1.
                                                                 i                                                                       i
(a) : in the specification of column (5), the point estimate of β is negative for 4.3% of individuals. The reported results assume that β = 0 for these individuals.

                                                     i
(b) : due to the large estimated heterogeneity of β in the specification of column (6), the welfare estimates for the "mandate mastectomy" case (bottom set of rows)
are extremely large and should be interpreted with a great deal of caution. This does not affect the welfare estimates for finite price changes, in which the individuals
                                                                                                                                                                            31




with low βi ’s are infra-marginal and thus do not affect the estimates.
(c) :the welfare estimates for actual choices (top set of rows) and for the “mandate mastectomy” case (bottom set of rows) are computed for the 95.7% of the individuals
whose βi ’s are strictly positive.
32




                                                              Table 5: Ex-ante efficiency: Simple calibration
                                                                                          !"##$%&'()*+($   1&$2&3$"3$                                   5&3$"3$
                                                                                                                        5&3$"3$*##&6(7   !8)92$:(92
                                                                                              ,-./-0        ,-.4-0                                    8;9")*;%(
                                                                                               (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)          (5)
               <=$<:9&#"2($)89>$*'()98&;$?$@=@@@@AB$,C(78*;$(928C*2($8;$D&E(;$*;7$F8;*'G$A@@H0
               1A. Share of patients who choose lumpectomy                                  @=IJI            @=@@A          @=JI@         @=JI@        @=JH@
               2A. Insurer cost difference relative to full coverage                            @           KIGLLJ          KIGJII        KIGJII       KIGJII
               3A. Reduction in consumer surplus relative to full coverage (πi)                 0           11,308          4,978            @          796
               4A. Social cost relative to full coverage                                        0            5,865          -377           KMAH         -859
               N=$<:9&#"2($)89>$*'()98&;$?$@=@@@AM$,HI2E$3()%(;28#($(928C*2($8;$D&E(;$*;7$F8;*'G$A@@H0
               1B. Share of patients who choose lumpectomy                                    @=IJI          @=@@A          @=JI@         @=JI@        @=LLI
               2B.   Insurer cost difference relative to full coverage                          @           KIGLLJ          KIGJII        KIGJII       KIGJII
               3B.   Reduction in consumer surplus relative to full coverage (π )
                                                                               i                0           85,529         17,746            @          359
               4B.   Social cost relative to full coverage                                      0           80,085         12,391          KMAH         -546
               D=$<:9&#"2($)89>$*'()98&;$?$@=@@AH$,M@2E$3()%(;28#($(928C*2($8;$D&E(;$*;7$F8;*'G$A@@H0
               1C. Share of patients who choose lumpectomy                                    @=IJI          @=@@A          @=JI@         @=JI@        @=I@O
               2C.   Insurer cost difference relative to full coverage                          @           KIGLLJ          KIGJII        KIGJII       KIGJII
               3C.   Reduction in consumer surplus relative to full coverage (πi)               0          162,477         80,019            @           86
               4C.   Social cost relative to full coverage                                      0          157,034         74,664          KMAH         -191
     Notes: We analyze three alternative insurance designs for three different levels of risk aversion. The “Full coverage” (US-style policy) sets p = 0; the “No top up”
     (UK-style) policy sets p = T C; the “Top up allowed” policy sets p = c. The first row in each panel reports the share of breast cancer patients choosing lumpectomy.
     The second row reports the insurer cost savings relative to full coverage. The third row reports the change (relative to full coverage) in average risk premium πi , as
     defined in equation (6). The fourth row reports the total social cost relative to full coverage, by adding up the second and third rows. Each column corresponds to a
     different market design, and each panel corresponds to different calibrated level of risk aversion.
                                              33


A   Appendix: Additional figures and tables
                                                                                                                                                          34


         Figure A.1: Treatment choice by spherical distance to nearest radiation facility
                                                                                          (a) Raw data




                                                                                    (b) Residualized data
                                                            0.05


                                                            0.04
                                                                                                                         De-meaned, no controls
                                                                                                                         Control for demographics
                                                            0.03
                                                                                                                         All controls
                        Lumpectomy probability (residual)




                                                            0.02


                                                            0.01


                                                            0.00


                                                            -0.01


                                                            -0.02


                                                            -0.03


                                                            -0.04


                                                            -0.05
                                                                    <2   2-4             4-6            6-8            8-10             10-12       >12
                                                                               Spherical distance (miles) to nearest radiation facility


Notes: These figures plot the probability of treatment by spherical distance in miles to the nearest radiation facility, measured
from the patients’ address of residence at the time of cancer diagnosis, for our baseline sample (N=323,612). Panel (a) plots
the raw data, and a histogram of the number of patients by spherical distance. Panel (b) plots the de-meaned lumpectomy
rate as well as two residualized versions. The first residualizes lumpectomy probability using patient characteristics. The
second adds neighborhood-level covariates from the 2000 Census and clinical covariates. All covariates are as described in
the notes to Table 1.
                                                                                                                                                            35


           Figure A.2: Treatment choice by travel distance to nearest radiation facility
                                                                                             (a) Raw data




                                                                                       (b) Residualized data
                                                            0.05


                                                            0.04
                                                                                                                           De-meaned, no controls
                                                                                                                           Control for demographics
                                                            0.03
                                                                                                                           All controls
                        Lumpectomy probability (residual)




                                                            0.02


                                                            0.01


                                                            0.00


                                                            -0.01


                                                            -0.02


                                                            -0.03


                                                            -0.04


                                                            -0.05
                                                                    <2.5   2.5-5           5-7.5         7.5-10         10-12.5          12.5-15      >15
                                                                                   Travel distance (miles) to nearest radiation facility


Notes: These figures plot the probability of treatment by travel distance in miles to the nearest radiation facility, measured
from the patients’ address of residence at the time of cancer diagnosis, for our baseline sample (N=323,612). Panel (a) plots
the raw data, and a histogram of the number of patients by spherical distance. Panel (b) plots the de-meaned lumpectomy
rate as well as two residualized versions. The first residualizes lumpectomy probability using patient characteristics. The
second adds neighborhood-level covariates from the 2000 Census and clinical covariates. All covariates are as described in
the notes to Table 1.
36




                                             Table A.1: Robustness: Treatment choice by travel time, full sample
                                                                                Homogeneous Logit                                       Heterogenous Logit
                                                                                                             Column (3) +
                                                                                           Column (2) +                        All controls, also
                                                                          Column (1) +                           clinical                              Column (4) +
                                                      No covariates                        Census block                         interacted with
                                                                          demographics                       characteristics                        random coefficients
                                                                                           characteristics                          distance
                                                                                                              (all controls)
                                                           (1)                (2)               (3)                (4)                (5)                   (6)
               Average effect of a 10-minute
               increase in travel time                  -0.0068             -0.0096           -0.0067           -0.0060             -0.0088              -0.0265
               (standard error)                        (0.00057)           (0.00054)         (0.00063)         (0.00056)           (0.00056)            (0.00262)
               Standard deviation (across patients)
                                                        0.00002             0.00018           0.00018           0.00009            0.00598               0.04869
               of the above effect
     Notes: This table summarizes estimates from logit regressions estimating the relationship between breast cancer treatment choice of lumpectomy (mean = 0.58) and
     travel time to the nearest radiation facility, measured from the patients’ address of residence at the time of cancer diagnosis, for our full sample (that is, not limited
     to women receiving lumpectomy or mastectomy; N=343,399). The outcome variable is an indicator variable, equal to 1 if the patient receives a lumpectomy. This
     table reports the estimated effect with respect to a ten-minute increase in travel time by computing - for each patient in our sample - the predicted probability of a
     lumpectomy choice (given the estimated coefficients) and the way it would change if we made her drive 10 minutes longer; we then report the average marginal effect
     in the sample and its standard error (clustered at the county level, and based on 50 replications of the bootstrap), as well as the standard deviation of this effect
     across patients. Column (1) reports estimates from a logit model with no controls. Columns (2), (3), and (4) add covariates for demographics, Census block controls,
     and clinical controls successively. Column (5) adds interactions between these covariates and our distance measures, and Column (6) allows random coefficients on
     distance. All covariates are as described in the notes to Table 1.
                                            Table A.2: Robustness: Treatment choice by spherical distance


                                                                         Homogeneous Logit                                         Heterogenous Logit
                                                                                                        Column (3) +
                                                                                     Column (2) +                         All controls, also
                                                                  Column (1) +                              clinical                              Column (4) +
                                                 No covariates                       Census block                          interacted with
                                                                  demographics                          characteristics                        random coefficients
                                                                                     characteristics                           distance
                                                                                                         (all controls)
                                                      (1)              (2)                (3)                 (4)                (5)                   (6)

          Average effect of a 10-mile increase
          in spherical distance                    -0.0177           -0.0211            -0.0146            -0.0151             -0.0231              -0.0732
          (standard error)                        (0.00116)         (0.00097)          (0.00097)          (0.00101)           (0.00120)            (0.00840)

          Standard deviation (across patients)
                                                   0.00010           0.00052            0.00052            0.00124            0.01470               0.26626
          of the above effect


Notes: This table summarizes estimates from logit regressions estimating the relationship between breast cancer treatment choice of lumpectomy (mean = 0.58)
and spherical distance to the nearest radiation facility, measured from the patients’ address of residence at the time of cancer diagnosis, for our baseline sample
(N=323,612). The outcome variable is an indicator variable, equal to 1 if the patient receives a lumpectomy. This table reports the estimated effect with respect
to a ten mile increase in spherical distance by computing - for each patient in our sample - the predicted probability of a lumpectomy choice (given the estimated
coefficients) and the way it would change if we made her travel ten spherical miles longer; we then report the average marginal effect in the sample and its standard
error (clustered at the county level, and based on 50 replications of the bootstrap), as well as the standard deviation of this effect across patients. Column (1) reports
estimates from a logit model with no controls. Columns (2), (3), and (4) add covariates for demographics, Census block controls, and clinical controls successively.
Column (5) adds interactions between these covariates and our distance measures, and Column (6) allows random coefficients on distance. All covariates are as
described in the notes to Table 1.
                                                                                                                                                                             37
38




                                                      Table A.3: Robustness: Treatment choice by travel distance
                                                                              Homogeneous Logit                                         Heterogenous Logit
                                                                                                             Column (3) +
                                                                                          Column (2) +                         All controls, also
                                                                        Column (1) +                             clinical                              Column (4) +
                                                        No covariates                     Census block                          interacted with
                                                                        demographics                         characteristics                        random coefficients
                                                                                          characteristics                           distance
                                                                                                              (all controls)
                                                             (1)            (2)                (3)                (4)                 (5)                   (6)
               Average effect of a 10-mile increase
               in travel distance                         -0.0091         -0.0116            -0.0081            -0.0084            -0.0112               -0.0691
               (standard error)                          (0.00072)       (0.00069)          (0.00064)          (0.00066)          (0.00081)             (0.00510)
               Standard deviation (across patients)
                                                          0.00004         0.00007            0.00003            0.00004            0.00006               0.24492
               of the above effect
     Notes: This table summarizes estimates from logit regressions estimating the relationship between breast cancer treatment choice of lumpectomy (mean = 0.58) and
     travel distance to the nearest radiation facility, measured from the patients’ address of residence at the time of cancer diagnosis, for our baseline sample (N=323,612).
     The outcome variable is an indicator variable, equal to 1 if the patient receives a lumpectomy. This table reports the estimated effect with respect to a ten mile
     increase in travel distance by computing - for each patient in our sample - the predicted probability of a lumpectomy choice (given the estimated coefficients) and the
     way it would change if we made her travel ten miles longer; we then report the average marginal effect in the sample and its standard error (clustered at the county
     level, and based on 50 replications of the bootstrap), as well as the standard deviation of this effect across patients. Column (1) reports estimates from a logit model
     with no controls. Columns (2), (3), and (4) add covariates for demographics, Census block controls, and clinical controls successively. Column (5) adds interactions
     between these covariates and our distance measures, and Column (6) allows random coefficients on distance. All covariates are as described in the notes to Table 1.
                                     Table A.4: Parameter estimates and standard errors underlying Table 3


                                                                       Homogeneous Logit                                        Heterogenous Logit
                                                                                                     Column (3) +
                                                                                   Column (2) +                        All controls, also
                                                                 Column (1) +                            clinical                              Column (4) +
                                                 No covariates                     Census block                         interacted with
                                                                 demographics                        characteristics                        random coefficients
                                                                                   characteristics                          distance
                                                                                                      (all controls)
                                                      (1)            (2)                 (3)                (4)               (5)                   (6)


          Travel time (minutes)
                                                   -0.0032         -0.0041            -0.0029           -0.0030            -0.0045
          (standard error)                        (0.00102)       (0.00124)          (0.00112)         (0.00129)          (0.00197)

          Mean of (random) coefficient on
          travel time                                                                                                                             -8,910
          (standard error)                                                                                                                       (51,629)

          Std. deviation of (random)
          coefficient on travel time (minutes)                                                                                                   3.5E+12
          (standard error)                                                                                                                      (4.78E+13)



Notes: This table summarizes the parameter estimates and their standard errors that give rise to the average marginal effects reported in Table 3. All details are as
reported in the notes to Table 3.
                                                                                                                                                                        39
40




                                           Table A.5: Robustness: Treatment choice by non-linear travel time
                                                                                                   Homogeneous Logit
                                                                                                                                          Column (3) +
                                                                                                                  Column (2) +
                                                                                           Column (1) +                                       clinical
                                                                    No covariates                                 Census block
                                                                                           demographics                                   characteristics
                                                                                                                  characteristics
                                                                                                                                           (all controls)
                                                                         (1)                     (2)                     (3)                     (4)
                                                                       0.153                   0.203                   0.150                     0.165
                               Travel time <= 5 minutes
                                                                      (0.0439)                (0.0503)                (0.0423)                  (0.0475)
                                                                       0.104                   0.140                   0.0998                     0.111
                               Travel time is 5-10 minutes
                                                                      (0.0373)                (0.0426)                (0.0377)                  (0.0424)
                                                                       0.0574                  0.0806                  0.0445                    0.0480
                               Travel time is 10-15 minutes
                                                                      (0.0329)                (0.0354)                (0.0291)                  (0.0302)
                               Travel time >= 15 minutes                         --------------------- Omitted category ---------------------
     Notes: This table summarizes estimates from logit regressions estimating the relationship between breast cancer treatment choice of lumpectomy (mean = 0.58) and
     travel time to the nearest radiation facility, measured from the patients’ address of residence at the time of cancer diagnosis, for our baseline sample (N=323,612).
     Unlike in Table 3, we here parametrize travel time non-linearly: <=5 minutes, 5 to 10 minutes, 10 to 15 minutes, or more than 15 minutes (omitted). All other
     details are as reported in the notes to Table 3.
                           Table A.6: Robustness: Treatment choice by travel time, linear probability models


                                                                                                                 Column (3) +
                                                                                             Column (2) +                          All controls, also
                                                                         Column (1) +                                clinical
                                                     No covariates                           Census block                           interacted with
                                                                         demographics                            characteristics
                                                                                             characteristics                            distance
                                                                                                                  (all controls)
                                                          (1)                 (2)                  (3)                  (4)               (5)


               Trvael time (in 10-minute units)
                                                        -0.0078             -0.0100             -0.0070             -0.0068             -0.0101
               (standard error)                        (0.00252)           (0.00303)           (0.00275)           (0.00293)           (0.00440)



Notes: This table summarizes estimates from linear probability models estimating the relationship between breast cancer treatment choice of lumpectomy (mean
= 0.58) and travel time to the nearest radiation facility, measured from the patients’ address of residence at the time of cancer diagnosis, for our baseline sample
(N=323,612). The outcome variable is an indicator variable, equal to 1 if the patient receives a lumpectomy. Column (1) reports estimates from a model with no
controls. Columns (2), (3), and (4) add covariates for demographics, Census block controls, and clinical controls successively. Column (5) adds interactions between
these covariates and our distance measures. Standard errors are clustered by county. All covariates are as described in the notes to Table 1.
                                                                                                                                                                       41
