NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WILL DIVESTMENT FROM EMPLOYMENT-BASED HEALTH INSURANCE SAVE
EMPLOYERS MONEY? THE CASE OF STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENTS
Jeremy D. Goldhaber-Fiebert
David M. Studdert
Monica S. Farid
Jay Bhattacharya
Working Paper 20222
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20222
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2014

The authors gratefully acknowledge Daniel R. Austin, Anna Luan, and Louise L. Wang, co-authors
along with Dr. Bhattacharya on an earlier paper in Health Affairs that examined the effect of shifts
to employer insurance premiums. These authors generously shared Stata code that formed the basis
for the ACA subsidy and cost-sharing calculations used in our work. The authors also wish to thank
the Stanford Health Policy faculty and trainees for insightful comments and questions during the development
of this work. Dr. Goldhaber-Fiebert was supported in part by the National Institutes of Health Nation
Institute on Aging (K01-AG037593; PI: Goldhaber-Fiebert). Dr. Bhattacharya also thanks the National
Institute on Aging for support (P01-AG05842 and R37-AG036791). The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Jeremy D. Goldhaber-Fiebert, David M. Studdert, Monica S. Farid, and Jay Bhattacharya.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Will Divestment from Employment-Based Health Insurance Save Employers Money? The
Case of State and Local Governments
Jeremy D. Goldhaber-Fiebert, David M. Studdert, Monica S. Farid, and Jay Bhattacharya
NBER Working Paper No. 20222
June 2014
JEL No. H51,H7,I1,J45
ABSTRACT
Reforms introduced by the Affordable Care and Patient Protection Act (ACA) build new sources of
coverage around employment-based health insurance. But what if firms find it cheaper to have their
employees obtain insurance from these sources, even after accounting for penalties (for non-provision
of insurance) and employee bonuses (to ensure the shift is cost neutral for them)? State and local
governments (SLGs) have strong incentives to consider the economics of such “divestment”; many
have large unfunded benefits liabilities. We investigated whether SLGs would save under two scenarios:
(1) shifting all employees and under-65-retirees to alternative sources of coverage; (2) shifting only
employees whose household incomes indicate they would be eligible for federally subsidized coverage
and all under-65-retirees. Full divestment would cost SLGs more than they currently pay, due primarily
to penalty costs. Selective divestment could save SLGs nearly $129 billion over 10 years at the expense
of the federal government.
Jeremy D. Goldhaber-Fiebert
117 Encina Commons
CHP/PCOR
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6019
jeremygf@stanford.edu

Monica S. Farid
117 Encina Commons
CHP/PCOR
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 943305-6019
msfarid@nber.org

David M. Studdert
117 Encina Commons
CHP/PCOR
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6019
studdert@stanford.edu

Jay Bhattacharya
117 Encina Commons
CHP/PCOR
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6019
and NBER
jay@stanford.edu

A data appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w20222

I. INTRODUCTION
Sweeping national policy reforms often reset the division of fiscal responsibilities between the
public and private sectors, and between different levels of government.[1] They may also create
strong incentives for cost shifting, particularly in immediate post-reform periods when
“loopholes” abound in evolving regulations.[2] The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act
(ACA) is no exception. The federal government’s role in healthcare financing expands
substantially as it takes on subsidies and cost-sharing for lower income households, as well as the
lion’s share of the costs of Medicaid expansions.
The enhanced role for federal government financing has the potential to chill employers’
willingness to offer health insurance.[3] With coverage for most workers and their families
available through the health insurance exchanges or expanded Medicaid programs, it may be
appealing for firms to curtail their own offerings. For this to be a cost-saving move, however,
any savings from having employees obtain insurance elsewhere would need to exceed penalties
levied under the ACA.1 Such health insurance “divestment” by employers is not what the ACA’s
architects intended, but the potential for firms to have financial incentives to pursue it cannot be
ignored.
One large group of employers with pressing reasons to consider health insurance divestment is
state and local government (SLG). Of critical importance, SLGs were particularly hard hit by the
most recent financial crisis. Between 2009 and 2012, budget shortfalls among state governments
exceeded $540 billion [4], prompting deep cuts to spending and services. Although the fiscal
position of SLG has generally improved since 2012, many will take years to return to a stable
financial position.[4]
Health insurance benefits constitute a substantial component of SLG budgets. In 2013, most
SLGs offered health insurance to their employees, and many extended benefits to retirees under
age 65, but continuing to do so will be challenging.[5] A 2010 Pew Center report estimated that
states’ obligations to public sector retiree healthcare benefits exceeded states’ assets by $627
billion.[6-8] A more recent Pew Center report co-commissioned with the MacArthur foundation
finds that SLGs offer more generous insurance than large private employers, covering a greater
proportion of their employee’s healthcare costs and being more likely to offer first-dollar
coverage.[9] Hence, the weight of SLG healthcare obligations in their current form is particularly
heavy.
Would SLGs alleviate their budgetary pressures by shifting current and retired employees into
federally-subsidized health insurance plans? If so, how much money might they save? We
addressed these questions by combining and analyzing data from three national surveys. We
began by estimating the costs to SLGs of continuing to offer coverage in the usual way. Next, we
1

In addition to the incentives of capturing subsidies and cost-sharing, an important example of how the ACA may raise the cost
of maintaining employer sponsored insurance plans relative to cost prior to the ACA is the so-called “Cadillac tax” which taxes
overly generous plans. Press coverage has highlighted the risk of SLG insurance plans in facing the “Cadillac tax”; and it is likely
given SLG healthcare plan generosity that it will be felt there first. Yet, because the threshold at which the “Cadillac tax” kicks in
is indexed to the overall CPI and medical costs have historically grown much more quickly that the overall CPI, it is quite
possible that many employers – even non-SLGs – will eventually face the “Cadillac tax” themselves and hence greater incentives
to shift away from employer sponsored coverage or at least to reduce the generosity of the plans they offer.

1

estimated whether SLGs would save by dropping employment-based insurance entirely and
supporting employees and retirees to obtain coverage elsewhere. We then estimated potential
savings from selectively shifting defined subgroups of beneficiaries to alternative coverage
sources. Finally, we considered possible legal barriers to these moves by SLGs, particularly the
selective shifting of current employees onto the ACA exchanges.
Our findings should provide useful information to SLGs considering their options in the wake of
the ACA. Since savings to SLGs are achieved largely by shifting costs to the federal
government, our estimates are also relevant to ongoing debates about projected costs of ACArelated reforms to the federal government.
A. The Divestment Calculus
The calculus of divestment is complex for any employer and may be particularly so for SLGs. It
involves evaluating the complex interplay between financial and non-financial incentives for and
against such action that flow from a variety of sources, accounting for demand, political climates
and the potential for policies to be changed through federal regulatory, legislative or legal
processes.
The ACA does not establish special rules for SLGs; essentially, the law treats them like any other
employer.2 Thus, under the ACA’s “play-or-pay” regime, if an SLG with at least 50 full-time
equivalent workers does not offer at least one coverage option to every full-time employee, and
an employee obtains subsidized coverage through an individual exchange, the employer must pay
a $2,000 penalty for each full-time employee above the first 30. Alternatively, if an SLG with 50
full-time equivalent employees offers coverage but employees choose instead to purchase
insurance on the exchange, the SLG faces a penalty if the purchase attracts a subsidy. In this
case, the SLG faces the lesser of two penalties: $3,000 per employee who purchases subsidized
coverage or $2,000 for all full-time employees above the first 30.
Nor does the ACA stipulate special rules or exceptions for SLG employees. They may purchase
health insurance offered on the exchange, or enroll in Medicaid provided they meet eligibility
criteria. Income thresholds for Medicaid eligibility vary by state, but the ACA sets a floor: states
implementing the expansions must accept households with incomes below 138% of the Federal
Poverty Level (FPL), which in 2013 corresponded to $15,856 for an individual or $26,951 for a
family of three. Households with incomes between 138% and 400% FPL are eligible for
subsidies and cost-sharing for exchange-purchased plans, calculated on a sliding scale.3
For SLGs and other employers, shifting employees to Medicaid and exchange-purchased plans
may be fiscally attractive. However, the calculus is not straightforward. It depends on several
factors — principally, how many employees are Medicaid eligible, how many are eligible for
subsidies and cost-sharing (and at what level), and the amount of any applicable penalties.
Furthermore, these costs and benefits depend upon whether particular states have undertaken
2

Rules described in this section come from various provisions of [1] The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act.
U.S.A2010:119.
3
The ACA actually specifies 133% of the federal poverty level as the Medicaid eligibility threshold, but the first 5 percentage
points of income are disregarded, effectively making it 138%.

2

Medicaid expansions. These factors, and the overall cost equation, are amenable to quantitative
analysis.
Other implications of health insurance divestment by SLGs — for example, political and
reputational costs — are much more difficult to quantify, and we do not incorporate them
directly into our estimates. However, recent developments provide some clues. A 2009 50-state
survey by the US Government Accountability Office found that SLGs striving to control
unfunded liabilities have introduced a variety of changes to their retiree health benefits, including
alterations to plan offerings, employer contributions, and eligibility requirements.[7] In addition,
recent media reports describe proposals by several cities and counties — including Chicago,
Detroit, Sheboygan County (Wisconsin), and Stockton (California) — to utilize ACA provisions
to reduce the costs of health insurance benefits to their retirees.[11-14]4 Yet, even with these
recent developments, the prospect of firms divesting from health insurance in the presence of the
ACA has been questioned on a number of grounds including the observation that even when not
required, firms provided such benefits voluntarily prior to the ACA.[15]
Despite signs that SLGs are already moving to constrain health insurance benefits, we recognize
that simply ceasing to offer them and pointing workers elsewhere would be an unpalatable option
for most SLGs, however parlous their financial situation. This is especially true in relation to
current employees. Such a move would be criticized on public policy grounds, and may have
adverse effects on the health and wellbeing of the tens of millions of people who currently obtain
coverage through SLG-based plans.
For these reasons, all of the health insurance divestment strategies we consider incorporate an
income supplement paid by SLGs to their employees who purchase insurance on the exchanges.
The purpose of these supplements is to bridge any cost differences employees may encounter
(i.e., the difference between premiums in their employment-based plan and premium costs in
products found on the exchange, less any subsidies received). In other words, our calculations
are designed to ensure SLG employees who shift to federally subsidized forms of coverage are
no worse off financially than they were under employment-based coverage.
We also recognize that forcing subgroups of employees to shift from employment-based
coverage is likely to be unpopular. In the selective divestment scenarios we consider, SLGs need
not impose bars on employment-based purchasing. Rather, we imagine a suite of inducements
that would lead most or all members of certain subgroups to seek non employment-based
coverage, and if they do, fair income supplements would be provided to make this a cost-neutral
move.
In addition, income supplements will have tax consequences. Employer contributions to
coverage purchased on an exchange must be paid with post-tax income, whereas traditional
employer sponsored coverage can generally be made with pre-tax income. With some
exceptions, employee contributions are taxable.5[17, 18] Consequently, the tax treatment of any
4

We are not aware of any SLGs actively considering this strategy for current employees.
Payments that exceed 10% of the employee’s Adjusted Gross Income (AGI) are tax deductible. Under section 125 of the
Internal Revenue Code, the Internal Revenue Service also permits certain “qualified expenses”, including some medical and
premium costs, to be paid on a pre-tax basis. For a discussion of “cafeteria plans” see [2] Hall M, Monahan A. Paying for
Individual Health Insurance through Tax-sheltered Cafeteria Plans. Inquiry. 2010; 47(3):252-61.
5

3

income supplements to SLG employees must also be considered in a divestment calculus that
seeks to leave the SLG employees financially no worse off.
Finally, for a variety of reasons including their own overall strategy on healthcare for all citizens
within their jurisdiction, some SLGs may simply be more inclined and ready to consider shifting
their own employees towards ACA exchanges. One indication of this is whether a state has
established its own insurance exchange or instead has a federal exchange imposed. Another is
whether a State has taken up the ACA Medicaid expansion. Hence, we examine scenarios in
which divestment strategies are confined to States that have their own exchanges, all but one
having undertaken a Medicaid expansion as well.

II. DATA AND METHODS
A. Data
Our analyses use the Current Population Survey (CPS), Medical Expenditure Panel Survey
Household Component (MEPS), and Annual Survey of Public Employment & Payroll (APES).
The CPS is a monthly survey of about 60,000 households conducted by the US Bureau of Labor
Statistics and the Census Bureau. It provides information on a wide range of labor and income
statistics; and includes data on respondents’ demographic and household characteristics. We used
the CPS to estimate the size of the study population, and to determine the incomes and household
composition of SLG employees and retirees.
The MEPS, conducted by the Agency for Health Care Research and Quality, is a comprehensive
source of information on healthcare utilization and costs. We used the household component of
the MEPS to estimate healthcare expenditures for our study population.
The APES, conducted by the US Census Bureau, provides comprehensive data on government
employment. The survey covers US federal, state and local civilian government employees, and
permits reliable estimates of the number of full-time employees and full-time equivalents for
each type of government entity. We used APES data to sort SLG employees into government
entities of varying sizes, and to validate our estimates of the total number of SLG workers.
B. Study Population
We used the CPS to identify two groups: 1) current SLG employees under the age of 65 who
have health insurance coverage provided by their employer; 2) SLG retirees under the age of 65
who report an SLG as their primary source of retirement income. The CPS’s representative
design permitted extrapolation of national estimates of the size of both groups (Figure 1 and
Appendix Tables 1). We also extracted data on the number of persons under 65 in the
households of each member of each group, as well as their demographic information (e.g., age
and sex). Values for all CPS measures were based on averages derived from surveys conducted
between 2010 and 2013.

4

Results of analyses of both CPS and MEPS data were weighted to represent the civilian noninstitutionalized US population.6 We express all monetary outcomes in 2013 dollars, adjusting
inflation for non-healthcare quantities (e.g., income) using the consumer price index (CPI) and
adjusting healthcare costs using the medical component of the CPI.[19]
C. Health Insurance Costs
Estimated household healthcare costs were used as a proxy for the cost of health insurance for
members of the study population, whether they obtained it through employment-based plans or
on the exchanges. We predicted healthcare costs for SLG plan enrollees using MEPS data on
average annual healthcare expenditures (including pharmaceuticals).
For every worker, retiree, and family member identified in the CPS analyses, we predicted an
average annual healthcare expenditure, based on the individual’s age, sex, and geographical
region. The prediction model used an ordinary least squares regression applied to the adjusted
MEPS expenditure data with restricted cubic splines for age, with knots starting at 0 and then in
15-year increments. The regression specification was a fully interacted model between the
splines and indicators for sex and for region (Appendix Figure 1). Predicted expenditures were
then aggregated at the household level, and expenditures on family members aged 65 years or
older were excluded from the tallies.
Three main factors create some divergence between direct MEPS-based cost estimates and the
true costs of health insurance to SLGs, and necessitate adjustments. Several studies have found
that MEPS underestimates health care costs by up to 10%; additionally, MEPS data does not
reflect insurance company loading fees, which for SLG workforces may be in the order of 25%.
[20-27] Beyond this, SLG employees make some contributions (e.g. copayments, deductibles) to
the costs of their health care (although these contribution levels tend to be quite low by national
standards). Specifically, survey data suggests SLGs, on average, cover about 80% of the
costs.[28] To account for these three factors, we adjusted our cost estimates accordingly (i.e.
MEPS*1.10*1.25*0.80).
It is worth noting that the final costs we estimate exceed the premiums charged for silver plans in
every state; they are closer to the cost of gold plans (Appendix Table 2).
D. Ledger Losses to SLGs from Divestment
1. Penalties
The penalty regime prescribed under the ACA fines firms that do not offer insurance options
current employees, and firms that offer options that are “unaffordable” or do not provide
“minimum value”.7 However, there are two necessary conditions for penalty imposition: the
employer must have more than 50 full-time equivalent workers, and at least one employee must

6

The chief sources of uncertainty in our estimates are the estimated sizes of the study population and the precision of the
predictions of the expected individual healthcare costs. The consistency of the estimated size of our study population with counts
from the APES provides confidence about the precision of this estimate, at least in relation to current SLG employees. The largescale, national representativeness of MEPS permits robust healthcare cost predictions.
7
“Unaffordability” is defined as premiums that exceed 9.5% of an employee’s household income. “Minimum value” is defined
as covering at least 60% of the total allowed costs of benefits expected to be incurred under the plan.

5

have purchased a policy on the exchange and attracted a subsidy or cost-sharing. Our analysis
had to account for how often these conditions were met.
Because the CPS does not identify specific SLGs, we could not directly link the profiles of
individuals in our study population to characteristics of their SLGs, such as workforce size
(although 2011 APES data showed that >99% of SLG employees worked in entities with more
than 30 full-time equivalent employees). We therefore made a conservative pair of assumptions:
all SLGs had enough employees to expose them to penalties, and all SLGs would have at least
one employee who qualified for exchange subsidies or cost-sharing. Hence, for the scenario in
which SLGs cease to offer coverage entirely, we set the penalty at $2,000 per full-time employee
above the first 30 full-time employees. For scenarios in which SLGs selectively shift employees
away from employment-based options, we set the penalty at $3,000 per shifted employee eligible
for a federal subsidy and/or cost-sharing. We chose the $3,000 formulation over the $2,000 one
because, for most SLGs, it is likely to produce the lesser total penalty. Finally, we used APES
data to compute the per-capita penalties according to size of SLGs’ full-time workforce
(Appendix Table 3).
One important caveat to the penalty calculations outlined above is that the “lesser penalty”
provisions are designed to apply in situations in which the employer has offered health insurance
to all full-time employees. This bears upon the question of what firms may do to selectively
divest. Stripping a subset of employees of any opportunity to purchase employment-based
policies would immediately trigger the $2,000 version of the penalty; it may also be illegal.8 For
these reasons, selective shifting strategies are likely to be most advantageous if they are pursued
through inducements that preserve employees’ voluntary choices about where to purchase their
health insurance. We assume such inducements, coupled with the income supplements described
below, could drive shifts away from employment-based coverage options. However, our
calculations do not consider the costs of such inducements.
2. Income Supplements
To calculate the size of the income supplements SLGs would have to pay to make employees
“whole” for premium costs they incurred in purchasing coverage on the exchange, we computed
the SLG employer share (80%) of each household’s expected healthcare costs minus any
subsidies and cost-sharing it would attract.
It was also necessary to consider that such income supplements may alter the tax position of SLG
employees. One change is virtually certain; two others are possible. First, by increasing an
employee’s gross income, the supplements would increase the employee’s total tax liability.
Second, the additional income may bump an employee into a higher marginal tax bracket.
Finally, the supplements may affect the tax deductibility of premium payments. Non-selfemployed workers may deduct premium payments in excess of 10% of their adjusted gross
income (AGI). Hence, increases to AGI caused by the income supplements may reduce or
eliminate the tax-deductible premiums.
Our estimates of the appropriate level of income supplementation for each SLG employee were
adjusted for these three potential tax effects to ensure the supplements left employees “whole”
8

See discussion of potential legal barriers below.

6

(Appendix Sections 6-7). We did not adjust income supplements to SLG retirees for tax effects
because retirees already pay tax on those benefits.
E. Ledger Gains to SLGs from Divestment
1. Medicaid Coverage
To calculate household income as a percentage of the FPL, we used CPS data on total household
income for SLG employees and under-65-retirees. For households with income below 138%
FPL, we assumed household members younger than 65 years would be eligible for Medicaid,
thereby shifting costs from SLGs to those programs. In our base calculation this assumption
applied only to the 26 states (including the District of Columbia) implementing Medicaid
expansions as of January 28, 2014 as the federal government covers the overwhelming majority
of the healthcare costs for individuals newly enrolled in states expanding Medicaid (Appendix
Table 4).[29] In a secondary calculation, we examined the implication for financial incentives to
divest if one assumed that all states would expand Medicaid.
Both assumptions are imperfect. Income eligibility thresholds for Medicaid programs vary across
states and population subgroups (children, pregnant women, etc.).[30] In certain states and for
certain subgroups, income eligibility thresholds are above 138% FPL. The main consequence of
not accounting for these nuances is that we counted fewer individuals in the study population as
Medicaid eligible than was truly the case, which, all else equal, would tend to bias downward our
estimates of any SLG savings from divestment. Finally, even in states that continue to bear a
substantial share of Medicaid costs (because they have not expanded Medicaid) and hence may
not find it financially advantageous to shift workers on to this source of coverage, local
governments are not so constrained. Thus, we were conservative in assuming that local
governments would behave like their state counterparts.9.
2. Subsidies and Cost-Sharing for Individual Purchasers
For households with incomes between 138-400% FPL, we followed ACA rules for determining
the amounts of subsidies and cost-sharing (Appendix Section 5).[31] For households with
income above 400% FPL, we assumed no subsidies or cost-sharing.
Household income determines the levels of both subsidies and cost-sharing. Therefore, if SLGs
provide income supplements to offset any additional costs employees and retirees face in
purchasing insurance on the exchange, this may in turn affect eligibility for subsidies and costsharing. The relationship between these variables is dynamic. As income supplements boost
total household income, subsidies and cost-sharing drop, necessitating larger supplements to
achieve status quo. Tax effects are an additional variable in this dynamic equation. We solved
for the stable levels of subsidies, cost-sharing, and income supplements using a two-step, fixed
point method (Appendix Section 7).
3. Eligibility for Exchange Subsidies and Cost-Sharing
The ACA explicitly authorized subsidies for policies purchased through state-operated
exchanges, but included no such explicit authorization for purchases on federally operated
9

Admittedly, this assumption was a necessity because the CPS data did not permit separation of households with state
government employees from those with local government employees.

7

exchanges.10 On July 22 2014, the US Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia struck down
an IRS ruling that had declared subsidies were available on federal exchanges.[32] Hours later
the Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals in another decision upheld the IRS’s interpretation, ruling
that the statutory language was ambiguous.[33] In November 2014, the US Supreme Court
granted certiorari in King, and a decision is expected in mid-2015.
What effects would success for the plaintiffs-appellants in King have on our estimates? There
are actually four different types of exchanges: (1) state-based marketplaces; (2) federallysupported state-based marketplaces (in state exchanges use the federal information technology
platform); (3) state-partnership marketplaces (in which states provide consumer assistance but
the federal government does the rest); and (4) federally-facilitated marketplaces. A win for the
plaintiffs-appellants in King would likely invalidate subsidies for federally-facilitated exchanges
and probably also invalidate them for partnership exchanges, but projecting implications beyond
that is difficult. We performed a sub-analysis that assessed SLG employer savings in the event
that subsidies became available only on state-based-marketplaces (n=14) and federally-support
state-based marketplaces (n=3).11

III. RESULTS
A. Status Quo
SLGs in the US employ approximately 12 million workers and have 1.5 million retirees under
the age of 65 (Figure 1). The average household size is 3.5 persons for workers and 2.5 for
retirees. Thus, SLGs provide health insurance benefits to up to 45 million individuals.
We estimate that the study population — SLG employees, SLG retirees under 65 years of age,
and the families of both groups — will incur approximately $1.8 trillion in healthcare costs over
the next 10 years (Appendix Table 6). This total consists of $1.59 trillion for employees and
their families and $250 billion for retirees and their families. For context, this equates to 6% of
the total cost of the US healthcare system over the decade. [35] [35]
B. Household Income and Eligibility for Financial Assistance
Thirty nine percent of the study population had household incomes low enough to qualify for
subsidies and/or cost-sharing on the health insurance exchanges (Figure 2 and Appendix Table
6). Nationally, 40% of SLG employees had household incomes in the 138-400% FPL range and
33% of retirees did. An additional 3% of households met the ACA’s Medicaid income eligibility
threshold. There was substantial variation across states in the proportion of SLG employees and
retirees whose household incomes fell within these bands (Appendix Table 7).
C. Full Divestment

10

The ACA provides for establishment of state exchanges under §1311. In the event a state does not establish an exchange,
§1321 authorizes the federal government to do so. At issue in Halbig and King were the final regulations the IRS released on
section 36B of the Internal Revenue Code, which extended the ACA’s premium assistance program to exchanges established
under both §1311 and §1321.
11
The status of states exchanges came from the most recent version of a tracking report published by the Kaiser Family
Foundation with the list reproduced in Appendix Table 5. [3]
State Health Insurance Marketplace Types, 2015. 2015
Available from: http://kff.org/health-reform/state-indicator/state-health-insurance-marketplace-types/

8

Exiting employment-based health insurance altogether would be a more expensive proposition
than the status quo for SLGs in almost all states and the District of Columbia (Appendix Tables
8-10). This result is primarily driven by the size of the employer penalties. But penalties aside, in
29 states, the size the income supplements required to leave employees and retirees no worse off
outstrip the combined savings reaped from subsidies and Medicaid displacement. A recalculation
that assumed all states proceeded with Medicaid expansions (as opposed to the 26 jurisdictions
that currently are) did not eliminate the net losses associated with full divestment (Appendix
Tables 11-13).
D. Selective Divestment
An alternative strategy for SLGs is to encourage particular subgroups of beneficiaries to seek
coverage elsewhere. There are many possibilities for construction of the subgroups. We focused
on the cost implications of shifting two clearly defined subgroups: (1) under-65-retirees, and (2)
employees whose household income levels make them eligible for either Medicaid coverage or
subsidies on the exchanges.
1. Retirees
It should not be surprising that several cities and municipalities have already signaled interest in
shifting under-65 retirees to alternative sources of coverage. Several elements of the cost
equation suggest it may be particularly advantageous to do so. In particular, employer penalties
do not apply and the tax effects of income supplementation are minimal or nil.
We estimated that shifting retirees and their households to health insurance purchased on the
exchanges could save SLGs more than $18 billion over 10 years (Table 1 and Appendix Table
9). Every state would save. Approximately 80% of these savings stem from subsidies and costsharing; the rest come from Medicaid displacement of SLG coverage. Total savings rise to more
than $21 billion over 10 years under the assumption that all states undertake Medicaid
expansions (Table 1 and Appendix Table 12).
2. Medicaid- or Subsidy-Eligible Employees
Because current employees account for most of SLGs’ healthcare costs, the savings attained by
any selective shifts of them are potentially much larger than those attainable from shifting
retirees. The cost equation employed in our model lays bare which groups of employees will
provide the most lucrative returns to selective divestment: employees who are Medicaid eligible,
or who attract substantial subsidies and cost-sharing on the exchanges.
We estimate that shifting this subgroup of workers from employment-based coverage would save
SLGs more than $100 billion over 10 years (Table 1 and Appendix Tables 14). Despite paying
$88 billion in penalties and almost $30 billion in income supplements over the decade, the $197
billion gained in subsidies and cost-sharing and the $21 billion absorbed by federal support of
Medicaid expansions, overwhelm these losses. Total savings would increase to more than $130
billion over 10 years if all states undertook Medicaid expansions (Table 1 and Appendix Table
15).
E. Divestment in a World Where Only State-Based Exchanges May Provide Subsidies

9

In states where subsidies (and the associated penalties) are unavailable, divestment will always
look financially unattractive to SLGs, relative to the status quo. In the 17 states that have
implemented exchanges, full divestment was less financially attractive than selective divestment.
Table 2 shows that shifting all under-65 retirees to alternative forms of health insurance
coverage could save SLGs more nearly $8 billion over 10 years. Selective divestment from
coverage for Medicaid- or Subsidy-Eligible employees in these states could save SLGs more than
$42 billion over 10 years.

V. DISCUSSION
A. Overview of Findings
This study estimated that completely exiting the direct provision of employment-based health
insurance would not save SLGs money. However, selective divestment to take advantage of
coverage options introduced by the ACA could save SLGs nearly $119 billion over the next 10
years (or $150 billion if all states implemented Medicaid expansions). Savings of this magnitude
could substantially improve the weak financial position of many SLGs.
The vast majority of the savings we have identified would come from costs shifted to the federal
government. Hence, if SLGs were to follow en masse the selective divestment strategies we
have outlined, it could add more than 10% to the projected costs of ACA reforms.[36] For the
kinds of political and practical reasons mentioned earlier, divestment en masse seems unlikely, at
least in relation to current employees. Therefore the SLG savings and additional costs to the
federal government we have estimated are best interpreted as upper bounds.
B. Assumptions and Limitations
Our analysis makes a number of simplifying assumptions. One is that removing any differences
in the costs of health insurance will make SLG employees indifferent to the prospect of obtaining
insurance elsewhere. This does not necessarily follow. Plans purchased on the exchange may
have smaller networks and may require SLG employees and retirees to switch from physicians
they know and like. Further, employees who shift to Medicaid coverage may have trouble
finding willing providers.[37, 38]
It is possible that an accumulation of such non-monetary factors may prompt some beneficiaries
to respond strategically — for example, by seeking employment elsewhere, shifting to coverage
available through a spouse’s policy, even dropping coverage and pocketing the income
supplement. The theoretical effects of such behavioral responses on our estimates are unclear;
they run in both directions and disentangling and quantifying them requires further research.
Employers, too, may engage in strategic behavior. Salary adjustments or hiring practices may be
used to alter the mix of employees eligible for the federally-subsidized coverage. SLGs may also
seek to minimize their exposure to penalties by reducing the size of their full-time or full-time
equivalent workforce, turning to part-time workers, outsourcing, and other measures. However,
employers’ latitude to take such action is constrained. Unions would vigorously resist any such
large-scale changes. Moreover, since SLGs tend to be relatively large employers, workforce

10

changes could reduce the size of penalties based on employee multipliers, but it would be
infeasible for most to shrink below the thresholds that trigger mandates and penalties.
Another simplifying assumption is that all SLGs currently offer coverage to their employees and
retirees, all of whom take it up. This is not the case. The Kaiser Family Foundation’s 2013
health insurance survey estimated that, although virtually every SLG had some offering, 80% of
workers were eligible, of whom 91% took up insurance, resulting in a coverage proportion of
73%.[5, 39] Uptake rates for eligible employees are high chiefly because SLG plans tend to be
generous. The number of under-65-retirees who receive health insurance benefits from SLGs is
more difficult to estimate. As a proxy, we used the proportion who, according to the CPS,
received SLG retirement benefits. Overestimating the number of employees and retirees to
whom insurance is currently provided would result in overestimates of the size of current
obligations and total savings attainable, but it should have little effect on the size of per-person
savings.
It should also be acknowledged that, while divestment incentives may confront all employers,
SLGs are distinctive in a number ways that may limit the direct generalizability of our analysis to
non-public sector firms. Perhaps the most salient of these distinctions is that shifts of
beneficiaries to Medicaid are not costless for state governments because they share the costs of
this program with the federal government. For states that have expanded Medicaid under the
ACA, the share is small (0% through 2017, and 10% thereafter). For states that have not, the
state contribution to Medicaid averages ~45% but varies considerable across states. Such costsharing implications may alter the financial incentives state governments face to divest in unique
ways.
Our estimates of SLG financial incentives over a 10-year time horizon do not take account of
other factors that may change over this period and affect the financial incentives to divest that
SLGs face. The main time-varying determinants of the magnitude of incentives are: (1) Pace of
medical cost growth; (2) SLG workforce size; (3) Demography of the SLG workforce; (4)
Overall health/pace of the economy; and (5) Political/legal shifts that may change the ACA at the
national level or the preferences of particular State and Local Governments. In principal, it would
be possible using our approach or dynamic microsimulations to incorporate trends in (1) through
(3) based the historical experience as represented by datasets like MEPS and CPS. Even for
these, we note that SLG worker tenure and retirement prior to age 65 (i.e., (2) and (3)) may
depend in complex ways on (1) and its interaction with SLG policies in regard to health
insurance provision. The latter two determinants ((4) and (5)) do not lend themselves as readily
to modeling based on historical data. Hence, we elected not to incorporate trends into our
estimates but instead to properly contextualize them.
C. Legal Issues
Our analyses also rest on several legal assumptions that warrant closer scrutiny and justification.
An in-depth analysis of the legal issues raised by divestment from employment-based insurance
under the ACA is beyond the scope of this paper. We merely describe three areas of legal
uncertainty that may arise.
1. Challenges to Key ACA Provisions
11

One assumption the estimates of our main analysis make is that, with the exception of the
Medicaid expansions (which the US Supreme Court has already ruled cannot be forced upon
states [40]), the reforms introduced by the ACA will survive more-or-less intact. A bevy of
challenges to various provisions of the ACA continue to move through state and federal courts
across the country.[41] If successful, some of these challenges could alter the structure of ACA
reforms in ways that would significantly affect our calculations.
We tested the robustness of our estimates to the effects of the line of attack to which the ACA
reforms appear most vulnerable today—namely, elimination of subsidies and penalties in states
that have not established their own exchanges. This sub-analysis shows that elimination of
subsidies on the federal exchanges would have dramatic effects: 27 states currently have them
(with a further 7 states operate joint state-federal “partnership” exchanges), and divestment
becomes a uniformly losing proposition in those states.
There are other types of challenges whose effects on our estimates we did not explore. For
example, we assumed that SLGs, like private sector employers, are liable to pay the ACA
penalties for failing to provide insurance, or for offering “unaffordable” insurance. Several legal
challenges currently on foot argue that forcing SLGs to pay penalties violates the 10th
Amendment of the U.S. Constitution.[42] If tax penalties against SLGs were found to be
unconstitutional, and subsidies survived the King challenge, our calculations would
underestimate potential savings from divestment.
2. Legality of Selective Divestment
We assumed the divestment strategies we analyzed would be lawful. For some SLGs, however,
divestment may breach contracts in force with public sector unions or other employee groups.
We could not observe, and so did not consider, the constraints such private arrangements may
place on SLGs’ discretion to divestment.
Private agreements aside, it is difficult to imagine a scenario in which full divestment would be
considered unlawful. The employer mandate is a “play or pay” rule, not a true mandate. Opting
completely out of health benefits offerings is therefore permitted, provided the employer pays
any applicable penalties. Similarly, divestment focused on under-65 retirees would also lawful;
SLGs are not bound, at least not under federal law, to provide health benefits to retirees. A
selective divestment strategy aimed at employees eligible for Medicaid or subsidies on the
exchange presents a somewhat more difficult case.
The two main federal laws that govern employer-based health insurance are the Employee
Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (ERISA) and the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (IRC).
ERISA also incorporates the non-discrimination provisions of the Health Insurance Portability
and Accountability Act, which prohibit group health plans from structuring eligibility, benefits,
or premiums in ways that discriminate among employees on the basis of health-related factors.
In addition, the ACA itself includes a number of provisions that limit the ability of employers to
undertake “risk based” classifications of employees when providing health benefits (although
nearly all of these restrictions overlap with ones that were already in place pre-ACA under
ERISA and the IRC [43]).

12

Would any of these federal laws bar selective divestment? Firm answers to that question require
a more comprehensive legal analysis than we have the space (or expertise) to undertake here.
However, several observations are relevant.
Although ERISA regulates many aspects of plan administration, and certain of its provisions may
bear upon employers’ latitude to divest, it does not apply to SLGs.
The primary focus of the HIPAA and ACA non-discrimination rules is disparate treatment of
employees who are sick or costly. That is not an accurate characterization of the selective
divestment strategy we have considered for two reasons. First, in the scenario we analyzed,
employees eligible for cost-sharing are incentivized to purchase insurance elsewhere but they are
not excluded from employment-based coverage. Second, the defining characteristic of the
subgroup we constructed was the availability of external cost-sharing, not bad insurance risk.
While it may be tempting to assume the two overlap, our data suggest this is not the case: the
average health care costs we estimate for SLG employees eligible for Medicaid and subsidies
appear to quite similar, on average, than the costs estimated for employees who are not
(Appendix Table 15). Subsidy-eligible employees tend to be younger, and this age effect may
counter-balance any association between lower income and ill health.
The IRC prohibits self-insured health plans from discriminating in favor of “highly-compensated
individuals” with respect to eligibility, contributions, and benefits.12 The ACA extends this
prohibition to sponsors of group health plans (other than self-insured plans).13 At first glance,
these rules come much closer than risk classification prohibitions do to a selective divestment
strategy centered on subsidy-eligible employees. However, the match is still doubtful.14 “Highly
compensated individuals” are a defined group (a top-five paid officer, a more-than-10 percent
shareholder, and 25 percent of employees with the highest salaries), which is unlikely to align
well with the profile of SLG employees not incentivized to switch plans. More importantly,
SLGs’ use of incentive structures and sponsorship of benefits obtained from other sources seems
tangential to the kind of “rules” and “eligibility” exclusions addressed by the IRC and ACA
nondiscrimination provisions.
3. Legality of Income Supplements
The IRS, joined by the Department of Labor and the Department of Health and Human Services,
recently issued a guidance clarifying that, under the ACA, payments employers make to
employees for purposes of covering the costs of health insurance purchased on the exchanges
will not enjoy preferential tax treatment.[44] Under section 125 of the IRC, compensation
funneled through “employer payment plans” qualified for the same tax exemptions as other kinds
of employer contributions to the costs of employee health insurance. However, regulators have
moved to block this under the ACA, in part to blunt incentives for employers to send employees
elsewhere.
12, Internal Revenue Code, §105(h).
13. ACA, §2716. At the date of writing, this provision is not yet active. In Notice 2011-1, the IRS delayed the effective date of
this provision until guidance on how the section applies in the fully insured context is issued, and none has been.
14. In addition to the questions of applicability outlined in this section, the applicability of these nondiscrimination provisions to
SLGs is uncertain. Formerly, SLGs were exempted from the rule (see Taxpayer Relief Act of 1997 (P.L. 105-34), §1505),
although there is no exception mentioned in ACA provision. Thus, technically, HHS appears to have the authority to enforce the
nondiscrimination rules against insured non-federal governmental plans, but it is not yet clear whether it will do so.

13

The ruling does not directly affect our calculations because we assumed income supplements
would be paid with after-tax monies. It does, however, highlight a factor that we did not take
into account. If SLGs’ contributions to the costs of health insurance are tax exempt in the status
quo, but the income supplements incur payroll and other taxes (e.g., the Federal Insurance
Contributions Act (FICA) tax), this difference should be included in the tally of ledger losses. To
the extent we did not do this, we may have overestimated savings.15

VI. CONCLUSION
Employment-based health insurance is a central pillar of the U.S. healthcare system. Its
existence has long framed options for reform. Although the ACA sought to expand coverage by
building around and strengthening employment-based insurance, the changes it introduces to the
sources and financing of coverage have the potential to reset the playing field entirely. How
employers will respond remains to be seen.
This study considered possible reactions by one large employer group with strong motives to
reduce the burden of health insurance costs. We found that SLGs may save nearly $119 billion
over the next 10 years by shifting under-65-retirees and segments of their workforce to
comparable plans on the exchanges and Medicaid programs. Such savings would be gained at
the expense of the federal government.
SLGs garner no special treatment under the ACA. The cost advantages projected for them may
apply to greater or lesser extents to other employers, depending on the demographic, income and
healthcare utilization profiles of workers in those firms. General divestment is not barred by state
or federal law, but SLGs may have contracts in force with employees that limit their ability to
pursue this strategy. Selective divestment does not face clear legal barriers either, although this
depends on how subgroups of interest are constructed; certain forms of selectivity, such as
targeting employees with the highest health care expenses — a strategy we do not consider (or in
any way endorse) — would probably violate federal nondiscrimination protections.
The federal government could probably stem any rush toward divestment by changing key rules,
such as penalty levels and eligibility for subsidies and cost-sharing. But until that happens,
divestment is a strategic option that diligent business leaders may find difficult to ignore.

15

In the selective divestment scenario, the income supplement provided by the SLGs would increase the size of the FICA tax
owed. As the goal of selective divestment is not to make the employee worse off, the SLG might cover both the employer and
employee portions – roughly 15%. However, as FICA is deducted prior to computing total income for the purpose of income
taxes, the income tax supplement from the SLG would be lowered by roughly the marginal tax rate (~25% in our group). Hence
our estimates of savings may be ~11% too high depending on how SLGs choose to compensate employees for these amounts. It is
not entirely clear that compensation is necessary as Social Security and Medicare could be viewed as benefits that employees
receive later in life and hence their benefit offsets greater withholding now.

14

REFERENCES
[1]
Rodden JA. Hamilton's Paradox: The Promise and Peril of Fiscal Federalism. European
Journal of Political Economy. 2006.
[2]
Federalism and the Welfare State : New World and European Experiences: Cambridge
University Press 2006.
[3]
Cutler DM, Gruber J. Does Public Insurance Crowd out Private Insurance? The Quarterly
Journal of Economics. 1996; 111(2):391-430.
[4]
Oliff P, Mai C, Palacios V. States Continue To Feel Recession's Impact. Washington,
DC: Center on Budget and Policy Priorities; 2012.
[5]
Employer Health Benefits 2013, Annual Survey: The Kaiser Family Foundation & Health
Research and Education Trust; 2013.
[6]
The Widening Gap Update: The Pew Center on the United States; June 2012.
[7]
State and Local Government Retiree Health Benefits: Liabilities Are Largely Unfunded,
but Some Governments Are Taking Action. Washington, DC: Government Accountability
Office; 2009.
[8]
Summary of Statement No. 45: Accounting and Financial Reporting By Employers For
Postemployment Benefits Other Than Pensions. June 2004 Available from:
http://www.gasb.org/st/summary/gstsm45.html

[9]
State, Local Government Spending on Health Care Grew Faster Than National Rate in
2012: The Pew Charitable Trusts; Jan 2014.
[10] The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. U.S.A2010:119.
[11] Davey M, Goodnough A. Detroit Looks to Health Law to Ease Costs. The New York
Times. July 2013.
[12] Sheboygan County Retirees may be shifted to ObamaCare. Milwaukee Journal Sentinel.
April 2013.
[13] U.S cities looking to shed retired employees' healthcare costs. United Press International.
July 2013.
[14] Memo to Stockton Retiree receiving Retiree Medical benefits. April 2013 Available
from: http://www.stocktongov.com/files/Retiree_Healthcare_Option_Letter_April_1_2013.pdf
[15] Buchmueller T, Carey C, Levy HG. Will employers drop health insurance coverage
because of the Affordable Care Act? Health Aff (Millwood). 2013; 32(9):1522-30.
[16] Hall M, Monahan A. Paying for Individual Health Insurance through Tax-sheltered
Cafeteria Plans. Inquiry. 2010; 47(3):252-61.
[17] Federal, State and Local Governments : Quick Reference Guide for Public Employers:
Internal Revenue Service; February 2013.
[18] Publication 502 : Medical and Dental Expenses. Available from:
http://www.irs.gov/publications/p502/ar02.html

[19] Consumer Price Index. 2014 Available from: http://www.bls.gov/cpi/
[20] Meara E, White C, Cutler DM. Trends In Medical Spending By Age, 1963–2000. Health
Affairs. 2004; 23(4):176-83.
[21] Economic costs of diabetes in the U.S. in 2012. Diabetes Care. 2013; 36(4):1033-46.
[22] Aizcorbe A, Liebman E, Pack S, Cutler DM, Chernew ME, Rosen AB. Measuring health
care costs of individuals with employer-sponsored health insurance in the U.S.: A comparison of
survey and claims data. Statistical Journal of the IAOS: Journal of the International Association
for Official Statistics. 2012; 28(1):43-51.
15

[23] Improving Health Cost Projections for the Medicare Population: Summary of a
Workshop: National Research Council Committee on National Statistics; 2010.
[24] Bernard D, Cowan C, Selden T, Cai L, Catlin A, Heffler S. Reconciling medical
expenditure estimates from the MEPS and NHEA, 2007. . (2159-0354 (Electronic)).
[25] Sing M, Banthin J, Selden T, Cowan C, Keehan S. Reconciling medical expenditure
estimates from the MEPS and NHEA, 2002. (0195-8631 (Print)).
[26] Selden TM, Sing M. Aligning the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey to Aggregate U.S.
Benchmarks. . Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. 2008; (Working Paper No. 08006).
[27] Karaca-Mandic P, Abraham JM, Phelps CE. How do health insurance loading fees vary
by group size?: implications for Healthcare reform. Int J Health Care Finance Econ. 2011;
11(3):181-207.
[28] The Pew Charitable Trusts and the MacArthur Foundation. State Employee Health Plan
Spending: An examination of premiums, cost drivers, and policy approaches. 2014.
[29] State Health Facts : Status of State Action on the Expansion Decision. 2014 Available
from: http://kff.org/health‐reform/state‐indicator/state‐activity‐around‐expanding‐medicaid‐under‐
the‐affordable‐care‐act/

[30] State Medicaid and CHIP Income Eligibility Standards Effective January 1, 2014.
Available from: http://www.medicaid.gov/AffordableCareAct/Medicaid‐Moving‐Forward‐
2014/Downloads/Medicaid‐and‐CHIP‐Eligibility‐Levels‐Table.pdf

[31] Austin DR, Luan A, Wang LL, Bhattacharya J. Small Increases To Employer Premiums
Could Shift Millions Of People To The Exchanges And Add Billions To Federal Outlays. Health
Affairs. 2013; 32(9):1531-7.
[32] Halbig v. Burwell. D.C Cir. 2014.
[33] King et al v. Burwell. US Court of Appeals, 4th Circuit 2014.
[34] State Health Insurance Marketplace Types, 2015. 2015 Available from:
http://kff.org/health‐reform/state‐indicator/state‐health‐insurance‐marketplace‐types/

[35]

National Health Expenditures 2012 Highlights. Available from:

http://www.cms.gov/Research‐Statistics‐Data‐and‐Systems/Statistics‐Trends‐and‐
Reports/NationalHealthExpendData/downloads/highlights.pdf

[36] Elmendorf DW. Letter to U.S CongressMarch 2010.
[37] Decker SL. In 2011 Nearly One-Third Of Physicians Said They Would Not Accept New
Medicaid Patients, But Rising Fees May Help. Health Affairs. 2012; 31(8):1673-9.
[38] Goodnough A. Medicaid Growth Could Aggravate Doctor Shortage. The New York
Times. November 2013.
[39] State Employee Health Benefits. December 2013 Available from:
http://www.ncsl.org/research/health/state‐employee‐health‐benefits‐ncsl.aspx

[40] Nat'l Fed'n of Indep. Bus. v. Sebelius. 2012.
[41] Gostin LO, Jacobson PD, Studdert DM. Law and Health System: St Paul, MN:
Foundation Press 2014.
[42] State of Indiana et al v. Internal Revenue Service. US District Court, Southern District of
Indiana, Indianapolis Division 2013.
[43] Monahan A, Schwarcz D. Will Employers Undermine Health Care Reform by Dumping
Sick Employees. Virginia Law Review. 2011; 97:125-97.
[44] Herrera CN, Gaynor M, Newman D, Town RJ, Parente ST. Trends underlying employersponsored health insurance growth for Americans younger than age sixty-five. Health Aff
(Millwood). 2013; 32(10):1715-22.
16

Table 1. Estimated savings to state and local governments from selective divestment strategies ($1,000,000s)
Shifting only under-65-retirees
Shifting only employees eligible for subsidies or
Medicaid
State
26 states expand
All states expand
26 states expand
All states expand
Medicaid
Medicaid
Medicaid
Medicaid
**
**
(1a)
(1b)
(2a)
(2b)
46
60
268
412
Alabama
11
14
13
33
Alaska
75
367
Arizona
39
199
Arkansas
202
1,389
California
38
187
Colorado
12
110
Connecticut
7
27
Delaware
3
9
District Of Columbia
133
154
482
746
Florida
68
75
360
702
Georgia
34
64
Hawaii
12
12
79
107
Idaho
23
306
Illinois
35
46
217
294
Indiana
15
121
Iowa
15
19
82
229
Kansas
33
293
Kentucky
42
113
210
362
Louisiana
11
15
33
41
Maine
38
216
Maryland
33
182
Massachusetts
48
252
Michigan
21
87
Minnesota
33
43
173
341
Mississippi
24
42
180
221
Missouri
10
15
43
59
Montana
7
13
52
71
Nebraska
11
44
Nevada
4
12
17
28
New Hampshire
51
224
New Jersey
40
163
New Mexico
215
987
New York
91
99
457
647
North Carolina
2
19
North Dakota
100
452
Ohio
15
35
133
241
Oklahoma
25
176
Oregon
86
114
161
227
Pennsylvania
8
22
Rhode Island
81
93
149
250
South Carolina
5
5
17
29
South Dakota
22
44
170
345
Tennessee
137
161
833
1,499
Texas
8
8
104
141
Utah
7
17
Vermont
37
82
144
234
Virginia
31
218
Washington
24
136
West Virginia
15
21
141
289
Wisconsin

Wyoming
NATIONAL
10 YEARS

9
2,095
20,946

11
2,442
24,419

23
10,804
108,039

33
13,847
138,466

* State and local government totals for these states are only positive because of savings from retirees under age 65 years. The costs of terminating
all employment-based coverage options for current state and local government workers in these states due to employer penalties and increased
liabilities for taxes more than offset the gains from federal subsidies and cost-sharing.
** Estimates are only shown in the “All States Medicaid Expansion” columns for states that do not currently have a Medicaid expansion planned
for 2014. Under a Medicaid expansion, the estimates are different than the previous column and hence are shown.
Note: The table shows the magnitude of savings to state and local governments from divestment strategies shifting SLG workers and/or under-65
retirees onto health insurance exchanges or into federally supported Medicaid expansions under two scenarios – current Medicaid expansions or
else full Medicaid expansions in all states. The results are shown by state and for the nation as a whole as well as nationally over 10 years.
Sources for this data involve authors’ calculations using MEPS and CPS data collected by the US government along with data from the Kaiser
Family Foundation on states’ Medicaid expansion statuses.

Table 2. Estimated savings to state and local governments from selective divestment strategies ($1,000,000s) in states
implementing Medicaid expansions and not using federal exchanges
Shifting only
Shifting only
under-65-retirees
employees eligible
for subsidies or Medicaid
State
26 states expand
26 states expand
Medicaid
Medicaid

Alabama
Alaska
Arizona
Arkansas
California
Colorado
Connecticut
Delaware
District Of
Columbia
Florida
Georgia
Hawaii
Idaho
Illinois
Indiana
Iowa
Kansas
Kentucky
Louisiana
Maine
Maryland
Massachusetts
Michigan
Minnesota
Mississippi
Missouri
Montana
Nebraska
Nevada
New Hampshire
New Jersey
New Mexico
New York
North Carolina
North Dakota
Ohio
Oklahoma
Oregon
Pennsylvania
Rhode Island
South Carolina
South Dakota
Tennessee
Texas
Utah
Vermont
Virginia

202
38
12

1,389
187
110

3

9

34
12

64
79

33

293

38
33

216
182

21

87

11

44

40
215

163
987

25

176

8

22

7

17

Washington
West Virginia
Wisconsin
Wyoming
NATIONAL
10 YEARS

31

218

764
7,643

4,243
42,425

Note: The table shows the magnitude of savings to state and local governments from divestment strategies shifting SLG workers and/or under-65
retirees onto health insurance exchanges or into federally supported Medicaid expansions. The scenario shown in the table involves only states
that have their own exchanges – the type not at risk if Supreme Court decisions invalidate subsidies and cost-sharing for federally administered
exchanges. The results are shown by state and for the nation as a whole as well as nationally over 10 years. Sources for this data involve authors’
calculations using MEPS and CPS data collected by the US government along with data from the Kaiser Family Foundation on the type of
exchanges operating in each state along with their Medicaid expansion status.

Figure 1: State and local governments workers and retirees below 65 years of age as % of
state population age 18‐65 years
A) State and Local Government Employees

4.1 – 6.0%
3.6 – 4.0%
3.1 – 3.5%
2.6 – 3.0%
1.5 – 2.5%

B) State and Local Government Retirees under Age 65 Years

0.51 – 0.70%
0.41 – 0.50%
0.36 – 0.40%
0.31 – 0.35%
0.00 – 0.30%

Note: This figures shows the proportions of each state’s adult population that are state and local government workers
or retirees below the age of 65 from such positions. Variation shown in the figures indicates substantial variation in
the exposure states face to healthcare costs of their employees and retirees and consequently incentives from
divestment. Source of data: Authors’ calculations with U.S. Current Population Survey and Census Data on age‐specific
state populations

Figure 2: Households of state and local governments workers and retirees below 65 years
of age falling below 400% of the Federal Poverty Level
A) Employees and Retirees with Household Incomes between 138‐400% of the Federal Poverty Line

46% – 50%
41% – 45%
36% – 40%
31% – 35%
20% – 30%

B) Employees and Retirees with Household Incomes below 138% of the Federal Poverty Line

4.6% – 9.0%
3.6% – 4.5%
2.6% – 3.5%
1.6% – 2.5%
0.0% – 1.5%

Note: This figures shows the proportions of state sand local government workers or retirees below the age of 65 from
such positions whose households fall below 138% of the Federal Poverty Limit (FPL) – hence potentially eligible for
federally subsidized Medicaid expansions – or within 138‐400% of the FPL – hence potentially eligible for federal
subsidies and cost‐sharing for insurance purchased on ACA exchanges. Variation shown in the figures indicates
substantial variation in the potential for states to capture federal dollars through health insurance divestment. Source
of data: Authors’ calculations using U.S. Current Population Survey

Appendix for “Will Divestment from Employment-Based Health Insurance Save
Employers Money? The Case of State and Local Governments”
by
Jeremy D. Goldhaber-Fiebert, Monica Farid,
David Studdert, Jay Bhattacharya

1

Appendix Sections:
1.

Study Population

2.

Average Annual Healthcare Expenditures

3.

Workforces Sizes of State and Local Governments in Relationship to ACA
Employer Penalties

4.

Medicaid Expansions and Development of State Exchanges

5.

Federal Subsidy and Cost-Sharing for ACA Exchange-Purchased Health Insurance
Plans

6.

Tax Effects of Income Supplements from State and Local Governments Whose
Workers Move to Purchase Insurance on ACA Exchanges

7.

State and Local Government Income Supplements, Federal Subsidies and CostSharing, and Tax Consequences: Two-Stage Fixed Point Method Technical Details

8.

Additional Results and Supplemental Analyses
a. Status Quo Estimates
b. Full Divestment Strategy
c. Selective Divestment Strategy
d. Comparison of Healthcare Costs of Employee Households Shifting to
Coverage under Exchange Plans and Those Continuing on State and Local
Government-Provided Plans with the Selective Divestment Strategy

2

1. Study Population
We consider two groups in our analysis, whose size we estimated using the CPS. The first group
is current employees of State and Local Governments. The second group is made up of retirees
from State and Local Governments. Additionally, we estimate the size of households of these
individuals. The table below shows the estimated size of these groups.
Appendix Table 1. Estimates of the Number of Current Workers and Retirees from State and Local
Governments under 65 Years of Age
Current Workers
Retirees below Age 65
State
#
Average
#
Average
Household
Household
Size
Size
217,000
3.4
30,000
3.0
Alabama
53,000
3.6
6,000
2.9
Alaska
222,000
3.8
31,000
2.4
Arizona
95,000
3.2
8,000
2.1
Arkansas
1,397,000
3.8
134,000
2.5
California
199,000
3.4
26,000
2.3
Colorado
148,000
3.6
17,000
2.7
Connecticut
30,000
3.3
5,000
2.1
Delaware
16,000
2.6
1,000
1.5
District Of Columbia
636,000
3.2
74,000
2.6
Florida
375,000
3.5
49,000
2.4
Georgia
53,000
4.5
10,000
4.7
Hawaii
80,000
3.4
7,000
2.9
Idaho
426,000
3.3
53,000
2.3
Illinois
197,000
3.2
22,000
2.3
Indiana
150,000
3.2
15,000
2.2
Iowa
153,000
3.6
14,000
2.2
Kansas
172,000
3.1
34,000
2.4
Kentucky
161,000
3.5
21,000
2.7
Louisiana
53,000
3.2
9,000
2.6
Maine
236,000
3.6
29,000
3.1
Maryland
266,000
3.4
30,000
2.2
Massachusetts
299,000
3.6
48,000
2.6
Michigan
190,000
3.5
24,000
2.2
Minnesota
157,000
3.4
23,000
2.2
Mississippi
213,000
3.6
24,000
2.5
Missouri
44,000
3.2
5,000
2.0
Montana
86,000
3.4
7,000
3.0
Nebraska
95,000
3.8
15,000
2.5
Nevada
48,000
3.3
7,000
2.6
New Hampshire
341,000
3.6
30,000
3.0
New Jersey
90,000
3.5
15,000
2.5
New Mexico
921,000
3.6
108,000
2.7
New York
474,000
3.3
54,000
2.3
North Carolina
34,000
3.3
3,000
2.2
North Dakota
397,000
3.5
56,000
2.6
Ohio
161,000
3.5
10,000
2.8
Oklahoma

3

Oregon
Pennsylvania
Rhode Island
South Carolina
South Dakota
Tennessee
Texas
Utah
Vermont
Virginia
Washington
West Virginia
Wisconsin
Wyoming
NATIONAL

173,000
418,000
37,000
195,000
33,000
209,000
999,000
91,000
27,000
266,000
316,000
93,000
228,000
40,000
12,008,000

3.3
3.4
3.5
3.3
3.5
3.2
3.6
4.1
3.3
3.3
3.4
3.1
3.6
3.3
3.5

32,000
77,000
8,000
41,000
3,000
15,000
108,000
9,000
3,000
28,000
29,000
10,000
31,000
3,000
1,455,000

2.2
2.8
2.5
2.4
2.2
2.2
2.6
2.6
2.7
2.2
2.5
1.9
2.2
2.8
2.5

4

2. Average Annual Healthcare Expenditures
An individual’s healthcare expenditures and those of his or her household act as reasonably close
proxy for total health insurance premium payments. We used data from MEPS to estimate
average annual medical expenditures for individuals conditional on their age, sex, and region of
the country in which they reside (see description further below). With these estimates we
predicted the average annual total healthcare costs of current State and Local Government
Employees, Retirees from these jobs under age 65 years, and the households of these individuals.
As a face validity check, we compared these predictions to the price of Silver Plans on ACA
Exchanges with the knowledge that State and Local Government benefits and insurance are
typically more generous than for comparable jobs in the private sector and hence expenditures in
these households may be higher than average. Appendix Table 2 shows a comparison of our
predictions to the premiums for a Silver Plan confirming that predicted average healthcare
spending (our proxy for premiums) in our group was higher than the Silver Plan premium
amounts, often closer to the Gold or Platinum Plans. Of note, these comparisons are made with
the total healthcare expenditures and not only the percentage of insurance premiums typically
covered by the State and Local Government employer.
Appendix Table 2. How Much Do Estimated Average Annual Healthcare Expenditures Exceed Silver Plans
on ACA Exchanges for Comparable Household Sizes
Household Size
1 person 4 people
$1,453
$787
Alabama
$1,778
$1,649
Alaska
$936
$546
Arizona
$1,000
$2,529
Arkansas
$1,431
$1,533
California
$1,099
$540
Colorado
$1,224
$4,285
Connecticut
$2,342
$1,501
Delaware
$811
$1,427
District Of Columbia
$1,534
$1,180
Florida
$1,507
$1,183
Georgia
$1,631
$2,875
Hawaii
$1,683
$125
Idaho
$2,756
$3,930
Illinois
$2,547
$3,612
Indiana
$2,431
$2,990
Iowa
$2,423
$3,129
Kansas
$280
$780
Kentucky
$786
$886
Louisiana
$2,863
$3,524
Maine
$1,547
$1,643
Maryland
$1,492
$3,322
Massachusetts
$2,179
$3,748
Michigan
$2,681
$4,181
Minnesota
$1,319
$1,321
Mississippi
$1,980
$3,082
Missouri
$1,373
$775
Montana
$2,357
$2,915
Nebraska
$1,756
$973
Nevada

5

New Hampshire
New Jersey
New Mexico
New York
North Carolina
North Dakota
Ohio
Oklahoma
Oregon
Pennsylvania
Rhode Island
South Carolina
South Dakota
Tennessee
Texas
Utah
Vermont
Virginia
Washington
West Virginia
Wisconsin
Wyoming

$2,246
$1,536
$1,581
$1,810
$1,509
$1,964
$1,610
$2,017
$1,110
$1,607
$2,129
$2,198
$2,562
$1,542
$1,421
$947
$2,105
$1,861
$1,457
$1,624
$2,786
$1,558

$3,210
$4,209
$202
$3,671
$597
$2,936
$3,275
($120)
$232
$3,255
$4,113
$1,667
$2,364
$1,554
$1,186
$459
$3,175
$1,592
$700
$990
$2,794
$604

We used the MEPS annual individual total healthcare expenditure inflated to 2013 US dollars
using the medical component of the Consumer Price Index and adjusted, as described in the
manuscript, to account for loading fees and undercounts of pharmaceutical costs along with data
on the age, sex, and region (Northeast, South, Midwest, or West) to form our predictions of
annual individual expenditure for our two study populations. To allow for a flexible non-linear
relationship between age and medical expenditures, the regression used restricted cubic splines
for age in years with knots placed at 15 year intervals from age 0 through age 75 and an
additional knot at age 85, though notably since the analysis focused on individuals below
retirement age, predictions on the under-65 populations were all that was used. Region entered
the regression as a set of dummy variables (reference category is Northeast) as did sex (reference
category is Female). The dummy variables were interacted with each other, age splines, and the
combination of the three. The regression model results are shown below and for greater clarity
and ease of interpretation, the predicted expenditure patterns by age, sex, and region are shown
in Appendix Figure 1 below.
Coefficient

Beta

Robust
Standard
Error

p-value

95% CI

Age Spline 0-15
Age Spline 15-30
Age Spline 30-45
Age Spline 45-60
Age Spline 60-75
Age Spline 75-85

113.6236
-221.6278
681.3117
-424.8395
1562.184
-5999.623

54.98912
668.247
2095.15
3128.349
4151.349
6148.192

2.07
-0.33
0.33
-0.14
0.38
-0.98

0.039
0.74
0.745
0.892
0.707
0.329

5.8461
-1531.377
-3425.136
-6556.335
-6574.369
-18049.94

Region
Midwest
South
West

769.0377
727.1344
-87.49932

717.037
731.9545
480.9301

1.07
0.99
-0.18

0.283
0.321
0.856

-636.3392
-707.4804
-1030.112

6

Region * Age Spline (0-15)
Midwest
South
West

-159.6188
-183.982
-113.6085

87.44735
82.7739
64.16526

-1.83
-2.22
-1.77

0.068
0.026
0.077

-331.0137
-346.217
-239.371

Region * Age Spline (15-30)
Midwest
South
West

2327.005
2149.976
1459.76

955.3503
872.9558
809.3271

2.44
2.46
1.8

0.015
0.014
0.071

454.5391
439.0022
-126.503

Region * Age Spline (30-45)
Midwest
South
West

-7397.975
-6506.44
-3825.126

2937.612
2646.13
2790.103

-2.52
-2.46
-1.37

0.012
0.014
0.17

-13155.63
-11692.8
-9293.667

Region * Age Spline (45-60)
Midwest
South
West

11057.04
8843.475
3251.278

4402.151
3834.575
5161.049

2.51
2.31
0.63

0.012
0.021
0.529

2428.917
1327.792
-6864.266

Region * Age Spline (60-75)
Midwest
South
West

-13346.48
-9512.011
-1571.384

5883.159
4967.089
7656.267

-2.27
-1.92
-0.21

0.023
0.055
0.837

-24877.35
-19247.4
-16577.5

Region * Age Spline (75-85)
Midwest
South
West

13649.34
9871.189
2217.815

8240.647
7235.822
10188.96

1.66
1.36
0.22

0.098
0.173
0.828

-2502.15
-4310.865
-17752.32

Male

529.6052

551.7665

0.96

0.337

-551.845

Male * Age Spline (0-15)
Male

-56.0196

76.7225

-0.73

0.465

-206.394

Male * Age Spline (15-30)
Male

-960.8822

974.2302

-0.99

0.324

-2870.352

Male * Age Spline (30-45)
Male

4688.839

3349.559

1.4

0.162

-1876.224

Male * Age Spline (45-60)
Male

-8097.658

6199.041

-1.31

0.191

-20247.64

Male * Age Spline (60-75)
Male

5973.889

9816.104

0.61

0.543

-13265.46

Male * Age Spline (75-85)
Male

-2442.451

13689.86

-0.18

0.858

-29274.28

Region * Male
Midwest, Male
South, Male
West, Male

-310.9885
-858.9727
-485.8696

929.8945
846.022
664.8764

-0.33
-1.02
-0.73

0.738
0.31
0.465

-2133.561
-2517.157
-1789.013

81.54219
124.5319

117.1654
103.5665

0.7
1.2

0.486
0.229

-148.0994
-78.45623

Region * Male * Age Spline (0-15)
Midwest, Male
South, Male

7

96.6155

95.29748

1.01

0.311

-90.16548

Region * Male * Age Spline (15-30)
Midwest, Male
South, Male
West, Male

-1172.715
-1319.967
-683.0241

1338.257
1190.05
1194.532

-0.88
-1.11
-0.57

0.381
0.267
0.567

-3795.669
-3652.439
-3024.281

Region * Male * Age Spline (30-45)
Midwest, Male
South, Male
West, Male

2882.241
3532.036
-133.6795

4371.593
3932.19
4154.981

0.66
0.9
-0.03

0.51
0.369
0.974

-5685.986
-4174.97
-8277.352

Region * Male * Age Spline (45-60)
Midwest, Male
South, Male
West, Male

-2012.342
-3853.203
5739.409

7531.788
6903.38
7886.26

-0.27
-0.56
0.73

0.789
0.577
0.467

-16774.48
-17383.68
-9717.488

Region * Male * Age Spline (60-75)
Midwest, Male
South, Male
West, Male

686.8747
4239.114
-10748.51

11417.13
10635.73
12392.24

0.06
0.4
-0.87

0.952
0.69
0.386

-21690.45
-16606.69
-35037.02

Region * Male * Age Spline (75-85)
Midwest, Male
South, Male
West, Male

1135.603
-4350.547
11140.72

16118.24
15120
17229.77

0.07
-0.29
0.65

0.944
0.774
0.518

-30455.8
-33985.41
-22629.26

1697.256

413.875

4.1

0

886.0698

West, Male

Constant

N = 167,279; F(55,167223) = 113.38; Prob > F < 0.0001; R-squared = 0.0624; Root MSE = 16,105

8

Appendix Figure 1. Average Annual Medical Expenditures Including Pharmaceuticals (USD 2013) By Age,
Sex, and US Geographic Region

9

3. Workforces Sizes of State and Local Governments in Relationship to ACA Employer
Penalties
We used 2011 APES data to provide an independent estimate of the size of our study population
as a face validation check and more importantly to characterize the percentage of state and local
government workers working for governments of different sizes. The latter was particularly
relevant because employer penalties are determined by the number of full-time workers above
30. Since the CPS does not allow linking individual workers to specific State or Local
Government entities, it was important to establish that the overwhelming majority of workers
work for governments whose total number of employees exceeds several hundred. This would
mean that the likelihood of at least one employee receiving subsidies or cost-sharing for
purchasing insurance on ACA exchanges is high and that the average per-capita penalty for that
government entity would be very close to $2,000 should it choose to cancel its provision of
insurance entirely. Appendix Table 3 shows both of these assumptions to be highly credible.
Appendix Table 3. Distribution of Sizes of State and Local Government Workforces According to the 2011
APES and the Implied size of the Employer Penalty for Firms of Corresponding Sizes
Size of Government Workforce
Average PerTotal Number of State and Total Number of Full(Number of Full-time Employees)
Capita Penalty
Local Governments
Time Employees
($)
0
3,290
41,914
30 and below
65
1
31
31
163
6
196
32-33
264
7
242
34-35
356
6
219
36-37
451
11
426
38-39
533
23
941
40-42
658
47
2,102
43-46
749
40
1,919
47-49
846
122
6,344
50-54
944
125
7,103
55-59
1,050
162
10,229
60-66
1,148
156
10,989
67-74
1,252
243
19,489
75-85
1,352
281
26,034
86-99
1,452
315
34,508
100-119
1,552
450
60,252
120-149
1,654
642
111,263
150-199
1,757
834
206,306
200-299
1,861
1,229
532,079
300-599
1,985
2,522
10,400,000
600+
TOTAL
10,512
11,472,568

10

4. Medicaid Expansions and Development of State Exchanges
State Medicaid expansions are important given that under the ACA the federal government
supports these expansions. However, such expansions are a moving target – as some states have
not implemented them without any current intention of doing so and others have not
implemented but are contemplating expansions more actively. We used data reported by the
Kaiser Family Foundation monitoring current implementations of Medicaid expansions as of
January 28, 2014 as shown in the table below.
Appendix Table 4. Medicaid Expansions for Implementation in 2014 According to the Kaiser Family
Foundation
State
Implementing Expansion
in 2014
No
Alabama
No
Alaska
Yes
Arizona
Yes
Arkansas
Yes
California
Yes
Colorado
Yes
Connecticut
Yes
Delaware
Yes
District of Columbia
No
Florida
No
Georgia
Yes
Hawaii
No
Idaho
Yes
Illinois
No
Indiana
Yes
Iowa
No
Kansas
Yes
Kentucky
No
Louisiana
No
Maine
Yes
Maryland
Yes
Massachusetts
Yes
Michigan
Yes
Minnesota
No
Mississippi
No
Missouri
No
Montana
No
Nebraska
Yes
Nevada
No
New Hampshire
Yes
New Jersey
Yes
New Mexico
Yes
New York
No
North Carolina
Yes
North Dakota
Yes
Ohio
No
Oklahoma
Yes
Oregon
No
Pennsylvania

11

Rhode Island
South Carolina
South Dakota
Tennessee
Texas
Utah
Vermont
Virginia
Washington
West Virginia
Wisconsin
Wyoming

Yes
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
No

Likewise, given Supreme Court considerations in cases like King v Burwell, the type of ACA
exchange in a state may determine whether subsidies and cost-sharing are available to otherwise
qualifying individuals purchasing insurance via the exchange. Given uncertainty in the
availability of subsidies and cost-sharing should the case be decided that federal exchanges do
not qualify, we performed a sensitivity analysis only estimating savings in states that had such
exchanges. For this sensitivity analysis, we use data from a Kaiser Family Foundation report
characterizing state exchange types.
Appendix Table 5. State Exchange Type in 2014 According to the Kaiser Family Foundation
State
Exchange Type
Subsidy Eligible
Regardless of
Supreme Court
Ruling
Federally-facilitated Marketplace
No
Alabama
Federally-facilitated Marketplace
No
Alaska
Federally-facilitated Marketplace
No
Arizona
State-Partnership Marketplace
No
Arkansas
State-based Marketplace
Yes
California
State-based Marketplace
Yes
Colorado
State-based Marketplace
Yes
Connecticut
State-Partnership Marketplace
No
Delaware
Yes
District of Columbia State-based Marketplace
Federally-facilitated Marketplace
No
Florida
Federally-facilitated Marketplace
No
Georgia
State-based Marketplace
Yes
Hawaii
State-based Marketplace
Yes
Idaho
State-Partnership Marketplace
No
Illinois
Federally-facilitated Marketplace
No
Indiana
State-Partnership Marketplace
No
Iowa
Federally-facilitated Marketplace
No
Kansas
State-based Marketplace
Yes
Kentucky
Federally-facilitated Marketplace
No
Louisiana
Federally-facilitated Marketplace
No
Maine
State-based Marketplace
Yes
Maryland
State-based Marketplace
Yes
Massachusetts
State-Partnership Marketplace
No
Michigan
State-based Marketplace
Yes
Minnesota
Federally-facilitated Marketplace
No
Mississippi
Federally-facilitated Marketplace
No
Missouri
Federally-facilitated Marketplace
No
Montana

12

Nebraska
Nevada
New Hampshire
New Jersey
New Mexico
New York
North Carolina
North Dakota
Ohio
Oklahoma
Oregon
Pennsylvania
Rhode Island
South Carolina
South Dakota
Tennessee
Texas
Utah
Vermont
Virginia
Washington
West Virginia
Wisconsin
Wyoming

Federally-facilitated Marketplace
Federally-supported State-based Marketplace
State-Partnership Marketplace
Federally-facilitated Marketplace
Federally-supported State-based Marketplace
State-based Marketplace
Federally-facilitated Marketplace
Federally-facilitated Marketplace
Federally-facilitated Marketplace
Federally-facilitated Marketplace
Federally-supported State-based Marketplace
Federally-facilitated Marketplace
State-based Marketplace
Federally-facilitated Marketplace
Federally-facilitated Marketplace
Federally-facilitated Marketplace
Federally-facilitated Marketplace
Federally-facilitated Marketplace
State-based Marketplace
Federally-facilitated Marketplace
State-based Marketplace
State-Partnership Marketplace
Federally-facilitated Marketplace
Federally-facilitated Marketplace

No
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
No
No

13

5. Federal Subsidy and Cost-Sharing for ACA Exchange-Purchased Health Insurance
Plans
For individuals purchasing health insurance on the ACA exchanges, federal subsidies and cost
sharing may be available depending on their household income and their expected medical
expenditures relative to the Silver Plan premium payments for households of equivalent size.
Subsidies are computed based on tiers of household income as a percentage of the Federal
Poverty Level: 138-149, 150-199, 200-249, 250-299, and 300-400 percent of the Federal Poverty
Level respectively. To determine the subsidy amount, the subsidy percentage is multiplied by the
total household income, and this amount is then subtracted from the price of a Silver Plan for a
household of size 1, 2, or 3+ individuals according to the size of each household in the affected
population. The price of the Silver Plan for a household of one individual is $4,914 and $13,591
for a household of 4 in in 2013 dollars. Likewise, cost-sharing percentages are based on tiers
from 138-149, 150-199, 200-249, and 250-400 percent of the Federal Poverty Level. To
determine the cost-sharing amount, the cost-sharing percentage is multiplied by the total
expected annual household medical expenditure.

14

6. Tax Effects of Income Supplements from State and Local Governments Whose Workers
Move to Purchase Insurance on ACA Exchanges
For federal income taxes, we classified each CPS household as being a single filer, married joint
filer, or head of household filer. Then, based on their Adjusted Gross Income (AGI), we
computed their total tax burden based on 2013 AGI cutoffs for marginal tax rates of 10%, 15%,
25%, 28%, 33%, 35%, and 39.6%. Assuming State and Local Governments wanted to make their
current workers as well off as they currently are after divesting from health care coverage, we
computed the amount of additional compensation that would need to be paid by SLGs to their
employees to offset both the cost of health insurance premium payments (net federal subsidies
and cost-sharing which also depend on the amount of the additional compensation) as well as to
cover increases in tax liabilities, using a two-step fixed point method (detailed below).

15

7. State and Local Government Income Supplements, Federal Subsidies and Cost-Sharing,
and Tax Consequences: Two-Stage Fixed Point Method Technical Details
To make our estimates of State and Local Government savings by divesting from the provision
of health insurance, we needed to compute the amount State and Local Government income
supplements net of federal subsidies and cost-sharing and compensating for their impact on an
individual’s federal tax bill. As federal subsidies and cost-sharing depended on total household
income relative to the Federal Poverty Level and the tax bill depended on Adjusted Gross
Income, simultaneously computing these quantities implied dealing with their interdependency.
To do so, we used an iterative, two-step, fixed point method.
First, we define three functions of Household Income (I) and Household Size and Demographic
Structure (F).
1) Subsidies (Federal Subsidy and Cost-Sharing) Function: : ,
2) Health Insurance Premium Payment Function: : ,
→
→
3) Federal Tax Bill Function: : ,

→

We compute initial values for Premium Payments (P0), Subsidies (S0) and Taxes (T0)
independent of one another:
,
,
,
We notice that Premium Payments are determined entirely by the Household Size and
Demographic Structure so P0 will remain fixed at P which we use unsubscripted for the
subsequent description below.
In our first step of our two-step approach, we update the Subsidies to account for premium
support that increases income provided by the State and Local government and likewise
recomputed Taxes based on this increase to income:
,
,
In our second step of our two-step approach, to ensure that the individual receives enough
additional income so that increases to the tax bill are compensated for, we update the Taxes
based on the following:
Δ
Δ ,
Δ ,

16

The system of equations has a fixed point. First, the Health Insurance Premium Payments (P) for
a fixed value of F and do not depend on income. Second, the Subsidies (S) are a declining
function of income for a fixed value of F. Third, Taxes is an increasing function of income for a
fixed value of F, but stabilizes to a function of elements that do not depend on subsidies once
income exceeds 400% of the Federal Poverty Level and hence subsidies are 0.
We rely on a numerical approximation of this fixed point by iteratively repeating this two-step
computation 50 times S2 in a given iteration replaces S0 for the start of the next iteration. After
the 50 iterations, we examine the values of subsidies and taxes after each iteration to ensure that
they have reached stable values by end whose changes from iteration 49 to 50 are approaching
$0 on average for all U.S. states (i.e., examining patterns of changes for each sequential pair of
iterations) and are very small in the last pair of iterations (i.e., <$1 on average for each state
between iteration 49 and 50).
Finally, with the values of the federal subsidies and cost-sharing estimated along with the change
in taxes for each household at the 50th iteration, we can compute the State and Local Government
income supplement to offset the difference between health insurance premium payments as:
Δ

17

8. Additional Results and Supplemental Analyses
8a. Status Quo Estimates
Appendix Table 6 shows the estimates of the total healthcare costs for households of SLGs
workers and retirees below the age 65 as a proxy for their premium costs. As noted in the
manuscript, we assume that SLGs cover 80% of the premium costs and hence have scaled
Appendix Table 6 accordingly, hence representing the costs borne by the SLGs. These estimates
represent the status quo costs against which potential savings and additional costs to SLGs of
various divestment strategies are benchmarked. Likewise, Appendix Table 7 shows the
percentage of households of SLG current workers and retirees below the age of 65 that fall below
important Federal Poverty Level thresholds (i.e., those for which ACA federal subsidies and
cost-sharing would apply; those for which federal support of Medicaid expansions would apply
if the state implements such an expansion). Of note, under various divestment strategies that
involve transfers to workers or retirees from SLGs in the form of income supplements in lieu of
providing health insurance directly, these percentages can change in ways that shift eligibility
and sizes of subsidies and of cost-sharing (see Appendix Section 7 above on the dynamic
calculation of these levels).
Appendix Table 6. Estimated Total Premium Costs (in $1,000,000s) for Households of State and Local
Government Current Workers and Retirees under Age 65
State
Current Workers Retirees
2,253
488
Alabama
494
99
Alaska
2,177
425
Arizona
916
132
Arkansas
13,876
2,044
California
1,778
391
Colorado
1,647
309
Connecticut
319
67
Delaware
117
17
District Of Columbia
5,836
1,091
Florida
3,664
803
Georgia
565
172
Hawaii
717
117
Idaho
4,746
980
Illinois
2,337
352
Indiana
1,690
310
Iowa
1,690
263
Kansas
1,596
533
Kentucky
1,558
398
Louisiana
586
151
Maine
2,319
430
Maryland
2,936
479
Massachusetts
3,498
861
Michigan
2,253
438
Minnesota
1,412
350
Mississippi
2,379
426
Missouri
414
76
Montana
982
154
Nebraska
930
228
Nevada

18

New Hampshire
New Jersey
New Mexico
New York
North Carolina
North Dakota
Ohio
Oklahoma
Oregon
Pennsylvania
Rhode Island
South Carolina
South Dakota
Tennessee
Texas
Utah
Vermont
Virginia
Washington
West Virginia
Wisconsin
Wyoming
NATIONAL
10 YEARS

565
4,027
822
9,908
4,195
369
4,454
1,442
1,557
4,307
426
1,855
352
2,060
9,198
893
300
2,574
2,920
926
2,606
368
121,807
1,218,066

110
524
224
1,702
844
53
905
214
488
1,244
113
603
62
243
1,556
145
62
399
478
165
622
58
23,398
233,980

19

Appendix Table 7. Household Incomes Relative to the 2013 Federal Poverty Line (FPL) for Current Workers
and Retirees from State and Local Governments under 65 Years of Age
Current Workers
Retirees
State
% between
% below
% between
% below
138-400%
138%
138-400%
138%
of FPL
of FPL
of FPL
of FPL
47%
5%
28%
2%
Alabama
47%
3%
44%
5%
Alaska
51%
3%
27%
8%
Arizona
47%
5%
54%
9%
Arkansas
35%
3%
29%
2%
California
36%
4%
31%
2%
Colorado
31%
1%
17%
0%
Connecticut
36%
3%
32%
5%
Delaware
33%
2%
47%
10%
District Of Columbia
43%
3%
34%
3%
Florida
50%
7%
31%
2%
Georgia
50%
4%
30%
5%
Hawaii
50%
3%
40%
0%
Idaho
34%
1%
23%
0%
Illinois
45%
3%
51%
5%
Indiana
38%
2%
29%
2%
Iowa
46%
7%
28%
3%
Kansas
46%
6%
36%
0%
Kentucky
47%
7%
33%
18%
Louisiana
40%
1%
42%
2%
Maine
29%
3%
36%
2%
Maryland
26%
2%
17%
7%
Massachusetts
34%
2%
34%
0%
Michigan
34%
1%
30%
2%
Minnesota
48%
10%
45%
4%
Mississippi
46%
2%
39%
6%
Missouri
43%
3%
29%
10%
Montana
42%
2%
36%
3%
Nebraska
39%
1%
27%
0%
Nevada
29%
1%
21%
6%
New Hampshire
24%
1%
32%
3%
New Jersey
40%
9%
45%
7%
New Mexico
36%
3%
33%
5%
New York
44%
3%
31%
2%
North Carolina
35%
2%
22%
0%
North Dakota
43%
2%
35%
8%
Ohio
48%
5%
35%
12%
Oklahoma
39%
3%
29%
0%
Oregon
32%
1%
31%
2%
Pennsylvania
25%
1%
20%
3%
Rhode Island
40%
4%
48%
3%
South Carolina
49%
2%
34%
0%
South Dakota
46%
6%
35%
10%
Tennessee
48%
5%
33%
2%
Texas
47%
3%
17%
0%
Utah
34%
1%
41%
2%
Vermont
38%
3%
35%
10%
Virginia
38%
1%
47%
2%
Washington

20

West Virginia
Wisconsin
Wyoming
NATIONAL

47%
42%
41%
40%

4%
4%
2%
3%

34%
29%
41%
33%

4%
3%
6%
3%

21

8b. Full Divestment Strategy
We consider the Full Divestment Strategy in the context of current state Medicaid expansions
which would be federally supported under the ACA. Columns in the tables generally show
individual components of savings (costs) that the strategies induce. For the current Medicaid
expansion scenarios in states that have not expanded Medicaid, we make two assumptions: 1) no
savings from federal support for Medicaid expansions; 2) SLGs in states without Medicaid
expansions increase compensation to households below 138% of the FPL so that their household
falls at 138% of the FPL and hence they qualify for maximal exchange subsidies and costsharing. For current workers, assumption #2 induces some increases in federal taxes that the
SLGs must also offset because of increased incomes. The component costs and savings are
shown in Appendix Tables 8-9.
In the Full Divestment Strategy, we sum the component savings and costs for current worker and
retiree subgroups. Then, for each state, we subtract employer penalties (approximately $2,000
per worker times the number of workers in Appendix Table 1) to compute the net savings (or
cost) (Appendix Table 10). We repeat this step examining a set of hypotheticals in which the
employer penalty per worker is lowered or even $0. The relevance of these hypotheticals is that
some smaller to mid-size SLGs may face a lower per-worker employer penalty than $2,000
given that the penalty is levied for workers above the first 30. Additionally, the $0 penalty may
be relevant if SLGs were to successfully challenge the applicability of the penalty to them.
We also consider the Full Divestment Strategy under a hypothetical scenario in which all states
implement Medicaid expansions. These results are shown in Appendix Tables 11-13. Note that
in the full Medicaid expansion scenario, SLGs do not increase the household incomes of those
below 138% of FPL up to 138% since those falling below 138% of FPL qualify for federal
support under Medicaid which produces larger savings for the SLGs.

22

Appendix Table 8. Component Savings and Costs from Divestment for Current Employees Assuming
Current Medicaid Expansions Only ($1,000,000s)
Savings from
Savings from
Additional Federal
Additional
Federal
Federal Support Taxes Compensated Compensation to bring
Government
of Medicaid
by State and Local
Household below 138%
Subsidies and
Expansions*
Governments
of the Federal Poverty
Cost-Sharing
Level up to That Level*
587
0
406
17
Alabama
72
0
110
1
Alaska
585
83
386
0
Arizona
255
58
143
0
Arkansas
2,169
479
3,026
0
California
275
75
393
0
Colorado
197
23
359
0
Connecticut
48
9
64
0
Delaware
20
1
28
0
District of Columbia
1,207
0
1,095
43
Florida
956
0
642
76
Georgia
105
30
108
0
Hawaii
174
0
117
3
Idaho
621
69
968
0
Illinois
483
0
373
14
Indiana
221
37
304
0
Iowa
287
0
270
27
Kansas
403
95
266
0
Kentucky
473
0
274
21
Louisiana
87
0
113
2
Maine
299
83
533
0
Maryland
289
52
647
0
Massachusetts
436
69
707
0
Michigan
220
14
446
0
Minnesota
416
0
216
23
Mississippi
434
0
408
4
Missouri
91
0
76
3
Montana
147
0
176
3
Nebraska
127
6
194
0
Nevada
56
0
117
4
New Hampshire
418
35
930
0
New Jersey
181
81
142
0
New Mexico
1,396
430
2,006
0
New York
1,035
0
748
34
North Carolina
39
10
70
0
North Dakota
801
100
799
0
Ohio
336
0
240
22
Oklahoma
295
52
300
0
Oregon
507
0
893
14
Pennsylvania
38
7
96
0
Rhode Island
371
0
335
4
South Carolina
62
0
60
3
South Dakota
473
0
344
34
Tennessee
2,141
0
1,609
130
Texas
213
0
174
4
Utah
33
3
58
0
Vermont
427
0
514
5
Virginia

23

457
33
605
0
Washington
208
43
149
0
West Virginia
387
0
473
12
Wisconsin
64
0
71
1
Wyoming
* For states without Medicaid expansions, savings from federal support of Medicaid is $0 but additional savings are
captured by increasing the household incomes of workers falling below 138% of the federal poverty lines up to
138% such that these households qualify for federal subsidies and cost-sharing for exchange-purchased plans.

24

Appendix Table 9. Component Savings and Costs from Divestment for Retirees under Age 65 Assuming
Current Medicaid Expansions Only ($1,000,000s)
Savings from Federal
Savings from Federal
Additional Compensation to bring
Government Subsidies
Support of Medicaid
Household below 138% of the
and Cost-Sharing
Expansions*
Federal Poverty Level up to That
Level*
52
0
5
Alabama
11
0
0
Alaska
42
33
0
Arizona
23
16
0
Arkansas
175
27
0
California
32
6
0
Colorado
12
0
0
Connecticut
4
4
0
Delaware
2
2
0
District of
Columbia
133
0
0
Florida
68
0
1
Georgia
18
16
0
Hawaii
12
0
0
Idaho
23
0
0
Illinois
37
0
2
Indiana
10
5
0
Iowa
15
0
0
Kansas
33
0
0
Kentucky
49
0
7
Louisiana
12
0
1
Maine
31
7
0
Maryland
16
17
0
Massachusetts
48
0
0
Michigan
14
7
0
Minnesota
36
0
3
Mississippi
34
0
10
Missouri
10
0
0
Montana
7
0
0
Nebraska
11
0
0
Nevada
5
0
2
New
Hampshire
43
8
0
New Jersey
25
15
0
New Mexico
132
83
0
New York
91
0
0
North Carolina
2
0
0
North Dakota
54
46
0
Ohio
18
0
4
Oklahoma
25
0
0
Oregon
95
0
9
Pennsylvania
5
3
0
Rhode Island
81
0
0
South Carolina
5
0
0
South Dakota
32
0
11
Tennessee
140
0
3
Texas
8
0
0
Utah
5
2
0
Vermont

25

43
0
6
Virginia
24
8
0
Washington
15
9
0
West Virginia
15
0
0
Wisconsin
9
0
0
Wyoming
* For states without Medicaid expansions, savings from federal support of Medicaid is $0 but additional savings are
captured by increasing the household incomes of workers falling below 138% of the federal poverty lines up to
138% such that these households qualify for federal subsidies and cost-sharing for exchange-purchased plans.

26

Appendix Table 10. Savings from Divestment for Current Employees and Retirees under Age 65 Assuming
Current Medicaid Expansions Only and Depending on Employer Penalty Level ($1,000,000s)*
Savings
Savings
Savings
Savings
Savings
with
with
with
with
with
Employer
Employer
Employer
Employer
Employer
Penalty
Penalty of
Penalty of
Penalty of
Penalty of
of
$1,750
$1,500
$1,000
$0
$2,000*
-170
-116
-7
210
Alabama
-224
-121
-107
-81
-28
Alaska
-134
-32
24
135
357
Arizona
-87
43
66
114
209
Arkansas
19
-2,621
-2,272
-1,573
-176
California
-2,970
-352
-302
-203
-4
Colorado
-402
-386
-349
-275
-127
Connecticut
-423
-52
-44
-29
1
Delaware
-59
-31
-27
-19
-3
District of Columbia
-35
-910
-751
-433
203
Florida
-1,069
-351
-257
-70
305
Georgia
-445
-32
-19
8
61
Hawaii
-45
-75
-55
-15
65
Idaho
-95
-1,001
-894
-681
-255
Illinois
-1,107
-213
-164
-66
131
Indiana
-263
-294
-256
-181
-31
Iowa
-331
-261
-223
-146
7
Kansas
-299
-37
6
92
264
Kentucky
-80
-62
-22
59
220
Louisiana
-102
-110
-97
-70
-17
Maine
-123
-526
-467
-349
-113
Maryland
-585
-739
-672
-539
-273
Massachusetts
-805
-677
-603
-453
-154
Michigan
-752
-523
-476
-381
-191
Minnesota
-571
-65
-25
53
210
Mississippi
-104
-326
-273
-166
47
Missouri
-379
-55
-44
-22
22
Montana
-66
-175
-153
-110
-24
Nebraska
-196
-217
-193
-145
-50
Nevada
-240
-145
-133
-109
-61
New Hampshire
-157
-1,022
-937
-766
-425
New Jersey
-1,107
3
26
71
161
New Mexico
-19
-1,577
-1,346
-886
35
New York
-1,807
-485
-367
-130
344
North Carolina
-604
-79
-70
-53
-19
North Dakota
-87
-492
-393
-195
202
Ohio
-592
-193
-153
-72
89
Oklahoma
-233
-230
-187
-100
73
Oregon
-273
-1,046
-942
-733
-315
Pennsylvania
-1,151
-107
-98
-79
-42
Rhode Island
-116
-229
-181
-83
112
South Carolina
-278
-54
-46
-29
4
South Dakota
-62
-249
-197
-93
116
Tennessee
-302
-1,208
-958
-458
541
Texas
-1,457
-116
-93
-47
44
Utah
-138
-62
-55
-41
-14
Vermont
-68

27

-521
-455
-322
-56
Virginia
-588
-637
-558
-400
-84
Washington
-716
-37
-14
33
126
West Virginia
-60
-482
-425
-311
-83
Wisconsin
-539
-69
-59
-39
1
Wyoming
-79
NATIONAL*
19
46
122
565
4,160
10 YEARS*
190
460
1,220
5,650
41,600
* The first column of estimates ($2,000 employer penalty per worker) is shown in bold as it is the assumption made
in the main analyses as shown in the manuscript.

28

Appendix Table 11. Component Savings and Costs from Divestment for Current Employees Assuming
Medicaid Expansions in All States ($1,000,000s)
Savings from Federal
Savings from Federal
Additional Federal Taxes
Government Subsidies and
Support of Medicaid
Compensated by State and
Cost-Sharing
Expansions
Local Governments
551
156
403
Alabama
71
19
109
Alaska
585
83
386
Arizona
255
58
143
Arkansas
2,169
479
3,026
California
275
75
393
Colorado
197
23
359
Connecticut
48
9
64
Delaware
20
1
28
District of
Columbia
1,185
233
1,090
Florida
932
282
632
Georgia
105
30
108
Hawaii
174
25
117
Idaho
621
69
968
Illinois
463
78
371
Indiana
221
37
304
Iowa
287
120
266
Kansas
403
95
266
Kentucky
473
130
272
Louisiana
85
7
112
Maine
299
83
533
Maryland
289
52
647
Massachusetts
436
69
707
Michigan
220
14
446
Minnesota
401
158
212
Mississippi
434
38
408
Missouri
90
14
76
Montana
146
16
175
Nebraska
127
6
194
Nevada
56
7
117
New Hampshire
418
35
930
New Jersey
181
81
142
New Mexico
1,396
430
2,006
New York
1,030
158
743
North Carolina
39
10
70
North Dakota
801
100
799
Ohio
331
89
237
Oklahoma
295
52
300
Oregon
501
54
892
Pennsylvania
38
7
96
Rhode Island
371
97
335
South Carolina
57
12
59
South Dakota
473
141
340
Tennessee
2,106
564
1,588
Texas
205
39
173
Utah
33
3
58
Vermont
414
95
513
Virginia
457
33
605
Washington

29

West Virginia
Wisconsin
Wyoming

208
387
62

43
136
10

149
471
70

30

Appendix Table 12. Component Savings and Costs from Divestment for Retirees under Age 65 Assuming
Medicaid Expansions in All States ($1,000,000s)
Savings from
Savings from
Federal Government
Federal Support of
Subsidies and Cost-Sharing Medicaid Expansions
52
9
Alabama
10
5
Alaska
42
33
Arizona
23
16
Arkansas
175
27
California
32
6
Colorado
12
0
Connecticut
4
4
Delaware
2
2
District of Columbia
125
29
Florida
68
6
Georgia
18
16
Hawaii
12
0
Idaho
23
0
Illinois
37
8
Indiana
10
5
Iowa
15
4
Kansas
33
0
Kentucky
43
70
Louisiana
12
3
Maine
31
7
Maryland
16
17
Massachusetts
48
0
Michigan
14
7
Minnesota
36
7
Mississippi
20
22
Missouri
10
5
Montana
7
5
Nebraska
11
0
Nevada
5
7
New Hampshire
43
8
New Jersey
25
15
New Mexico
132
83
New York
81
18
North Carolina
2
0
North Dakota
54
46
Ohio
9
26
Oklahoma
25
0
Oregon
95
20
Pennsylvania
5
3
Rhode Island
81
12
South Carolina
5
0
South Dakota
32
11
Tennessee
140
21
Texas
8
0
Utah
5
2
Vermont
43
40
Virginia
24
8
Washington
15
9
West Virginia

31

Wisconsin
Wyoming

8
7

13
4

32

Appendix Table 13. Savings from Divestment for Current Employees and Retirees under Age 65 Assuming
Medicaid Expansions in All States and Depending on Employer Penalty Level ($1,000,000s)*
Savings
Savings
Savings
Savings
Savings
with
with
with
with
with
Employer Employer Employer Employer Employer
Penalty
Penalty
Penalty
Penalty
Penalty
of
of
of
of
of
$2,000
$1,750
$1,500
$1,000
$0
-15
39
148
365
Alabama
-69
-98
-84
-58
-5
Alaska
-111
-32
24
135
357
Arizona
-87
43
66
114
209
Arkansas
19
-2,621
-2,272
-1,573
-176
California
-2,970
-352
-302
-203
-4
Colorado
-402
-386
-349
-275
-127
Connecticut
-423
-52
-44
-29
1
Delaware
-59
-31
-27
-19
-3
District of Columbia
-35
-631
-472
-154
482
Florida
-790
-1
93
281
656
Georgia
-94
-32
-19
8
61
Hawaii
-45
-47
-27
13
93
Idaho
-67
-1,001
-894
-681
-255
Illinois
-1,107
-129
-79
19
216
Indiana
-178
-294
-256
-181
-31
Iowa
-331
-107
-69
8
161
Kansas
-145
-37
6
92
264
Kentucky
-80
163
203
284
445
Louisiana
123
-98
-85
-59
-6
Maine
-112
-526
-467
-349
-113
Maryland
-585
-739
-672
-539
-273
Massachusetts
-805
-677
-603
-453
-154
Michigan
-752
-523
-476
-381
-191
Minnesota
-571
114
154
232
389
Mississippi
75
-266
-213
-106
107
Missouri
-319
-34
-23
-1
43
Montana
-45
-151
-130
-87
-1
Nebraska
-173
-217
-193
-145
-50
Nevada
-240
-126
-114
-90
-42
New Hampshire
-138
-1,022
-937
-766
-425
New Jersey
-1,107
3
26
71
161
New Mexico
-19
-1,577
-1,346
-886
35
New York
-1,807
-286
-167
70
544
North Carolina
-404
-79
-70
-53
-19
North Dakota
-87
-492
-393
-195
202
Ohio
-592
-64
-24
57
218
Oklahoma
-104
-230
-187
-100
73
Oregon
-273
-954
-850
-641
-223
Pennsylvania
-1,059
-107
-98
-79
-42
Rhode Island
-116
-115
-66
31
226
South Carolina
-164
-43
-35
-18
15
South Dakota
-51
-48
4
109
318
Tennessee
-100
-506
-257
243
1,242
Texas
-756
-80
-57
-11
80
Utah
-102
-62
-55
-41
-14
Vermont
-68

33

-387
-320
-187
79
Virginia
-453
-637
-558
-400
-84
Washington
-716
-37
-14
33
126
West Virginia
-60
-326
-269
-155
73
Wisconsin
-383
-58
-48
-28
12
Wyoming
-68
NATIONAL*
217
323
615
1,948
7,253
10 YEARS*
2,170
3,230
6,150
19,480
72,530
* The first column of estimates ($2,000 employer penalty per worker) is shown in bold as it is the assumption made
in the main analyses as shown in the manuscript.

34

8c. Selective Divestment Strategy
We consider the Selective Divestment Strategy in the context of current state Medicaid
expansions which would be federally supported under the ACA. Columns in the tables generally
show individual components of savings (costs) that the strategies induce. For the current
Medicaid expansion scenarios in states that have not expanded Medicaid, we make two
assumptions: 1) no savings from federal support for Medicaid expansions; 2) SLGs in states
without Medicaid expansions increase compensation to households below 138% of the FPL so
that their household falls at 138% of the FPL and hence they qualify for maximal exchange
subsidies and cost-sharing. For current workers, assumption #2 induces some increases in federal
taxes that the SLGs must also offset because of increased incomes. The component costs and
savings for current workers are shown in Appendix Tables 14. Of note, since full divestment for
retirees under age 65 is cost saving and no employer penalties are relevant to this subgroup, we
use the data presented in Appendix Table 9 for the retiree portion of this strategy as well.
In the Selective Divestment Strategy, we sum the component savings and costs for current
worker and retiree subgroups. Unlike the Full Divestment Strategy, penalties are assessed for
workers who qualify for federal subsidies or cost-sharing, so these penalty estimates are reported
in the tables directly. Of note, like the Full Divestment Strategy, a $0 penalty may be relevant if
SLGs were to successfully challenge the applicability of the penalty to them – if so, the
component costs and savings could be summed omitting the employer penalty column.
We also consider the Selective Divestment Strategy under a hypothetical scenario in which all
states implement Medicaid expansions. These results are shown in Appendix Tables 15, with
those relevant to retirees the same as Appendix Table 12. Note that in the full Medicaid
expansion scenario, SLGs do not increase the household incomes of those below 138% of FPL
up to 138% since those falling below 138% of FPL qualify for federal support under Medicaid
which produces larger savings for the SLGs.

35

Appendix Table 14. Component Savings and Costs from Selective Divestment for Current Employees below
400% of the Federal Poverty Level Assuming Current Medicaid Expansions Only ($1,000,000s)
Savings from
Savings from
Additional
Employer
Additional
Federal
Federal
Federal Taxes
Penalties Paid
Compensation to
Government
Support of
Compensated by to the Federal
bring Household
Subsidies and
Medicaid
State and Local
Government
below 138% of the
Cost-Sharing
Expansions*
Governments
Federal Poverty
Level up to That
Level*
576
0
52
239
17
Alabama
70
0
16
39
1
Alaska
578
83
60
234
0
Arizona
244
58
13
90
0
Arkansas
2,132
479
282
940
0
California
272
75
33
127
0
Colorado
195
23
25
84
0
Connecticut
48
9
6
23
0
Delaware
19
1
2
10
0
District of
Columbia
1,163
0
107
531
43
Florida
943
0
103
404
76
Georgia
101
30
19
49
0
Hawaii
171
0
15
74
3
Idaho
601
69
84
279
0
Illinois
482
0
50
201
14
Indiana
218
37
30
104
0
Iowa
282
0
39
135
27
Kansas
393
95
29
166
0
Kentucky
462
0
42
189
21
Louisiana
86
0
11
40
2
Maine
292
83
32
127
0
Maryland
289
52
35
125
0
Massachusetts
432
69
57
192
0
Michigan
217
14
36
109
0
Minnesota
400
0
36
168
23
Mississippi
426
0
54
189
4
Missouri
90
0
8
36
3
Montana
145
0
20
69
3
Nebraska
127
6
23
65
0
Nevada
56
0
7
28
4
New
Hampshire
414
35
48
177
0
New Jersey
181
81
16
83
0
New Mexico
1,379
430
185
637
0
New York
1,016
0
88
437
34
North
Carolina
37
10
7
21
0
North Dakota
773
100
92
329
0
Ohio
329
0
32
141
22
Oklahoma
287
52
31
131
0
Oregon
494
0
72
247
14
Pennsylvania
37
7
6
17
0
Rhode Island
362
0
38
172
4
South
Carolina

36

61
0
10
31
3
South Dakota
449
0
42
203
34
Tennessee
2,099
0
234
902
130
Texas
211
0
22
81
4
Utah
33
3
4
15
0
Vermont
418
0
61
208
5
Virginia
445
33
57
202
0
Washington
207
43
19
94
0
West Virginia
382
0
54
176
12
Wisconsin
61
0
7
29
1
Wyoming
* For states without Medicaid expansions, savings from federal support of Medicaid is $0 but additional savings are
captured by increasing the household incomes of workers falling below 138% of the federal poverty lines up to
138% such that these households qualify for federal subsidies and cost-sharing for exchange-purchased plans.

37

Appendix Table 15. Component Savings and Costs from Selective Divestment for Current Employees below
400% of the Federal Poverty Level Assuming Medicaid Expansions in All States ($1,000,000s)
Savings from
Savings from
Additional Federal
Employer Penalties
Federal Government Federal Support of Taxes Compensated by Paid to the Federal
Subsidies and CostMedicaid
State and Local
Government
Sharing
Expansions
Governments
541
156
51
233
Alabama
69
19
16
39
Alaska
578
83
60
234
Arizona
244
58
13
90
Arkansas
2,132
479
282
940
California
272
75
33
127
Colorado
195
23
25
84
Connecticut
48
9
6
23
Delaware
19
1
2
10
District of
Columbia
1,143
233
107
523
Florida
921
282
102
398
Georgia
101
30
19
49
Hawaii
171
25
15
74
Idaho
601
69
84
279
Illinois
462
78
49
197
Indiana
218
37
30
104
Iowa
282
120
39
135
Kansas
393
95
29
166
Kentucky
462
130
42
189
Louisiana
84
7
11
40
Maine
292
83
32
127
Maryland
289
52
35
125
Massachusetts
432
69
57
192
Michigan
217
14
36
109
Minnesota
385
158
36
165
Mississippi
426
38
54
189
Missouri
88
14
7
36
Montana
143
16
20
68
Nebraska
127
6
23
65
Nevada
56
7
7
28
New
Hampshire
414
35
48
177
New Jersey
181
81
16
83
New Mexico
1,379
430
185
637
New York
1,011
158
88
434
North Carolina
37
10
7
21
North Dakota
773
100
92
329
Ohio
323
89
32
140
Oklahoma
287
52
31
131
Oregon
488
54
71
245
Pennsylvania
37
7
6
17
Rhode Island
362
97
38
172
South Carolina
56
12
10
30
South Dakota
449
141
42
203
Tennessee
2,063
564
231
897
Texas
203
39
21
80
Utah
33
3
4
15
Vermont

38

Virginia
Washington
West Virginia
Wisconsin
Wyoming

405
445
207
382
59

95
33
43
136
10

60
57
19
54
7

206
202
94
176
29

39

8d. Comparison of Healthcare Costs of Employee Households Shifting to Coverage under
Exchange Plans and Those Continuing on State and Local Government-Provided Plans
with the Selective Divestment Strategy
We examine the projections of total household healthcare costs for groups of employee
households defined in terms of whether they are subsidy eligible and hence would receive
coverage under exchange-purchased plans in the selective divestment strategy. In general, for
most states, the projections of total healthcare spending we use in our analysis are reasonably
similar in magnitude, though slightly higher on average for SLG employee households falling
below 400% of the Federal Poverty Level (likely to qualify for subsidies, cost-sharing, or
Medicaid) compared SLG employee households above this level. Notable large state exceptions
include California and New York where those below 400% have lower total healthcare spending
on average. Note that these comparisons are made on total healthcare spending and not just the
share of these costs covered by the SLG employers.
Appendix Table 16. Average Annual Household Healthcare Expenditures Projected for Employee
Households Shifting to Coverage under Exchange Plans and Those Continuing on State and Local
Government-Provided Plans with the Selective Divestment Strategy
Shifting to
Continuing on
Exchange Plans
Employer Provided Plans
(≤400% of
(>400% of
Federal Poverty Level)
Federal Poverty Level)
13,605
12,120
Alabama
12,686
12,649
Alaska
12,978
12,616
Arizona
13,307
12,045
Arkansas
13,198
13,400
California
12,475
11,290
Colorado
14,256
15,349
Connecticut
13,745
12,719
Delaware
8,990
10,039
District of Columbia
12,554
11,570
Florida
12,729
12,355
Georgia
14,245
14,609
Hawaii
13,249
12,104
Idaho
14,881
13,367
Illinois
15,317
14,150
Indiana
15,863
13,603
Iowa
15,601
13,988
Kansas
12,891
11,438
Kentucky
12,129
12,095
Louisiana
14,988
14,279
Maine
12,930
12,671
Maryland
14,238
14,577
Massachusetts
15,395
14,705
Michigan
16,349
14,587
Minnesota
13,063
11,686
Mississippi
16,388
13,374
Missouri
13,188
11,552
Montana
16,415
13,438
Nebraska
12,927
13,056
Nevada
15,206
13,934
New Hampshire

40

New Jersey
New Mexico
New York
North Carolina
North Dakota
Ohio
Oklahoma
Oregon
Pennsylvania
Rhode Island
South Carolina
South Dakota
Tennessee
Texas
Utah
Vermont
Virginia
Washington
West Virginia
Wisconsin
Wyoming

15,262
12,581
13,895
12,865
15,682
15,562
12,704
12,268
13,763
14,674
13,010
14,358
13,673
12,800
14,151
15,120
12,716
12,950
13,539
15,196
12,760

14,124
11,274
14,338
11,880
12,977
13,714
12,215
11,764
12,973
15,190
11,925
13,808
12,110
12,713
12,637
13,579
12,436
12,290
11,891
14,391
12,057

41

