NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PRICE INERTIA AND INFLATION:
EVIDENCE AND THEORETICAL RATIONALE

M. Ishaq Nadiri

Working Paper No. 2022

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 1986

The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
-in Productivity. Any opinions expressed are those of the author
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #2022
September 1986

Price Inertia and Inflation: Evidence and Theoretical Rationale

ABSTRACT

In this paper we look at some empirical evIdence of and theoretIcal
rationale for price inflexibility in the face of a decrease in short run demand
in the Western—type industrialized economies. The empirical evidence suggests
that price sluggishness is pervasive but varies across markets, industries and
countries. There are different reasons for the price inertia. The respon8e of
firms to uncertainty, the cost of adjusting prices, the contents of the long—
term contracts In the goods and Input markets, the extent and variability of
excess demand may differ among firms and industries. The structure of the
industry, the degree of heterogeneity of the products In a market, the network
of input—output relationship among industries, the nature of International competition, the process of forming expectations about the future,shocks from monetary and fiscal policies and input price shocks, all interact and create the
ever changing environment of the firms. In these changing circumstances there
are incentives for prices to be sluggish and thus arises the dilemma of
achieving price stability at a high cost of unemployment. The ability of
governments to achieve stable prices is probably endogenous in the system and
may depend on a threshhold rate of inflation. A number of policy options are
discussed to address the issue of price inertia which would reduce the adjustment burden of anti—inflationary policies.

M. Ishaq Nadiri
National Bureau of Economic Research
269 Mercer Street, 8th floor
New York, N.Y. 10003
(212) 598—7042

—2—

Introduction

TIie phenomenon of price insensitivity to changes in demand in the

advanced Western economies has been a subject of considerable discussion

among macro—economists and policy makers. In recent years prices have not
only been rigid downward but even have risen in the face of slack demand.
Short—run inflexibility of prices is critical for the success of fiscal and

monetary stabilization policies and ability of the economic systems to

accommodate external shocks. The question is what are the causes of price
inflexibility and is it consistent with private maximization principles.
How the dynamic interactions among various stages and types of economic
activity lead to price stickiness of the aggregate price level?
The debate on aggregate price adjustment has been joined by two

schools of thought: the neo—Keynesian approach which assumes that markets
do not clear because of institutional and informational

arrangements and

the "new classical" equilibrium approach to business cycle which postulates

market clearance and instantaneous prices adjustment in response to changes

in nominal demand. The empirical evidence, as shown by Gordon [1982aJ and
others is that prices are neither perfectly fixed nor perfectly flexibile;
they vary over time and across industries, markets, and countries. Neither
of the two approaches seem as of yet to provide a consistent explanation of

this empiricaL finding. This has led to a search for developing the micro
foundations for price rigidity from an optimization viewpoint and models
which explicitly take account of the structure of markets and input—output

relationships in the economy. As of yet there is no general consensus

—3--

model available to explain the observed degree and pervasiveness of price
i

nil exi hi I

In

ity.

this paper our purpose is to sketch some illustrative empirical

findings on price adjustment at the aggregate and industry levels in some
of the Western industrialized economies and to discuss some of the micro

economic models of price adjustment that have been proposed. The second
objective of the paper is to examine the relationship of market structure
and pricing behavior and assemble some of the evidence on differential

price behavior in competitive and oligopolistic markets. The third issue
considered is how these differential price behaviors may lead to the price

adjustment observed at the aggregate economy level. The paper is concluded
with a few final remarks and policy suggestions.

I. The Extent and Degree of Price Inflexibility
The empirical evidence on the question of price vs. output flexibility

has been quite extensive. The evidence comes partly from macro econometric
studies, survey of transactions in different markets and studies of

disaggregated price series. We shall briefly discuss each of these type of
evidence before examining some of the theoretical rationale provided for
the phenomenon of price inertia in the context of profit maximizing models.

1.

Evidence from Macro Price Models

R. J. Gordon [1982a] has been one of the leading persons in the U.S.
who has addressed empirically the question of price inertia in aggregate

price level. His results indicate that nominal GNP has been divided consistently over the last 90 years of U.S. history about two thirds taking

—4—

the form of output changes and the remaining one third the form of price
changes; the structure of price expectations has changed some time before

the World War lifrom a regressive to an extrapolative form possibly due to
the recognition of the stabilizing role of government policies and the

emergence of overlapping wage contracts in the U.S. However, when the
experience of the U.S. economy is compared to that of Japan and the U.K.,
Gordon finds that the wage and prices are more flexible in the latter

countries. The degree of price inflexibility therefore varies among
countries and overtime. Nonetheless, the evidence of price inertia particularly in the postwar U.S. economy suggests a sluggish response of prices to restrictive demand policies and the resulting

high unemployment,

thus constituting a dilemma for policy makers.
Evidence of price inflexibility in the postwar U.S. economy and the
European economies has been reported by other studies as well. Otto
Eckstein and G. Fromm [1968] using U.S. annual data found that both prices
and outputs react within three to six months to changes in costs and

demand. George Hay [1970] found for two U.S. industries that a temporary
increase in demand caused a small increase in price but a large increase in

output. de Minel [1974] using aggregate data for the U.S. reached similar
conclusions. The evidence provided for the nineteen OECD countries by D.
Grubb, R. Jackman and R. Layard [1982] suggests different

degrees of price

and wage Inertia in these countries over the postwar period. Coutts,
Godley and Nordhaus [1978] using British data for several industries
reached the conclusion that prices are mainly determined by costs and

affected little by changes in demand. Studies using time series data for

—5—

Germany found that firms keep their prices at their planned level and
adjust their outputs when demand changes [Kawasaki, McMillan and Zimmerman

[1983]J. The econometric results obtained by Nadiri and Gupta [19771 and
Eckstein—Wyss [1977] for different U.S. manufacturing industries provides

evidence of price inertia at the industry level. These results indicate
that effects of demand changes on prices are small in most of the
industries considered and there is evidence of considerable inertia in

price adjustments. The degree of demand effect and price adjustment,
however, varies among

industries.

The studies differ in their coverage, level of aggregation and span

of time. However, they all seem to point to the slow adjustment of prices
and more rapid adjustment of outputs when the demand level changes in the

short run. But a potential shortcoming of all these studies is that they
are based not on transaction but list prices. George Stigler and J.
Kindahl [1970] have argued that the relevant series is prices at which

buyers and sellers transact a sale. They have indicated based on their
study that transaction prices are highly variable and the price stickiness

reported above may be an illusion. However, as'Welss [1977] has argued
persuasively that changes in Stigler—Kindahi price series and BLS data
(which is often used in studies mentioned above) reflect each other and

therefore the Stigler—Kendall conclusion is not valid. Further new econometric studies using transaction prices indicate that firms in their immediate response to disequilibrium, are more likely to react immediately with
an output change than a price change.

—6—

2. Survey of Market Transactions
Another source of evidence of whether prices are inflexible is pro-

vided in an interesting study by Canton [1979].

Tables 1 and 2 provide

evidence on the pattern of transactions prices in a sample of businesses

during a relatively non—inflationary period 1957—66. Table 1 lists by product the average duration of price inflexibility in months and the standard

deviation of duration. The results

suggest several important points: For

many transactions between individual buyers and sellers, price once set
tends to remain unchanged for a substantial period of time. This suggests
that quantity adjustment and not prices may be the mechanism used to allo-

cate some goods when supply or demand changes. Since the standard
deviation of length of price rigidity is quite high we can infer that a
wide variety of contracts have differing price flexibility; i.e., some
contracts with very flexible prices while others with very inflexible pri-

ces for the same broad commodity group. Finally, there
ferences across industries in degree of price

are very large dif-

inflexibility.

The results in table 2 show the frequency of price rigidity by the
duration of contract i.e., annual and monthly. it seems that the
contracting structure for each product is not only different but there are

many annual

contracts

whose prices change well before one year is elapsed

while there are many monthly contracts whose prices often do not change for

one year. Thus the contract terms seem to be very flexible and adaptable
to changes in market condition. Perhaps ongoing relations between buyer
and selLer account for this behavior. Also the monthly contract prices
vary more frequently than those for the annual contracts which implies that

—7—

there are contracts whose prices remain unchanged at the same time that
demand and supply forces are changing other contract prices for the same
commodity group.

From these results it is likely to draw the conjecture that markets
resemble liquid markets with flexible prices performing the allocative role
and markets which resemble illiqiild markets with fixed prices and quantity

allocations performing the ailocative role. Nonferrous metal, petroleum
and plywood are likely to have submarkets that are highly liquid while
steel, paper and chemicals seem likely to have submarkets that are highly

illiquid. For some goods highly liquid and illiquid submarkets may exist
as well. These observations suggest there are different degrees of price
inflexibility in different markets and for different products which are
likely to change over time and among different industries.
An econometric study using monthly transaction prices and output
changes of individual firms in various German industries substantiates the
results noted above and confirms the hypothesis of differentiated behavior

in different markets. Kawasaki et al [19821 develop a dynamic disequilibrium model taking account of inventories and unfilled orders in
determining the adjustment path of prices and output in response to changes
In demand.

Their

results show that both prices and output flexibility vary

markedly across industries reflecting some of differences among industries

noted above. They show that prices are in the short—run inflexible in
industries such as stone and clay machinery; electrical equipment, iron,

tin and other products, glass and products and clothing. While nonferrous
metals, textiles, plastic and products exhibit short—run price flexibility.

—8—

The results also indicate that each firm changes its output whenever there
is an inventory or unfilled order disequilibrium

but changes its price only

when disequilibrium persists long enough to reflect permanent changes in

demand or costs. However, there is no evidence of asymmetry in their price
behavior i.e., prices are no less flexible downwards than upward. When
firms face high level of inventories, they are just as likely to cut their

prices as they are to raise their prices when inventories are too low.

3 EvIdence from Disaggregated Prices Studies
The most thorough study of behavior of prices during periods of
recession has been published by Cagan [1975].

Using approximately iioo BLS

wholesale price series for 1947—70, he demonstrated that in each succeeding
recession since World War II there was a tendency for a smaller average

decline in prices. The pattern is especially clear when the rate of price
change in a recession is regarded as a decline from the rate of price
increase in the immediately preceding

expansion. The important question is

whether the distribution of recession rates of

price change differs between

classes of industries with different levels of concentration ratio.
Cagan's results are unequivocal for all recessions except the 1969—70

period. The average decrease in the rate of price change has been greater
for less concentrated industries. In the 1969—70 recession the average
price of the high concentration group increased less than the mean price of
the intermediate group, but both average rates increased, whereas the
average rate for the least concentrated group declined relatively to the
preceding expansion.

—9--.

There are two principal points to be noted in connection with Cagan's
study:

1)

The responsiveness of all prices to recessions declined during the
post World War 11 period.

2) The prices in less concentrated industries were more responsive
than the prices in more concentrated industries.
The evidence seems to favor the view that all prices have become less

responsive to decline in aggregate demand. Also Wachtel and Adeisheim's
[1977] results imply that, even if cost changes are taken into account, the
concLusion reached by Cagan on

the

growing downward inflexibility of prices

in successive recessions is reaffirmed.

An examination of the empirical evidence of other disaggregated studies suggest several important conclusions:

1. Factor costs such as wage rates and material prices are the domi-

nant determinants of industry price changes. The importance of
factor costs is overwhelmingly supported by cross—sectional and
time—series studies. This finding is consistent with studies of
aggregate price behavior.

2. Prices are generally much less sensitive to demand changes than to
cost changes.

— 1()

3.

—

Pricing behavior is related to the level of industry con-

centration. Although costs are important determinants of prices
in all industries, the influence of demand varies considerably

among industries. Short—run demand changes have an effect on
price changes in the competitive industries. In contrast,
long—run trend of aggregate demand influences prices in more con-

centrated industries. This implies that short—run decline in
demand can be expected to have minimal effect on many industry

prices. This finding of disaggregate studies may explain why the
demand variable has been often found insignificant in aggregate
price equations.

4. Prices are often perversely affected by a decline in demand, that
is, a type of compensatory pricing behavior seems to have occurred
in some industries.

5. An important conclusion is that the structure of the economy has
changed in the 1960's toward domination of costs on prices. This
is manifested in the upward shift in the distribution of price
changes; there is less downward flexibility of prices in

recessions. In the most recent recessions wholesale

prices have

not generally fallen.

From the evidence presented here it seems that prlcs are subject to

•sl'igglsh adjustment En the postwar period. Unever, the degree and
vasiveness of price adjustment vary considerably over time, markets,

per-

— 11

industries and
run, however,

countries.

is mainly

—

The response

to a change in demand in the short—

to adjust output and to a much smaller extent pri-

ces. The questions that arise are:

Why

such

asymmetry in response of

prices and quantitities in majority of industries?

Whether the market

structure such as the degree of concentration has some relationship with

price inflexibility? And how the various degrees of price Inflexibility in
different markets, for whatever reason, may led to aggregate price level
inflexibility?

These are

some of the questions we shall attempt to address

below.

Section II. The Theoretical Rationale for Price Inflexibility

There are varieties of theoretical rationale for firms to be reluctant
to change their prices in face of a short term change in demand. If firms
are interested in long term profits they may equate their long term marginal revenue to long term marginal cost and then prices may become invarient

to changes in the short run. If firms are producing multiple output they

face the problem of jointly setting prices

will
The

a

for all of their product.

cost associated with price adjustments may induce the firms to have

stable price policy even if the demand for the individual product fluc-

tuates. Firms may be interested in goals other than profit maximization
such as increasing market share, stable profit margin or target rate of
return on investment.

In

such a case firms may want to change their prices

infrequently. It is impossible to present all the theoretical arguments

evidence for why

and

main

prices are inflexible. We shall discuss some of the

theoretical models put forward to rationalize why price inertia may

arise

from an optimizing behavior.

— 12 —

1.

Industrial Structure and Price Behavior

One of the most important structural features of the Western
industrial economies is the difference between individual industries in the
extent to which particular markets are dominated by one or a few large

sellers. The traditional view has relied on the difference in the discretionary power over the price as the main explanation of the differences in
the pricing behavior between oligopolistic and competitive industries.

Thus prices in competitive markets are supposed to arise out of interaction
between market demand and supply, whereas prices in oligopolistic
industries are set by some implicit collusive agreement between few oligo—
polistic firms dominating the industry.

The notion of differential price behavior in concentrated and uncon—
centrated industries was first raised by Gardiner Means [19621. He
advanced the "administered price" thesis, i.e., administrative control over
prices in markets where there are relatively small numbers of firms results
in less price flexibility than is found in more competitive markets:
prices in concentrated industries tend to fall less than competitive prices

during periods of recession and to rise less than the market determined
prices during expansionary periods.
Studies attempting to verify or reject Means' hypothesis have been
basically empirical with little theoretical explanation of the process
underlying the differential pricing behavior of the concentrated and uncon—

centrated industries. The usual criticism of the traditional view has
centered on the lack of explicit price determination mechanism in both

types of industries. In the absence of Walrasian actioneer it is not clear

— 13 —

how

prices

in the competitive markets are in fact "made" as a result of

interaction of supply and demand. On the other hand, theories of oligopo—
listic pricing have been generally ad—hoc and lack rigorous theoretical

foundations [Frydman and Nadiri (1978)1. However, recent studies have
clarified to some extent the basic issues involved and has led to a more
sophisticated understanding of the possible relationship between industrial
structure and pricing behavior.
Phelps and Winter [19701 have developed an atomistic competition made

of price behavior. In a significant departure from traditional analysis
the authors assume that each atomistic firm

is

in a position of a transient

monopolist and it is a price setter. Due to imperfect and costly information as to the currently set prices, the result will be not one price in

the competitive market, but a distribution of prices. Thus, each firm will
not lose its customers instantaneously when it raises its price above the
average of competitors' prices and will also not attract a substantial

number of customers at the instant in which it lowers its prices below the

average of market prices. The firm will fix its price according to standard theory of price settings under monopoly conditions with the significant difference that it will have to take explicitly into account the cost

of setting the price which is different than the mean industry price. The
Phelps—Winter model replaces the fiction of Wairasian actioneer with explicit account of price setting under conditions of atomistic competition.
The recent advance in theory of disequilibrium pricing suggested by F.
Fisher [1981] and others also substantiates the rationale of inertia or
relative inflexibility of prices in the competitive industries.

— 14 —

From the point of view of our discussion the importance of the

Phelps—Winter model lies in the apparent blurring of the distinctions bet-

ween oligopolistic and competitive pricing behavior. The differential
pricing behavior is dependent on the degree of response of rivals. What is
important to note is the information aspects of price setting that underlie

price formation inalimarkets [Frydman and Nadiri (1978)].

This,

however, does not lead to the conclusion that prices in oligopolitic and

competitive industries are set in the same way. The crucial difference
lies in the likelihood of collusion among firms in a given industry. G.
Stigler [19641 has argued that when the number of sellers is lower, the
ability to detect price cutters is much stronger and a collusive agreement

easier to maintain. This argument provides an essential link between the
likelihood of collusion among firms and degree of industry concentration.
Recently Phlips [1980] has derived a price rule which links price behavior
to the parameters representing market structure, degree of cooperation

among firms and the possibility of entry. It is shown that price rigidities can result from an intertemporal optimizing behavior. The optimal
path of the firms price rule is obtained from an intertemporal price
discrimination model where firms accumulate inventories and the possibility

of entry of exist. The industry price equation takes the following form:
m
5m
h—
P
(—)
a+ (—)
— (—)
—
m+S
m+tS
m+S
p q

P =

where cS

reflects

the degree of cooperation among firms In the industry, m

Is the number of firms, a is the slope of the linear industry demand sche—

— 15

dule,

—

k is the average normalized marginal cost, while

p

Pls the

average cost (or loss of profit) due to entry. It is likely that the
degree of cooperation

will depend on the degree of concentration, m.

Also barrier to entry represented by h P should have a positive effect

p Q

on industry price and the better the cooperation among firms (for given m)
the larger cS and the stronger is the negative impact of the threat of entry

on price. Other implications of this model are: In more concentrated
industries costs increases are less fully transmitted into prices than In
less concentrated industries; changes in demand are transmitted more fully
into prices in concentrated industries than in more competitive industries;
for a given industry structure an increase in industry demand will have
smal

Ier lmpact on

jrices than an increase

in

average marginal normaLized

costs. These are testable hypothesis and Phlips' empirical results for a
select group of industries in Belgium, the Netherlands, and France confirm

them. Particularly costs turn out to be the dominant factors affecting
prices in different catagories of industries and the barrier to entry has a
highly significant positive effect on prices.
An important question is to substantiate whether there is a link bet-

ween the likelihood of collusion among firm and the degree of Industry con-

centration. We noted Stigler's [19641 argument in favor of this
propostion. However, to establish Its validity, it is important to show
whether collusion among firms leads to higher long term profits. Some
evidence is provided by the studies of the relationship between con—

— 16 —

centration

and profits. Weiss [19741 concludes on the basis of extensive

survey of empirical evidence that, "The bulk of the studies show a significant positive effect of concentration of profits or margins." Since implicit cooperation is usually found in concentrated industries, these findings
imply that collusion seems to be profitable for cooperating firms.

But how does the process work? Ross and Wachter [1975] provide an
explanation for an observation that firms in oligopolistic Industries act
so as to maintain fixed pricing strategies (although not

necessarily or

generally fixed prices), which they alter at regular points of time. The
interval of time in which the pricing strategy is unchanged is called the

planning period. Thus their model is not an explanation of price determination under oligopoly, but it provides an analysis of timing of price

changes in concentrated industries. They assume that the firms are denied
a possibility of outright collusion and that particular equilibrium

industry structure has developed. The implication of this equilibrium is
that none of the firms or any coalition of firms, bound

by the implicit

collusive agreement, views it to be in their interest to alter the

equilibrium structure. As the demand and supply conditions of the

industry

change, in deciding on whether or not to adjust to the new developments,
the firm is forced to balance the loss of profits due to inappropriate
price structure against the potential profit loss if an attempt to alter
prices should lead to a breakdown in the level of

oligopoly cooperation.

The significance of Ross—Wachter's model lies in Its applicability to

a wide variety of market structures. The firms in the competitive
industries will repsond continuously to changes in market conditions, since

— 17 —

the atoniistlc firms find it impossible to collude and therefore will not
face the trade off between benefits of collusion and losses due to inappro-

priate price structure. On the other hand, the firms in oligopolistic
industries will move in discrete time intervals. The conclusion regarding
competitive firms should he modified, however, to take account of the factors elaborated in the Phelps—Winter model, i.e., informational structure

of the market would cause firms in the competitive markets to respond, also

in dscrete time intervals.

2. Inventory and Price Stickiness
A firm's profit maximizing inventory strategy may also cause the firm
to react differently to a change in demand depending on whether the firm

perceives the change to be transitory or permanent. The assumption about
the demand fluctuation is essential in models which link inventory deci-

sions and price inflexibility. Since demand fluctuates randomly around a
given mean, the firms respond to these fluctuations by changing their level
of inventories because they cannot instantaneously adjust their prices or

outputs. The inventory change is followed in the next period by a change
in the rate of production to restore their equilibrium inventory stocks

while leaving their prices unchanged. Kawasaki et al [1983] constructs a
model of dynamic profit maximization under uncertainty and imperfect competition to derive an analogue of repeated Cournot equilibrium framework.

Using such analytical framework they demonstrate that firms change their
output in response to

demand change but change their prices in response

to only permanent demand changes. A. Blinder [1982] also reaches similar

— 18 —

conclusions though using a different analytical framework. That

is, both

prices and output respond less to a transitory demand shock than to a permanent demand change and when output becomes more "inventorable." Prices
will become sticky when inventories can be stored without much cost and

when the demand shocks are transitory. In both of these models the
existence of inventories reduces the flexibility of prices In all states of

demand and in both directions. In fact, the

empiricial results reported by

Kawasaki et al [1982] as was noted earlier suggest no evidence of asvm—
metrical response of prices, i.e., prices are less flexible downwards than
upwards.

Note that these models provide an explanation of the relative price

inflexibility and not sluggish absolute prices. However, changes in relative prices can affect the rate of inflation

[see Fischer [19821 J. The

models described here can be modified to relate firm price decision to their
expectations about aggregate price expectations or demand fluctuation.

If

the mean of the firm demand functions stated above shifts, a new
equilibrium emerges with each firm having a new target Inventory stock and

perhaps a new price. This can arise if firms form expectations about
future changes in aggregate demand or general price levels and use them as
indicators of how the mean of the individual demand functions will shift.
This will lead to possibility of linking the sluggishness of relative prices and absolute prices as shown by J. Rotemberg [1982] and R. J. Gordon
[1981].

— 19

3.

—

Adjustment Costs in Changing Prices

The degree of price infiexbility, in econometric price equations is

measured by the coefficient of lagged price variable. The estimates of
this coefficient imply that firms incur a cost for not being able to change

its price readily. The partial adjustment of prices in these equations are
mainly ad—hoc in the same way as the adjustment lags were postulated in
econometric investment finctEons prior to the advent of the cost of

adjustment models. If the firms know the costs involved in adjusting their
prices in face of a changed demand condition it is logical for them to take

these costs into account in their optimization behavior. The adjustment
costs for changing prices are due to administrative cost of changing the
price lists, etc. and more importantly due to potential unfavorable reac-

tion of consumers to frequent price changes. J. Rotemberg [1982] has developed

with

an

cost

interesting

eqiifllbrium model of

monopolistic

price

adjustment

of adjustment of prices explicitly taken into account. The model

is like the Lucas [1972] equilibrium model of business cycle and incor-

porates the Phelps—Winter type of monopolistic pricing behavior. Firms
optimize their objective function taking the prices set by other firms as
given; they make the best full use of the current information i.e., they

form their expectations rationally. The firms produce differentiated products, they observe their demand and cost functions before setting their
prices, they know the prices of their suppliers, the price level and the

level of aggregate nominal money balances. The cost to changing prices is
assumed to be a function of the square of the price change and the monopolists set their prices optimally given that it is costly to change them.

— 20 —

Rotemherg shows that in the presence of adjustment costs changing prices
today will affect tomorrow's profit and the pricing rule for the firm will
be the usual partial adjustment equation used in most empirical studies
i.e.,

+ (1—y)

where

in the expectation formed by firm i of its optimal price; Pj

depends on the cost of changing prices, say C; and p the discount rate.
When c increases price increases i.e., it will take longer for current

prices to adjust toward their long run value. The effect of changes in p
on speed of adjustment is ambiguous; a decrease in p makes it relatively
cheaper to change prices in the future but it also penalizes the monopolists relatively more for current deviations of actual prices from their
long run values.

If each firm picks its

optimally given the prices charged by other

firms and expects its decision not to influence the path of aggregate
variables such as the stock of

money or the aggregate price level, then

Rotemberg shows that the industry equilibrium can be established and an
aggregate price equation analogous to the one stated above can be derived,
i.e.,

Pt = Ape_i + (1—A) P
where Pt is the price level "desired" at t and A is the partial adjustment

coefficient of aggregate price level. This type of equation is often

— 21 —

used to estimate the aggregate price level [Gordon (1981), Nadirl—Gupta
(1977)]. The virtue of Rotemberg's model is that it derives the partial
adjustment price equations for both Individual and aggregate prices from an
optimization model, links the parameters of the aggregate and individual
price equations and develops a cost of adjustment model of prices based on
rational expectations in which producers are aware of their true trading
opportunities and information in aggregate statistics concerning the present is available to them.

4. Uncertainty and Price Inflexibility
Production is essentially a dynamic phenomenon i.e., it takes time and

therefore is subject to uncertainty. Firms may take different steps to
reduce uncertainty. In a world of dynamic uncertainty firms will perform
Intertemporal arbitrage. The market variation is met only in part by
market adjustment in sales and the remainder is met by the firms internal

adjustment in inventory and to a lesser degree in production. In a world
of static certainty when the market is purely competitive through price and
entry and exit of firms the market adjusts to variation in demand and

supply. When the firm faces an uncertain market environment and a multi—
period decision horizon, price flexibility may not be a necessary condition

for efficient allocation of resources [Wu (1979)]. A stable price will
have certain benefits both to the sellers and buyers; it will cut the
search cost of buyers of the firm and eliminate the necessity for buyers to
accumulate precautionary inventory used to guard against price uncertainty.
These factors may encourage buyers to buy more at a given price or pay more

— 22 —

for

a given quantity of goods in exchange for reduction in price uncer-

tainty. This could mean a higher demand for sellers.
any price cut

could

revenue

other

hand,

be construed in most industries as an attempt to obtain

a larger market share which
lower

On the

wiLl

be resisted by rivals and may lead to

for the seller.

Another way to mitigate the haphazard results of uncertainty in a
world where production takes time is the use of contract [Davidson (1977)].
The wage Contract implicit

or explicit

is the most pervasIve agreement in

the economy. If it were constantly revised and recontracted, the transaction cost will be so high that it would

likely inhibit production in a

decentralized market economy. To a lesser degree the same argument applies
to other types of costs and

products.

siderat ion then the past and future of

When contracts are taken into con—

economic activities becomes part of

the economic process and provides the element of inertia i.e., the
overlapping labor contract as a source of

inflexibility of prices. Because

if money wages are determined outside the theoretical market system
over
the forthcoming three year interval, then prices will adjust to money
wages
rather the converse.
The inflexibility of wages arises from a number of factors. The most
widely accepted is based on the behavior of unions where collective
bargaining introduces lags in wage response of some Industries. In absence
of unions firms may want to pay premium wages in order to have a queue of
available skilled labor and therefore the firms

will not change wages imme-

diately as labor conditions change [Wachter (1976)]. Also firms may
desire an ongoing relationship with their labor force, especially if the

— 23 —

ideosyncratic in

jobs are

nature and

require specific skills and training.

The wages for these type of jobs wiU he determined by the internal wage
structure and the

short—run market forces will he ignored in this situation.

5. Heterogeneity of Markets and Price Inertia
A number of models have been proposed which emphasize

the

diversity

and heterogeneity of different markets as the source of inertia of the
aggregate

price level. The basic notion is that the economy

Is composed of

a variety- of markets with different characterIstics and different rules of
behavior.

Sticky prices may be a rational outcome in certain markets in

the economy which in turn

level.

impart the price inertia at the aggregate

Arthur Okun, W. t'ordhaus and R. J. Gordon have

aspects of how models of

the

may

discussed

various

heterogeneous markets may lead to price inertia at

aggregate level.

The Okun [19811 model is

based

on a "contract—theoretic" framework

and

states that in order to economize on transaction costs with one and other,

economic agents will trade repeatedly with each other. Wages and price
behavior are explained in a search theoretic framework. In markets with
heterogeneous products prices tend to be inflexible because information
about prices is difficult to obtain and there is a continuing relationship

between the buyer and seller. The transactions costs are very high and
price stability is in the interest of both parties. In these types of
markets called "customer markets" both customers and producers have an

interest in stable prices. The customers would like to avoid excessive
search cost and are willing to pay a premium to do business with customary

— 24 —

suppliers.

Firms have an incentive in stable prices to encourage customers

to return using yesterday's prices as a guide. But if permanent changes in
demand and costs have accrued and both the customers and firms have this
knowledge, prices could change without inducing customers to do comparison

shopping. Price stability is considered as a service in Okun's model which
is a complete reversal of Means' model of administered prices noted

earlier. The auction or what we called liquid markets clears instantaneously and there is no incentive to induce long term contractual

arrangements, infrequent price changes and quantity rationing. In markets
with homogeneous products information flows rapidly and the market macha—
nism is impersonal.

Nordhaus [1976] elaborates further this line of thinking. The economy
can be divided into "auction" and "administered" markets.

In the auction

markets competitive supply and demand forces prevail and prices are

flexible. In the administered markets either buyers or sellers have significant market power and one use of that power has been to restrain price

movements. Prices and wages are set In these markets on some principle of
"normal pricing" i.e., cyclical fluctuations are largely removed In setting

prices and wages. The effect of demand on aggregate price will be fairly
weak and there will be an effect from what Nordhaus calls the "momentum

effect." Demand changes affect prices through three channels: through the
mark up In the administered market prices

equation, through unemployment In

the wage equation and from "auction" market.

The combination of these

forces due to nonhinearities are likely to be weak at low levels of demand
but high when the economy operates at capacity. The "momentum effect" of

— 25 —

current and past wage and prices in the administered markets of the economy
dominates

their short term movements. The effect of demand policies will

be small in the initial stage .but would be spread out over a long period.

The third effect comes from the auction prices which may be due to such
factors as oil price increase, increases in commodity prices, changes In
weather, speculation, etc.

If these changes are significant, then as Bruno

and Sachs [19821 have shown, input price shocks can affect aggregate prices
significantly.

An elaborate model of price behavior is outlined by R. J. Gordon

[19811. No adjustment costs are formally included in the analysis but the
emphasis is put on diversity of circumstance facing firms in differnt

markets and the cost of communication and coordination through a complex
input—output network of relationships among firms.

Firms may face diverse

sets of circumstances in various markets: they may have distinct tech-

nologies, produce heterogeneous products, discover information about
changes in their own demand and costs and the aggregate demand and cost

changes with different degrees of certainty. The learning capacity of
firms are usually not the same [Frydman (1981)1 i.e., there may be long
lags in formation of expectations [Maccini (1981)1.

What emerges In

Gordon's model is the crucial role of the local vs. aggregate components of
demand and costs i.e., the ratio of the variance of local to the sum of

variances of local and aggregate components of demand shift and the ratio
of the local to the sum of the local and aggregate components of costs.
These ratio's are likely to be zero in periods of war and hyperinflation
when there is extreme pressure for prices to change; the variance of the

— 26 —

aggregate components of demand and costs will dominate in such
periods and
Individual prices respond immediately to changes in aggregate demand and
costs.

A further extension of the idea that the network of Input—output or

stages of production matter in pricing behavior of firms has been developed

recently by Blanchard [19831. Some of the simplifying assumptions are that
production is instantaneous, alt goods
increasing function of its real price,

are perishable, input supply is an
output demand depends posItIvely on

real money balances and money is neutral and affects only the level of all

prices. Firms choose their relative

prices every two periods and their

prices depend on current and expected input prices for the next two

periods. Assuming rational expectations and uncertainty Blanchard shows
that if the firm's price decisions

are not completely synchronized the

price level will depend on three elements: the actual and expected past
input prices, the actual value and past expectations of current Input prices and both past and current expectations of

input prices. As the number

of stages of production increases the dependence of the price level on
input prices further in the past and expected in the future. Price level
will react less and adjust more

slowly to changes in money if real input

prices are insensitive to market conditions.

Increase in money affects the

structure of prices; prices early in the chain of production move more and
adjust faster, prices further in the chain move less and adjust more

slowly. When a nominal disturbance requires

a change in the price level

what will likely follow is a change in prices of a complex structure of
final goods, intermediate goods and

inputs. These adjustments will not be

— 27 —

taken continuously nor in the same manner in different markets or
industries. Thus the desynchrouizatiofl of individual price decision can
generate price level inertia observed at the aggregate economy or industry
level.

There is some empirical evidence that suggests that the response of
prices by stage of process to a change in demand differ substantially. The
model of stage of process developed by Popkin [1977] links the movements of
crude, intermediate and finished goods components of the WPI with each

other and with the CPI. The results of the twenty—one sector price model,
when viewed as a whole, suggest that it is in the primary and semi—finished
goods industries, rather than in the finished goods producing and distributing sectors, that changes in demand affect the relationship between the

output and input prices. The initial response in the finished goods
industries is to reduce output and not prices. Cutbacks in orders for
materials and supplies placed by these industries are often larger than

they would be if prices had been flexible. The fluctuations in output are
much larger at the earlier stage than at the latter stage of production and
also the ratio of price of output to the weighted price of inputs behave
not procyclically in the finished goods sectors while that for the primary

and semi finished products it moves procyclically. In response to a cutback of orders from the finished product manufacturers, the prices in the

primary product manufacturing industries weaken. Such weakness then feeds
forward to final demand prices, with a lag, affecting prices in all

finished manufacturing and service sectors. Thus, the amplitude of output
and price responses to changes in final demand vary considerably among dif—

— 28 —

ferent

stages of production arid there is a dynamic relationship among the

response pattern through the input—output structure of the economy.

III. Asymmetrical Price Increase
We have noted that not only most prices have become less responsive to

decline in aggregate demand but they may also rise in a recession. What
can explain this perverse behavior? There are several lines of reasoning
for this phenomenon to occur.

Under the conditions of monopoly the traditional theoretical explanation for rigidity of prices in the presence of contraction in demand is
based on the difference between short and long run price elasticity of

demand. Since the short—run elasticity of demand is less than the long run
elasticity, and in many cases must be less than one. It implies that a
monopolist considering a price cut to deal with a temporary recession would
face a possibly negative marginal revenue compared to marginal revenue it

would face in making general price policy. The natural conclusion seems to
be that optimal price policy in a recession would often be to hold prices
stable or to change them only in response to changes In long—run
expectations.

This reasoning has some relevance to the explanation of price inflexi-

bility during recessions of oligopolistic prices. Spence [1976] has
suggested the concept of market share equilibrium and showed that there
exists the set of market shares having the property that no firm can
increase its profits if all others react by maintaining their market share.
In this framework market shares serve as basis of strategic interaction

— 29 —

among lirms in oligopolistic industry. Suppose now that the fall in

industry demand affects proportionately all the firms so they continue to

be in the market share equilibrium. It is clear that If industry demand
becomes inelastic the firm would not find it profitable to lower their
prices given that other firms will react to maintain their market shares.
Lowering of the price by individual may be considered by other firms as
"competitive" price cutting and lead to the breakdown of implicit collusive

agreement and benefits associated with such agreement. Moreover considerable uncertainty will exist as to the true value of industry's price

elasticity of demand. Therefore, it is very likely that known benefits of
implicit collusion will outweight highly uncertain benefits of contemplated

price reduction. On the other hand if costs during the recessions because
of "momentum effect" build in past contracts rise, the firm will likely to
pass these prices without any danger of retaliation from its competitors.
Cost increases are likely to be experienced by all the firms In the oligo—
polistic industry where firms are likely to follow a normal pricing decision rule with respect to prices of inputs and outputs.
Another rationale for asymmetric pricing behavior is suggested by

Kuran [19831. He argues that prices of monopolistic firms with
nonincreasing price elasticity of demand and nonincreasing marginal costs

can be relatively more rigid downward than upward. Such firms raise their
prices to a greater extent when they expect inflation, than they lower them

when they expect equivalent reduction in demand. In response to an
Increase in price level uncertainty these firms will increase their prices.
These results follow from the notion that the monopolist's loss is greater

— 30

—

from charging a price below the monopoly price than the loss from charging
above it by a proportionally equivalent amount. A price cut may trigger a
reaction from competitors while an increase in prices may not.

To show that relative prices variability can be linked to variation In
the rate of inflation require that prices respond asymmetrically to distur-

bances. If prices behave asymmetricaly in either direction the association
between relative prices and rate of inflation can be established and not if
prices are equally sticky in recessionary and expansionary phases of the

business cycle. Fischer's [1982] results indicate that there is a strong
link between unanticipated inflation and relative price variability for
both

U.S.

and Germany. There are weaker links between the variation of

relative prices and rate of inflation. Unanticipated inflation was found
to affect relative price variability much more than a deflation suggesting
support for the asymmetric price response hypothesis.

But why should many firms in the competitive industry raise prices

when demand falls? The only conceivable circumstance is the perception of
the decrease in the short—run elasticity of demand coupled with increase of

marginal costs of firms in the competitive industry. In such a case, If
properly perceived by individual firms the proper profit maximizing
response is the increase, not decrease in the price [Frydman and Nadiri

(1978)]. Since the firm contemplating the price change will be highly
uncertqin as to the price elasticity of demand for its product but it wilt
be able to observe the increases in its costs, it might decide to increase

its price. If all firms perceive the Situation in this way the fall in
demand will be mostly reflected in the output changes.

— 31

—

The overall, conclusion from the above reasoning is that when contraction of demand is accompanied by increases in direct costs the rational
response of both competitive and oligopolistic firms might be to raise

prices. This phenomenon will be considerably strengthened, if the firms in

both

oligopolistic and competitive industries expect the contraction in

demand to be temporary, while cost increases are perceived to be permanent.
It is also clear that due to the element of implicit collusion in oligopo—
listic industries the increase in prices should be more widely observed in
more concentrated industries.
An interesting explanation of this perverse behavior of prices is pro-

vided by Cagan [1979]. If the anticipated trend of prices is upward and
price changes over the cycle are the cyclical deviations from the trend,

then prices will rise in the recession, however, less than the trend. The
long trend in prices can he subject to rational expectations. This anticipation factor will be incorporated in contract prices of inputs or some

input supplies will be withheld from the market. Thus, the anticipated
rise in price trend can limit decline of prices in the recession and may

cause prices to rise if the anticipated trend is rising fast enough. But
the anticipated price trend will be revised by rational agents depending on
the severity and duration of current and past business cycles.

IV. International Competition and Pricing Behavior
In the previous sections we have examined a pricing behavior across

industries in the domestic economy. A number of the Industries considered
produce

goods that are

sold in the

foreign nmrkets.

In many industries

— 32 —

foreign

firms have a significant share of the domestic markets.

Moreover,

many industries use inputs that are traded internationally. Therefore, the
developments In the world markets, trade patterns and currency fluctuations
have a potentially important role in understanding of the pricing adjust-

ment in domestic industries. Unfortunately, no systematic theoretical and
empirical analysis of price formation seems to exist for industries pro—

ducing exportable or import—competing goods. Therefore, the discussion in
this section wilL necesarily be limited to few observations on the possible
significance of these issues.

We noted earlier that barriers to entry could play an important role

in pricing behavior of firms. Competition in the world market could have
the same effect as entry of a competitor in the domestic economy. For
example, Wachtel and Adelsheim [1977] have argued that in U.S. automobile
industry foreign competition provides an extraordinarily intense competitive check on what had traditionally been a mature oligopoly with

routinized pricing behavior. Due to this competition, price increases for
domestically produced cars have been restrained and price markups In the
automobile industry have declined in recent years.
Even though similar calculations have not been performed for other
Industries the potentially significant effect of imports can be inferred by
noting that between 1960 and 1970 imports increased in high concentration

industries by the following percentages: Machinery and transportation
equipment — 662 percent; rubber tires and tubes — 876
percent; iron and
steel mill products — 352
percent. These developments suggest caution in
the use of concentration ratios as a basis for studying price behavior

— 33 —

across industries. In the presence of substantial volume of imports, the
concentration ratios might significantly overstate the degree of market
power or possibility of implicit price coordination in domestic industries.
[Frydman and Nadiri (1978)].

As we noted earlier, material costs are generally very significant in

explaining industry price behavior. Since many of raw materials are
traded internationally, it is clear that the domestic prices will be

strongly affected by the conditions in the world commodity markets. Also,
the effect of changes in exchange rate in addition to having an effect on
Import prices, will have an effect on domestic prices of import competing
goods.

Some empirical results are available on the role played by changes in
import prices and particularly the recent increase in material prices.

Nordhaus and Shoven [1977] have decomposed the rate of Inflation of 58 sec-

tors in the U.S. economy during 1972—1974 into its components. They have
considered the effect of acceleration in agricultural prices, rise in
mining and domestic fuel prices, imports price increase, and Increase in

labor costs. Several results stand out: First, the contribution of these
components vary considerably in different sectors; In some Import prices
dominate, in a few the rise in agricultural prices stands out, while in
some others the labor cost increase seems to be the major component of the
sectoral inflation rates; second, about 85% of the inflation was explained
by the pass—through of hikes in the commodity prices and wages, suggesting
the dominance of the costs in prices behavior; third, there were shifts in

the composition of the inflation over the two years 1972—74. In the early

— 34 —

parts

of the period wage increase was the major contributory factor to

inflation, while prices of agricultural products accounted for two third8
of the inflation in November 1972 to August 1973; imports contributed about

16% to Inflation in this period. In the last part of 1973—74 period

imports dominated the picture. 36% of total inflation was due to rise In
import prices and the price rise of the domestic crude oil and natural gas
contributed significantly to inflation in this period.

Grubb et al [1982J explore the causes of stagflation in 19 OECD
countries and estimate the contributrion of slowdown in productivity
growth, the unfavorable trends in relative import prices and the higher

level of unemployment. They show that in the average OECD country relative
import prices made inflation in 1980 5% higher than it would have been if

import prices had continued their pre 1973 trend. Lower

productivity

growth had art equal effect in raising Inflation. These two effects were
offset by the effect of higher unemployment measured as deviation from its

trend. Bruno and Sachs [1982] also have argued that input price shocks
can lead to decline in growth of output and productivity, real wages, and

capital accumulation. When real wages are sticky these effects are greatly
magnified leading to greater unemployment and decline in output. With real
wage inertia profitability is reduced significantly by the rise in input

prices and investment tends to become sharply reduced. Their empirical
analysis suggests that recent sharp increases in material prices has been a
ma)or

contributory of the increase in the

rate of inflation in most of the

OECD countries. Since materials is a major

these

component of the imports in

countries, the exogeneous increase in prices of materials and oil

— 35 —

since

1973 was one of the major factors in the stagflation of the Western

economics.

V. Concluding Remarks
In this paper we have looked at some empirical evidence on price
inflexibility and presented some of the theoretical bases for why price
stability in the face of a decrease in short run demand may be an outcome

of rational maximization behavior. The response of firms to uncertainty,
the cost of adjusting prices, the contents of the long—term contracts
(explicit or implicit) in the goods and input markets, the extent and

variability of excess demand may differ among firms and industries. The
structure of the Industry, the degree of heterogeneity of the products in a
market, the network of input—output relationship among industries, the
nature of international competition, the process of formation of expectations shocks from monetary and fiscal policies and Input price increases,
all may Interact and create the ever changing environment of the firms.
There is a continual interplay of institutional forces, market arrangements
and cultural factors and customs that govern the behavior of firms with the
governmental policies and macroeconomic forces, which will result in price

rigidities in the short—run. These rigidities will evolve over time and
will vary across different markets, industries, or countries. In the long
run the Institutions and market arranginents will also change when they are

no longer useful and serve their purpose.
In the presence of the price rigidities, the conventional monetary and
fiscal restraint can achieve price stability at a high cost of high

— 36 —

unemployment.

This would result from the momentum of built in lags in the

costs and if people form their expectations by extrapolating past rates of

inflation. The cost of restraining inflation could be fairly high as

recently documented by Gordon [1982b]. On the other hand there is convincing evidence that monetary and fiscal restraints have been very successful in reversing the inflationary spiral in hyper—inflations
experienced by a number of countries in the early 1920's (Sargent [1982]).
The cause of such hyper—inflations may have been the excessive increase of

money and peoples' expectations that the government will accommodate the

inflationary developments. To end the hyper—inflation the governments were
forced to adopt a dramatically new strategy of a coordinated set of poli-

cies. An abrupt change in government policies and an effective inforcement
of the new legislations were the prerequisites for ending the hyper—

inflations. Though there are not any specific estimates of costs of such
anti—inflationary policies, it seems they did not lead to any widespread
unemployment that are implied in the models discussed in this paper.
In hyper—inflationary situations the transaction costs of holding money
Is so high that all contracts expressed in money terms become excessively

burdensome and the length of contracts dramatically shrinks; the distortive
effects of high inflation on incentives could lead to disorientation of the
business and consumers, the distribution of income and wealth gets
distorted and finally the self generating nature of Inflationary expec-

tations become very much understood by the public and the government. In
such situations the government will get the mandate to follow dramatic
anti—inflationary policies to break the inflationary expectations and put

— 37 —

the economy on a stable course. However, at low rates of inflation a consensus often does not exist for a decisive action. In democractic
societies, the governments will not have the ability to sustain anti—
inflationary policies for too long and with sufficient force to achieve

growth with stable prices. The central point to stress is that the ability
of governments to combat inflationary expectations is eridogenous in the

system. There is a nonlinear relationship between the costs of inflation,
the ability of the government to pursue effective anti—inflationary policies, and the public's acceptance of the needed adjustments.
What kind of policy options are open In an economy with moderate rates

of inflation which exhibits, in the short—run, price inflexibility for the

reasons described in this paper? This is a very difficult question and
would require considerable analysis and space beyond the scope of this

paper. A few such options can be mentioned here but only briefly. If the
price inflexibility Is partly due to Imperfect and costly information or
its uneven distribution and utilization then such a market failure can be
corrected with timely and relevant information provided by policy makers
and emergence of firms that could make the needed information available.
If the problem is partly due to overlapping wage contracts and institutional rigidities in other markets, or if it Is due to disynchronised
nature of pricing decision, then the possibility of successes in the short—

run is not encouraging. Only a consistent policy targeted at the disaggre—
gated industry levels and sustained for a number of years might dampen the

effects of these structural forces. If the price inflexibility is partly
in response to uncertainty and inability to determine precisely the changes

-38--

in aggregate demand, then governmental policies can minimize potential distur--

bances by avoiding erratic and sizeable shifts in its monetary and fiscal poli-

cies. Government policies that lessen the degree of concentration -in domestic
markets and encourage international

competition may dampen the potential effects

of monopoly power on prices. But international agreements may also be required
to stabilize prices of inputs such as raw materials, which can exert significant
effect on the level of prices when the domestic prices are inflexible.
Promoting increase in productivity and technical change may be one of the impor-

tant ways to lower the rate of inflation and reduce

price inflexibility.

Further, the price structure of government services and the effect of governmental regulations on price behavior must be examined carefully for they may
impart significant inflexibility to the price structure.

— 39 —

References
Blanchard, 0.J. (1983) "Price Desynchronization and Price Level Inertia",
National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper Number 900.
Blinder, Alan. (1982) "Inventories an(1 Sticky Prices: More on the
Microfoundations of Macroeconomics", American Economic Review,
vol.72, no.3, pp. 334—348.

Bruno, M. and J. Sachs. (1982) "Input Price Shocks and the Slowdown
In Economic Growth: The Case of U.K. Manufacturing", Review of
Economic Studies, vol.49, no.5, PP. 679—705.
Cagan, P. (1975) "Changes in the Recession Behavior of Wholesale
Prices in the 1920's and Post—World War II", Occasional Paper of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.

____________________ (1979) "Persistent Inflation: Historical and
Policy Essays", Columbia University Press, New York, pp. 227—252.
Canton, D. (1979) "Contracts, Price Rigidity, and Market Equilibrium",
Journal of Political Economy.
Coutts, K., W. Godley, and W. Nordhaus. (1978) Industrial Pricing in
the United Kingdom, (Cambridge, N.Y.: Columbia University
Press)

Davidson, P. (1977) "Post Keynes Monetary Theory and Inflation",
In Sidney Weintraub (ed.), Modern Economic Thought,
(Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsylvania Press), pp. 275—293.
de Minel, G. (1974) "Aggregate Price Dynamics", Review of Economics
and Statistics, PP. 129—140.
Eckstein, 0. and G. Fromm. (1968) "The Price Equation", American
Economic Review, vol. 58, pp. 1159—1183.

____________________ and P. Wyss. (1971) "Industry Price Equations",
In Eckstein (ed.), The Econometrics of Price Determination,
(Washington: Publication Services, Division of Administrative
Services, Board of Governors & Federal Revenue System), pp. 133—156.
Fischer, S. (1982) "Relative Price Variability and Inflation in U.S.
and Germany", European Economy Review, vol 18, no. 1/2, May—June,
pp. 171—196.

— 40 —

Frydman, R. and M.I. Nadiri. (1971) Price Behavior, Industrial
Structure, and Inflationary Bias in the U.S. Economy", Mimeo

____________________ (1981) "Sluggish Price Adjustments and the
Effectivenes of Monetary Policy Under Rational Expectations:
A Comment", J. Money, Credit, Banking, vol 13, no. 1, pp. 94—102.
Gordon, R. J. (1980) "A Consistent Characterization of a Near Century
of Price Behaviro", American Economic Review, vol 70, no. 2,
pp. 243—249.

____________________ (1981) "Output Fluctuations and Gradual Price
Adjustment", Journal of Economic Literature, vol. 19, no. 2,
pp. 493—530.

____________________ (1982a) "Wages and Prices Are Not Always Sticky,
A Century of Evidence of U.S., U.K., and Japan", National Bureau
of Economic Research Working Paper, No. 847.
_____________________ (1982b) "Why Stopping Inflation May Be Costly:
Evidence from Fourteen Historical Episodes", In R. E. Hall (ed.),
Inflation: Causes and Effects, (Chicago, London: University of
Chicago Press), pp. 11—40.

Grubb, D., R. Jackman, and R. Layard. (1982) "Causes of the Current
Stagflation", Review of Economic Studies, vol. 49, no. 5, pp. 707—730.

Hay, G. (1970) "Production, Price and Inventory Theory", American
Economic Review, vol. 60, no.4, pp. 531—545.
Kawasaki, S., J. McMillan, and K.F. Zimmermann. (1982) "Disequilibrium
Economics", American Economic Review, vol. 72, no. 5, pp. 992—1004

____________________ (1983) "Inventories and Price Inflexibility",
Econometrica, vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 599—610.
Kuran, T. (1983) "Asymmetric Price Rigidity and Inflationary Bias",
American Economic Review, vol. 73, no. 3, pp.373—382.

Lucas, R.E. (1972) "Expectations and Neutrality of Money", J of Economic
Theory, vol 4, no. 2, pp.103—124.
Maccini, L. (1981) "Adjustment Lags, Economically Rational Expectations,
and Price Behavior", Review of Economic Statistics, vol. 63, no. 2,
pp. 213—222.
Means, G.C. (1962) "The Corporate Revolution in America", Crowell—
Collier (eds.).

— 41 —

Nadiri,

M.l. and V. Gupta. (1977) "Price and Wage Behavior in the U.S.
Aggregate Economy and in Manufacturing Industries", In Popkin (ed.),
Analysis of Inflation: 1965—1974, (Cambridge, Mass.: Published
for the National Bureau of Economic Research by Ballinger
Publishing Co.).

Nordhaus, W. (1976) "The Flexibility of Wages and Prices", American
Economic Review, pp. 59—64.

____________________ and J. Shoven. (1977) "A Technique for Analyzing
and Decompsing Inflation", In J. Popkin (ed.), Analysis of
Inflation: 1965—1974, (Cambridge, Mass.: Ballinger Publishing Co.
pp. 333—355.

Okun, A.M. (1975) "Inflation: Its Mechanics and Welfare Costs",
Brooking Papers on Economic Activity.
"Prices and Quantities: A Macroeconomic
Abaktsus", The Brookings Intitutlon.

__________________ (1981)

phelps, E.S. and S.G. Winter, Jr. (1970) "Optimal Price Policy Under
Atomistic Competition", In Phelps, (ed.), Microeconoinic Foundations
of Employment and Inflation Theory, W.W. Norton and Co.
Phlips, L. (1980) "Intertemporal Price Discrimination and Sticky Prices",
Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 94, no. 3, pp.525—542.

Popkin, J. (1977) "An Integrated Model of Final and Intermediate Demand
by Stage of Process: A Progress Report", American Economic Review,
vol. 67, no. 1, pp. 141—147.
Ross, S.A. and M.L. Wachter. (1975) "Pricing and Timing Decision in
Oligopoly Industries", Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 89,
no. 1, pp. 115—137.
Rotemberg, J.J. (1982) "Monopolistic Price Adjustment and Aggregate
Output", Review of Economic Studies, vol. 49, no. 4, pp. 517—531.
Sargent, T. (1982) "The Ends of Four Big Inflatlons", En R.H. Hall, (ed.)
Inflation: Causes and Effects, (Chicago, London: National Bureau
of Economic Research University of Chicago Press), pp. 41—98.

Spence, H. (1976) "Market Shares and Tacit Coordination", Discussion
Paper Number 464, Institute of Economic Research, Harvard
University.
Stigler, G.J. (1964) "A Theory of Oligopoly", Journal of Political
Economy, no. 72, pp. 44—61.

— 42 —

____________________ and J.K. Kindahi. (1970) The Behavior of
Industrial Prices, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Wachtel, H.M. and P.D. Adeishelm. (1977) "How Recession Feed Inflation:
Price Markups in a Concentrated Economy", Challenge.

Wachter, M.L. (1976) "Some Problems in Wage Stabilization", American
Economic Review, vol. 66, no. 2, pp. 65—71.
Weiss, L.W. (1974) "The Concentration—Profits Relationship and
Antitrust", In H.J. Goldschmid, M.H. Mann, and J.F. Weston (eds.),
Industrial Concentration: The New Learning, (Boston, Mass.:
Little, Brown Company).
_____________________ (1977) "Stlgler Kindahi and Means on Administered
Prices", American Economic Review, vol. 67, no. 4, pp. 610—619.

Wu, S.T. (1979) "An Essay on Monopoly Power and Stable Price Policy",
American Economic Review, vol. 69, no. 2, pp. 60—72.

