NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CAPITAL CONTROLS AND RECOVERY FROM THE FINANCIAL CRISIS OF
THE 1930S
Kris James Mitchener
Kirsten Wandschneider
Working Paper 20220
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20220
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2014

We thank conference and seminar participants at Oxford University, UC Davis, and the Bank of NorwayGraduate Institute of International Studies Conference for useful suggestions. Melissa Daniel and Rose
York provided invaluable research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Kris James Mitchener and Kirsten Wandschneider. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Capital Controls and Recovery from the Financial Crisis of the 1930s
Kris James Mitchener and Kirsten Wandschneider
NBER Working Paper No. 20220
June 2014
JEL No. E61,F32,F33,F41,G15,N1,N2
ABSTRACT
We examine the first widespread use of capital controls in response to a global or regional financial
crisis. In particular, we analyze whether capital controls mitigated capital flight in the 1930s and assess
their causal effects on macroeconomic recovery from the Great Depression. We find evidence that
they stemmed gold outflows in the year following their imposition; however, time-shifted, difference-indifferences (DD) estimates of industrial production, prices, and exports suggest that exchange controls
did not accelerate macroeconomic recovery relative to countries that went off gold and floated. Countries
imposing capital controls also appear to perform similar to the gold bloc countries once the latter group
of countries finally abandoned gold. Time series analysis suggests that countries imposing capital
controls refrained from fully utilizing their newly acquired monetary policy autonomy.
Kris James Mitchener
Department of Economics
Leavey School of Business
Santa Clara University
Santa Clara, CA 95053
and NBER
kmitchener@scu.edu
Kirsten Wandschneider
Department of Economics
Occidental College
1600 Campus Rd
Los Angeles, CA 90041, U.S.A.
kirsten@oxy.edu

Capital Controls and Recovery from the Financial Crisis of the 1930s
1. Introduction
In 2010, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) revised its stand against capital controls,
recognizing that sudden capital surges can pose risk for some countries, and acknowledging that
controls on capital inflows may be part of a toolkit that countries use to ward off financial crises
(Ostry et al, 2010). This change in policy reversed the previous IMF position favoring the free
movement of capital.1 Nevertheless, the use of capital controls as a policy tool, especially as a
stopgap to ward off financial crises, remains controversial. For example, in 1998, Malaysia was
castigated by policymakers and financial markets for imposing capital controls in response to the
East Asian financial crisis.
Since capital controls have been used in response to exchange rate crises, understanding
their macroeconomic effects relative to other policies is an important agenda for research. On the
one hand, capital controls bottle up inflows, which could potentially drive new investment
spending and fuel a recovery in the wake of a crisis. On the other, their imposition could provide
central banks with room for maneuver; in particular, central banks can maintain fixed exchange
rates, but pursue expansionary monetary policy in the short run to stimulate output and return to
long-run policy objectives. Research on the 1997-8 East Asian financial crisis has suggested that
restrictions on the movement of capital may have produced a faster economic recovery in
comparison to countries that relied on help from the IMF (Kaplan and Rodrik, 2002).
Determining the relative benefits and costs of capital controls for economic recovery is
ultimately an empirical question, and the Great Depression offers a potentially fertile testing
ground for shedding light on this issue. Deflation spread globally after 1929, and as production
and incomes fell, countries found it increasingly difficult to maintain pegged exchanged rates.
By the mid-1930s, most had abandoned the gold-exchange standard and were seeking refuge in a
variety of alternative exchange-rate arrangements, including capital controls. The abandonment
of gold, however, was carried out in a haphazard manner, with some countries following
England off gold in 1931 and others steadfastly staying on gold until after 1933 (Eichengreen,

1

For example, in 1998, in its World Economic Outlook, the IMF was critical of Malaysia’s use of capital controls in
response to the East Asian financial crisis (IMF, 1998, p.4). By 2011, deputy managing Director Nemat Shafik
suggested that that Iceland keep its capital controls in place in response to the 2008-9 financial crisis (IMF, 2011).

1

1992, Kindleberger, 1986). Some countries chose to re-peg at lower rates to particular
currencies, such as the pound sterling, others floated their currencies, and many imposed
exchange controls (i.e., the common name for capital controls in that era) in order to shield their
economies from the effects of short-term capital flows (“hot money”) and balance-of-payments
pressures.2
The Depression was the first financial crisis in the era of modern economic growth in
which a large number of countries responded to balance-of-payments pressures by imposing
restrictions on the movement of capital. Few, if any, financial crisis since the Depression have
rivaled its severity and global impact, and few have witnessed so many countries responding by
imposing capital controls, perhaps in part because many subsequent crises have been regional in
nature (Glick and Rose, 1999). Previous research has found that de-linking from gold sped up
recovery from the Great Depression (Choudhri and Kochin, 1980, Eichengreen and Sachs, 1985,
Campa, 1990) and that imposing capital controls appears to have offered some relief from
“golden fetters” (Obstfeld and Taylor, 1998). Extant studies, however, have yet to analyze
systematically how countries imposing exchange controls performed relative to countries that
stayed on gold (the so-called “gold bloc”) and how countries imposing exchange controls
performed relative to countries that exited gold and floated their currencies after abandoning the
gold standard. For example, imposing capital controls might have prevented short-run capital
flight and, under the “policy trilemma” framework, enabled policymakers more room to aid
ailing banking systems using monetary policy. Moreover, imposing capital controls while
maintaining a fixed exchange rate might have reduced the possibility that a dramatic decline in
the value of the currency would further increase the probability of a banking crisis. On the other
hand, if capital control countries kept their exchange rates pegged (perhaps due to a “fear of
floating”) or delayed an adjustment in their parity, then the scope to engage in a competitive
devaluation to boost the domestic production of exports might be more limited relative to
floaters.

2

We use the terms capital controls and exchange controls synonymously throughout the paper. While the modern
economics literature uses the term capital controls, the writings of the 1930s uniformly use the term exchange
controls. This term referred to the original purpose of controls, restrictions on purchases and sales of foreign and
domestic currency at market rates, but interwar controls on the movement of capital quickly grew to include
restrictions on trade, travel, and the repatriation of capital gains, and hence why we use them interchangeably
throughout.

2

In order to fill these lacunae, we analyze the effects of capital controls on economic
recovery in the 1930s by assembling a large, new monthly data set of macroeconomic variables
and information on exchange rate and capital controls, spanning 1925-36, which contains almost
all of the countries that were on the interwar gold standard. Our database classifies how and
when countries abandoned the interwar gold standard as well as whether countries imposed
exchange controls, enabling us to study a variety of counterfactuals and consider how the pace of
recovery differed under alternative policy regimes.
We use these data to examine both their immediate effects on capital flight as well as
their medium-term effects on economic recovery. Our empirical analysis takes advantage of the
variation in timing of going off gold and heterogeneous policy responses in order to estimate the
causal effects of exchange controls on economic recovery from the Great Depression. We
employ time-shifted, difference-in-differences estimators to account for bias arising from the
variation in timing of going off gold (i.e., when treatment began).
We first show that the capital controls achieved the short-run policy objective of
stemming capital outflows. Gold cover ratios stabilized in the months following the imposition
of capital controls. We then show that capital controls did not accelerate recovery from the Great
Depression relative to countries that went off gold and floated. In examining the impact of
capital controls on industrial production, exports, and prices, we only find statistically significant
effects on industrial production, even after controlling for additional policy variables such as
movements in the discount rate and changes in trade barriers. However, the estimated coefficient
on industrial production suggests that capital controls slightly reduced its rate of growth relative
to floaters. Thus, while capital controls provided an immediate tool to combat capital flight, they
appear have held no advantage over a free float, and likely even hindered recovery after they
were imposed.
The fact that exchange-control countries broke from the gold standard earlier than Gold
Bloc countries meant that their recoveries began sooner; however, once the latter group also
finally abandoned gold, our analysis shows that countries imposing capital controls did not
experience faster growth in industrial production and export growth relative to the gold bloc.
Exchange controls allowed countries that perhaps “feared floating” to maintain a fixed parity, but
it offered scant improvement in terms of macroeconomic recovery.
3

We explore the implications of our results – why capital controls did not stimulate
recovery. Time series analysis suggests that countries imposing capital controls did not actively
pursue expansionary monetary policy after abandoning gold. An examination of discount rate
policy of capital control countries suggest that, while they did not follow France and continue to
raise rates after imposing controls, they also did not pursue a discount rate strategy similar to the
U.S., a country which floated and then aggressively pursued expansionary monetary policy. The
average growth rate in the money supply of capital control countries turned positive after their
imposition, but it was slower than the growth rates of either floaters or gold bloc countries once
they finally abandoned.
The next section of the paper reviews existing research on exchange controls and relates
it to the setting of this paper – the 1920s and 1930s. Section 3 employs a new panel level data set
to quantify how capital controls influenced the paths of industrial production, exports, and prices
relative to other policy regimes – countries that floated and countries that stayed on gold. Section
4 analyzes central bank policy rates to determine the extent to which countries exploited the
“policy trilemma” and took advantage of the ability to conduct autonomous monetary policy
once capital controls were imposed. It then provides a discussion as to why capital controls were
maintained even after gold outflows subsided. Section 5 summarizes our findings on the
effectiveness of capital controls in response to the crisis of the 1930s.
2. Capital Controls and the Great Depression
A. Costs and Benefits of Capital Controls
Capital controls limit the movement of currency and foreign exchange across borders.
They come in many forms and are put in place with a variety of goals in mind.3 They share the
feature of centralizing all dealings of foreign exchange in the hands of some government
authority. The first widespread use of them occurred during World War I. At the outset of the
war, belligerents tried to slow down the repatriation of capital so that foreign exchange could be
used for purchasing strategic imports. These controls were also used as a means for raising

3

For example, controls might be used to limit outflows of capital for balance of payments reasons, to preserve
domestic savings or to allocate capital to specific sectors of the economy.

4

revenue via higher inflation (delinking to gold and printing money) and as a tool for taxing
wealth (Bakker, 1996).
In this paper, we study restrictions that were put in place as a reaction to balance-ofpayments pressures and, in particular, the threat of capital outflows.4 In currency crises,
exchange controls are often employed as a response to anticipated or immediate danger of capital
exports or repatriation of funds abroad. A League of Nations’ study (1938, p.25) concluded that
capital controls were initially adopted in the late 1920s and early 1930s in response to a
deterioration in balance of payments conditions and observed or anticipated flight of capital.5
Some research has suggested capital controls have considerable utility in warding off
financial crises. For example, Krugman (1998) argues that in the event of a crisis, temporary
exchange controls can provide a country with time to restructure its financial sector in an orderly
fashion, lower interest rates, and put pro-growth policies in place. Recent theoretical work has
suggested that targeted capital controls could be used to provide some degree of control over
macro policy management (Farhi and Werning (2012) and Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2012)),
although the effectiveness of such controls, if used episodically, may depend on whether they are
able to target a wide set of assets and act like a “wall” (Klein and Shambaugh, 2013).6 Others
have pointed out that capital controls have a place in a world where free capital predominantly
flows from poor to rich countries, rather than the reverse, and where unchecked capital flows can
expose countries to excessive systemic risk (De Long, 2004). Blouin, Ghosal, and Muhan (2011)
emphasize that arguments for capital controls are strongest when institutional state capacity is
weak and the economic environment is uncertain, putting countries at risk for capital flight.
On the other hand, critics point to evidence that the controls are ineffective: markets
figure out ways to circumvent restrictions on the movement of capital. For example, this
situation was observed during Bretton Woods once restrictions on the current account were
4

There is an equally large literature on the use of capital controls to ward off capital inflows, such as the use of them
to limit real currency appreciations (Neely, 1999; Johnston and Tamirisa, 1998).
5
Ellis (1947, p. 878-9) suggests that during the 1930s the most common form of exchange control was enforcement
of overvalued exchange rates as a device to avoid depreciation, which would have ensued because of the withdrawal
or flight of capital from debtor countries. Exchange controls were thus used to defend a particular exchange rate and
ward off capital flight.
6
Although not explicitly about financial crises, Farhi and Werning (2012) build a model where they consider the
utility of capital controls in response to a variety of shocks. In numerical simulations, they find that capital controls
are especially effective in response to risk premium shocks (interpreted as a shock to the world interest rate). Klein
(2012), however, finds “episodic” capital controls used recently to regulate inflow-fueled exchange rate
appreciations and potentially destabilizing asset price booms are ineffective.

5

lifted. Critics also suggest that capital controls encourage corruption, hinder necessary policy
adjustment in the time of a crisis, significantly raise trade costs and the cost of capital, and make
it difficult to attract capital flows once the crisis period ebbs (e.g. Edwards, 1995; Wei and
Zhang, 2007). Moreover, even if implemented in response to balance-of-payments crises, they
can become permanent policy features that distort markets (Edwards, 1999).
Empirical research has attempted to quantify the relative benefits and costs of capital
controls. For example, Alesina, Grilli and Milesi-Ferretti (1993) find little evidence that, in
general, capital controls reduce long-run growth. Edwards and Rigobon (2009) re-examine the
effects of restrictions on capital inflows (as in Chile’s recent use of taxes on the movements of
short-term portfolio investment), and suggest that these types of controls appear to reduce the
vulnerability of the nominal exchange rate to external shocks.
What has received less attention from researchers is the analysis of how capital controls
imposed in response to financial crises affect recovery. This may be due to empirical hurdles that
make credible identification difficult, such as having too few observed cases of countries
imposing capital controls in response to a single crisis or the problem of unobserved
heterogeneity that arises from pooling observations across different crises. One recent attempt to
overcome these challenges is Kaplan and Rodrik (2002), which uses difference-in-difference
estimates to show that the one country that imposed capital controls in response to the 1997-8
East Asian Financial Crisis, Malaysia, experienced stronger recovery relative to countries
receiving IMF programs.

B. Exchange-Rate Responses to the Great Depression
The global economic calamity of the 1930s ultimately led to the collapse of the interwar
gold standard.7 As countries considered abandoning their pegged rates under the gold-exchange
standard, they were confronted with the open economy macroeconomic policy trilemma
(Obstfeld, Shambaugh and Taylor, 2004).8 That is, whereas gold-standard countries had
previously embraced fixed exchange rates and capital mobility in exchange for limited monetary
7

The interwar gold standard was often known as the gold-exchange standard because countries supplemented gold
reserves with the foreign currency of other countries pegged to gold.
8
Simmons (1997), Wandschneider (2008) and Wolf (2008) suggest that deflationary pressures, banking crises, gold
reserves, and the prior experience of hyperinflation were important determinants in predicting the timing of when
countries exited.

6

policy sovereignty, abandoning the gold standard presented countries with new choices. They
could: stay off gold permanently and float; devalue and re-peg at lower currency values; and/or
put capital controls in place to give them some leverage over domestic monetary policy, perhaps
with the hope of reflating their economies or injecting liquidity into weak or collapsing banking
systems.
Table 1 summarizes when countries suspended operation of the gold standard, when they
depreciated or devalued, and when they imposed exchange controls. For our analysis, we follow
other researchers (including the League of Nations), and broadly classify countries into three
groups: (1) those that abandoned gold and imposed capital controls; (2) those that abandoned
gold by floating their currencies; and (3) those that remained on gold after 1934. The last group
includes countries commonly classified as the “gold bloc”: Belgium, France, the Netherlands,
Poland, and Switzerland. Italy is classified as an exchange control country for the current
analysis since it imposed exchange controls in May of 1934 (Dimitrova et. al., 2007). In addition
to the gold bloc, the “gold stalwarts” (group 3) include Albania, Hong Kong, Lithuania and the
Netherlands Indies, all of which abandoned gold in 1935 or later.
The second group, the “floaters,” is comprised of countries in the Sterling bloc and those
that abandoned gold without imposing capital controls. Since a primary goal is to understand
how capital controls affected recovery from the Depression, we categorize Finland and the
United States as floaters, despite both countries brief experience with exchange controls during
this period. For Finland, the exchange control period was only three months – October to
December 1931 – and it is seen as ineffective in stemming capital flight (Letho-Sinisalo, 1992).
Similarly, exchange controls in the US are generally not considered effective as can be seen in
the active forward market in US dollar. Since Portugal’s capital controls were nominally in place
since 1922, and since they were not used to manage a balance-of-payments crisis, we classify
this country as a floater.
The group of exchange control countries comprises the largest group in our sample. It
consists of Central and Eastern European countries, Latin American countries, Japan, and Iran.
Bulgaria heavily relied on exchange controls to align itself with Germany after 1931, so we
classify it as an exchange control country. In most countries, exchange controls took the form of
administrative controls, with the government centralizing exchange dealings, setting official
7

exchange rates, and hindering the transfer of capital abroad by private citizens to stop capital
flight and curb speculation. Governments also took control of export proceeds and privately held
foreign assets (Ellis, 1941).

C. The Emergence of Capital Controls in the 1930s
Nurkse (1944) corroborated the findings of the 1938 League of Nations study, suggesting
that the principal reason most countries imposed capital controls in the 1930s was to curb the
outflow of capital.9 Ellis (1941) also states that countries in this period explicitly used exchange
controls to protect against capital flight and to defend parities that had become overvalued based
on purchasing power parity values or international price comparisons.10
Many European countries opted for capital controls when confronted with banking crises
in the spring and summer of 1931, falling foreign exchange reserves, and capital flight. Some
countries appear to have been concerned that floating rates, without capital controls, would ignite
hyperinflations similar to those seen in Continental Europe in the early 1920s.11 Germany is
often cited as the most prominent example of a country that imposed extensive capital controls,
creating a complex system of bilateral trade clearing agreements in the late 1930s after their
imposition (Child, 1978; Neal, 1979).12 German capital controls were initially imposed to curb
capital outflows and maintained in order to keep the official foreign exchange rates for the
Reichsmark at the old parity; thereafter, an extensive trade clearing system was created to offset
the distortionary price and trade effects of the capital controls. The clearing system was then
utilized by the Nazi government in order to secure critical imports in the absence of foreign
currency (US Tariff Commission, 1942). And when countries such as Germany and Hungary
imposed exchange controls, some nearby trading partners felt pressure to follow suit (Ellis,
1941). Some primary-product exporting countries in South and Central America imposed
9

Exceptions may have been Hungary, Greece, and Bulgaria, which appear to have implemented capital controls in
1931 to acquire foreign exchange for debt servicing (Nurkse, 1944)
10
Quotas and restrictions on imports, used by France and other gold bloc countries, were an alternative means for
maintaining overvalued parities (Nurkse, 1944). Harris (1936) takes a broader view, suggesting countries that
devalued or imposed capital controls were the most likely to have overvalued currencies.
11
Or less extreme, capital controls may have provided a more effective nominal anchor than stabilizing interest rates
a la Calvo and Reinhart (2002).
12
The German bilateral clearing agreements, set up by Hjalmar Schacht in 1934, relied on a system of managed
accounts and fixed exchange rates to circumvent the need for gold and foreign assets. At its height, they expanded to
25 countries and covered about half of all German foreign trade (Neal, 1979).

8

controls in response to balance-of-payment pressures and potential sovereign debt defaults
(Bratter, 1939).
To assess whether capital controls had an effect on halting capital flight, we computed
cover ratios for countries imposing capital controls. The cover ratio for each country is
calculated as the ratio of central bank gold reserves and foreign currency assets to its domestic
liabilities (defined as notes in circulation). Data are from the Statistisches Handbuch der
Weltwirtschaft (1934, 1936-7). Figure 1 then centers each country’s data based on the month on
which it imposed exchange controls. As the graph shows, cover ratios declined dramatically in
the 15 months prior to imposing controls, falling from around 70 percent to below 50 percent. In
the months following the imposition of capital controls, the ratio then stabilizes and recovers
somewhat suggesting that exchange controls proved effective in stemming capital flight.

3. Analyzing how Capital Controls Influenced Recovery from the Great Depression

A. Cross-Sectional Evidence
At the time of their imposition, the League of Nations viewed the widespread use of
capital controls as troubling. While recognizing that controls halted capital outflows, the League
became concerned that the long-term costs of maintaining them would outweigh their short-run
benefits, suggesting that they would raise domestic prices and reduce exports (League of
Nations, 1938). Foreman-Peck (1983) later estimated that, as of 1934, the currencies of exchange
control countries were overvalued by as much as 60% relative to the pound and the dollar. Ellis
(1939) suggests that exchange controls discouraged foreign investment by hindering capital
repayments. He also claims that exchange control countries had lower output and trade than
countries with depreciated currencies, outcomes we empirically test in our paper. On the other
hand, Aldcroft and Oliver (1998) suggest that many exchange control countries expanded their
trade through clearing agreements and were able to obtain higher prices for their exports in the
clearing markets than in the world market (in effect, diverting trade).
Previous research has established that going off gold was linked to faster economic
recovery (Eichengreen and Sachs, 1985 and Campa, 1990), but the focus of these studies was
largely on identifying the pre- and post-effects of leaving the gold-exchange standard.
9

Comparatively less attention has been paid to the precise way in which countries abandoned the
gold standard. A few studies use cross-sectional data to suggest that countries, which chose to
remain on the gold standard, had lower rates of growth in industrial production between 1929-35,
but that this slow growth was mitigated by the use of exchange controls (Eichengreen, 1992;
Obstfeld and Taylor, 1998). These same studies suggest that countries preserving fixed exchange
rates were exposed to greater deflation, but find that deflation was less if they implemented
exchange controls; however, they do not try to account for differences in the timing of the
implementation of capital controls and how this might influence recovery.
We begin our analysis of the effects on recovery from the Depression by discussing our
data and presenting some summary evidence on macroeconomic performance once countries
abandoned gold. To do so, we hand collected monthly data from 1925-36 on industrial
production, wholesale prices, and exports for a sample of 37 countries from the League of
Nations (1937, 1938) and the Statistical Handbook of the World Economy (Statistisches
Handbuch der Weltwirtschaft, 1934 and 1936-37). Our new database improves on existing
interwar datasets by expanding coverage for the number of countries (Latin America and Asia,
plus Europe), the number of years (1925 to 1936), and the frequency of data (monthly versus
annual). Our sample includes all the major economies on the interwar gold standard as well as
almost all other countries that had adopted gold during this period.
Figures 2-4 plot the change in the parity between 1929 and 1936 against industrial
production, exports, and wholesale prices. The y-axis values are measured relative to 1929
values, with 1929 indexed at 100. As in Eichengreen and Sachs (1985) and Campa (1990), we
find that countries with large post-1929 devaluations experienced stronger growth in all three
measures, suggesting a reversal in the trends of the deflation and declining output and exports
that had set in during the Great Depression. As shown in Table 1, countries’ policy responses to
the Great Depression differed. We thus examine the scatter plots for the three sub-groups:
exchange control countries, “floaters,” and “gold stalwarts” (those that remained on gold past
1934). Figures 5-7 show that the salutary effects documented in the first set of plots were
strongest for the floaters. The scatter diagrams suggest that after abandoning gold (and up
through 1936), exchange-control countries experienced only a slight recovery in industrial
production, wholesale prices, and exports.
10

To shed more light on the effects on the longer-run effects of capital controls, we present
results from cross sectional regressions. In particular, we regress one of our macroeconomic
outcome variables (industrial production, wholesale prices, or exports) on a constant, a dummy
variable for exchange controls, a dummy variable for countries that remained on gold past 1934,
and a normally distributed error term. Our sample period ends in 1936, which relative to
previous studies, allows us to include more gold bloc countries in our analysis of post-gold
standard period; however, the coding of policy regime is nearly equivalent to Obstfeld and
Taylor (1998). Hence, we are able to replicate their analysis when restricting the sample period
to end in 1935.
Columns 1-3 of Table 2 define the dependent variable as the total percentage change
between 1929 and 1935 whereas columns 4-6 define it as the total percentage change between
1929 and 1936. For gold stalwarts, our results are similar to those reported in Obstfeld and
Taylor (1998). As columns 1-3 show, countries that remained on the gold standard after 1934
experienced an 18 percent cumulative drop in industrial production and a 28 percent fall in
prices, reflecting the deflationary pressures of staying on the gold standard in the 1930s. We also
document an almost 40% drop in exports in 1935 compared to 1929. The results are similar
when we the sample period is extended to 1936 (columns 4-6). By contrast, our results for
exchange control countries differ from earlier studies, such as Obstfeld and Taylor (1998), which
reported positive effects of exchange controls on output and wholesale prices. Between 19291935, we can identify no statistically significant effect of exchange controls on output, wholesale
prices, or export performance. If we instead use 1936 as the last year of the sample period,
exchange controls appear to have had no statistically significantly different effect on industrial
production or wholesale prices relative to floaters. However, exchange controls do appear to
have reduced exports by 21 percent relative to floaters. Unlike floaters, some exchange-control
countries had little scope to increase their exports via competitive depreciation because they did
not devalue (Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, Germany, Hungary, and Latvia). Other exchange control
countries devalued, but did so in a delayed fashion relative floaters, thus limiting their scope for
tilting the terms of trade in favor of domestic production. A closer examination of the
composition of trade shows that roughly 60 percent of exchange control countries’ exports went
to countries that floated and 70 percent of imports came from them (Harris, 1936). Hence,
11

because of delayed devaluations or no devaluation, the majority of goods that exchange-control
countries exported became relatively less competitive and the majority they imported became
relatively more competitive. Moreover, because exchange-control countries did not adjust their
parities to lower levels immediately after leaving gold, import prices did not rise to the same
degree as they did in floating countries, thus limiting their potential impact on the general price
level of the economy. Nevertheless, if capital-control countries pursued expansionary monetary
policies after imposing exchange controls, then a more dramatic recovery in prices could have
still ensued – a point we turn to later in the paper.

B. Difference-in-Differences Estimates
Cross sectional regressions confirm that abandoning gold accelerated economic recovery
in the 1930s; however our larger sample of countries shows somewhat different effects for
exchange control countries in comparison to previous studies. To explore these differences
further and develop causal estimates, we exploit the panel nature of our data (i.e., monthly data
on a large sample of countries) to construct difference-in-differences estimates of the effects of
exchange controls on several macroeconomic outcome variables.
Our identification strategy takes advantage of the variation in the timing of gold standard
abandonment and restrictions in the movement of capital to identify an average treatment effect
on the treated. To reiterate, Table 1 displays the time-series variation in policy changes across
countries. If such differences in timing are not accounted for, it can produce biased estimates of
our “treatment” variable. To illustrate this point, consider the more recent 1997-98 East Asian
financial crisis. Malaysia was still experiencing severe economic difficulties through the summer
of 1998, at a time when neighboring countries were already recovering from the 1997 Asian
crisis. Malaysia’s capital controls, however, came into place later than South Korea or Thailand’s
IMF assistance. Once this difference in timing of the treatment is accounted for, Malaysia
appears to have had a faster recovery with capital controls in comparison to those that received
IMF assistance packages (Kaplan and Rodrik, 2002). Similarly for our interwar sample, a bias in
the treatment effect would occur if one does not account for the variation in timing of when
countries leave the gold standard or impose exchange controls. For example, gold stalwart

12

countries are often found to have slow recoveries despite the fact that they did recover when they
finally left gold.
To gain some insight into how differences in implementation might matter, we first plot
the average monthly growth rates of industrial production, prices, and exports based on the
policy choice after abandoning gold. Figures 8-10 show the before and after effects of leaving
gold on industrial production, wholesale prices, and exports when we explicitly control for the
month when each country departed gold. It is important to note that the results are not to be
confused with the cross-sectional estimates shown in Table 2. The growth effects documented
here solely measure the recovery of countries once countries left the gold standard or imposed
exchange controls, even for the gold stalwarts. The graphs still confirm that growth rates
increased, deflation ended, and exports rose as countries abandoned the gold standard; however,
the relative degree of recovery differs significantly across the three groups. Figure 8 shows that
growth increased for all three groups when countries abandoned the gold standard or imposed
exchange controls, and this effect appears largest for the gold stalwarts. Before leaving gold,
floaters showed the largest decline in growth rates. As seen in Figure 9, all three groups showed
deflation while on gold, but deflationary effects were most severe for the floaters. Gold stalwarts
exhibit the strongest upward trend in prices once they finally abandon gold. By contrast,
exchange-control countries inflation rates are less pronounced and similar to floaters after going
off gold. With respect to exports, growth declines by about 0.5 percentage points for all country
groups while on the gold standard. Gold stalwarts exhibit the fastest recovery in exports after
finally leaving gold. Exports for exchange control countries recover slightly more slowly than
floaters.
To explicitly account for variation in the timing of gold standard abandonment and policy
choice and control for unobservable differences across countries, we estimate a time-shifting,
difference-in-differences model of the following form:

(1) yit = αit + βOffGoldit + γOffGoldit*XControlsi + σOffGoldit*Stalwarti + Xit + Ci +Montht +µit,

where yit is one of our three measures of macroeconomic performance (growth in industrial
production, the wholesale inflation rate, or export growth). OffGoldit is a time-varying dummy
13

variable that indicates the time off gold for each country. It equals one in all the months
following a country’s decision to devalue and/or officially suspend the gold standard (thereby
leaving gold de jure or de facto) or impose exchange controls. XControlsi is a dummy variable
for exchange controls as defined in Table 1a. Stalwarti is a dummy variable for the countries that
remained on gold through the end of 1934 as defined in Table 1c. Xit are additional time-varying
country-specific controls, Ci are country fixed effects, which absorb the time-invariant dummies
for Goldi and XControlsi. Montht are time fixed effects, and ui,t is a white-noise error term. We
estimate models where the omitted category is the floaters – countries that leave the gold
standard before the end of 1934 and do not impose exchange controls thereafter. Our

€

counterfactual estimates thus focus on the effects for two treatment groups, exchange-control
countries and the stalwarts, relative to floaters.13 In this specification, β describes the percentage
point change (log points) of the effect of leaving the gold standard for the omitted category.
γ and σ respectively estimate the effect of going off gold for the exchange control countries and
the gold stalwarts relative to the omitted group.
Table 3 presents estimates of equation (1), with standard errors of the estimated
coefficients clustered at the country level. For floaters, going off gold raises the growth rate in
industrial production by 1.1%, increases monthly wholesale inflation by 0.7% and stimulates
export growth by 1.8% Relative to floaters, exchange control countries see a smaller boost in
industrial production of 0.7% per month, but no statistically significant different effect with
respect to inflation and exports. Relative to floaters, gold stalwarts exhibit a statistically
significant increase of 1.3% per month in wholesale prices when they finally leave gold, but no
statistically significant effect with respect to industrial production or exports.
As a robustness check, we considered some additional specifications, including adding
controls to understand whether our effects are related to the capital controls themselves or to
other economic characteristics of the economies that scholars have suggested might matter. As
Table 3 shows, the one-month lagged discount rate as well as a measure for trade protection to
capture the effect that countries might have substituted exchange rate policy for trade policy,
does not alter the point estimates significantly.14 Ellis (1947) noted that some countries that
13

These counterfactuals follow naturally from the time-shifting, diff-in-diff identification strategy.
Data on trade protection come from Lampe and Sharp (2013) and use the import-weighted average ad valorem
tariff, calculated as the ratio of customs duty revenue to total imports for domestic consumption. For discount rates,
14

14

imposed capital controls had “overvalued” parities. If this were the case, then it is possible that
the capital control we consider is proxying for the fact that these countries had uncompetitive
exchange rates ex ante. We therefore tried a specification where we scaled the capital control
dummy by the exchange rate relative to the dollar as of the start of the Depression. If the
exchange rate is important, then the estimated coefficient on this variable should be negative and
significant. We therefore ran some specifications where we took into account the various sizes of
countries’ devaluations as well as countries’ debt levels. These specifications yielded similar
results, showing no systematic evidence that exchange controls boosted recovery relative to other
policy choices.15

C. Endogeneity of Exchange Controls
Our findings suggest that, in terms of macroeconomic performance, exchange control
countries did no better than either floaters or gold stalwarts. It is possible, however, that a
country’s decision to implement capital controls is non-random, in which case the estimates
reported in Table 3 might suffer from selection bias. To address the selection issue
econometrically, we compare our baseline results to some additional specifications. Columns 1-3
of Table 4 show regression results from a different fixed effects model, one that excludes time
dummies such that the identifying variation comes only from the time dimension. For the
interaction between capital controls and going off gold, the results are similar to what is shown
in the baseline specification of Table 3; of the three macroeconomic outcome variables, only
industrial production is statistically significantly different from zero and the sign and size on the
IP coefficient is nearly identical to the baseline regression. Because the source of identifying
variance is quite different for these estimates, they provide some additional evidence that
selection bias is not likely driving the findings with respect to capital controls.
We next employ a standard instrumental variables procedure to deal with the possibility
that countries non-randomly selected whether they would impose capital controls or float when
going off gold. Decisions about exchange-rate regime choices in the late nineteenth and early
twentieth centuries were dominated by concerns about price stability (Ellis, 1939, p.33). We
we tried alternative lag structures, including two and four months, and results were similar to those reported.
15
Results for these additional specifications are omitted to save space, but are available from the authors upon
request.

15

therefore use the change in a country’s price level between 1913-1922 as an instrumental
variable. Since changes in prices during the period 1913-22 are largely associated with wartime
disruptions to markets and the end of wartime price controls, they represent a plausibly
exogenous shock that tempered the decision about whether to impose capital controls or to float.
Moreover, price dynamics under the reconstituted interwar gold standard were fundamentally
different from the price movements in the floating period before 1922: there is no direct effect
from the 1913-22 price changes on industrial production, wholesale prices, and exports under the
gold standard regime. Countries that experienced high inflation or hyperinflation may have been
especially reluctant to abandon the gold standard in the 1930s (given the classical gold standard
era was associated with price stability) and thus tended to impose capital controls rather than
float (a decision that was associated with runaway inflation of the 1910s and early 1920s).
Because capital controls appear twice in our specification (i.e., also in the interaction term), we
create a second instrument that is the interaction between off gold and a country’s change in
prices between 1913-22.16 First stage results show that the sign on the changes in prices between
1913-22 is positively related to being a country with capital controls as predicted. The AngristPischke multivariate F tests of excluded instruments average 11.1 for the first instrument and
15.0 for the second instrument when looking across the three outcome variables.17
To implement the IV strategy, we include time dummies but exclude country fixed
effects.18 Thus, in contrast to columns 1-3 of Table 4, these estimates identify off of the crosssectional variation in the data. As shown in columns 4-6 of Table 4, and as reported in other
specifications, we find no ameliorative effects from capital controls. The coefficient estimates for
industrial production and wholesale prices are fairly similar to those reported in other
specifications. Only when we consider exports is the coefficient on capital controls somewhat
different. It is statistically significantly different from zero; however, the sign is negative.

16

An alternative IV approach would be to specify a model that looks like Columns 1-3 of Table 3, but includes only
the latter instrument, i.e. the time-varying instrument. Estimates for the three outcome variables look similar to those
reported in columns 4-6 of Table 4.
17
The corresponding Angrist-Pischke underidentification tests have p values between 0.0000 and 0.006.
18
The sample sizes are somewhat smaller in the IV regressions due to missing data on the changes in prices for the
period 1913-22.

16

Adding the two coefficients, the IV estimate suggests that, on average, capital controls reduced
exports by a little less than 1% per month relative to floaters.19
Finally, because IV approaches always depend on the (untestable) economic validity of
the instruments, it is worth considering the direction of the potential bias and what it would
imply for the analysis. If countries that selected into capital controls were systematically
performing worse than floaters at the time when they abandoned gold, then the reported
coefficients could potentially be understating the size of the effect that capital controls had on
recovery from the Great Depression. However, as Figures 8-10 show, the average decline in
prices, industrial production, and exports for capital countries prior to their implementation was
smaller in comparison to floaters prior to departing gold. Hence, selection would be positive
relative to floaters, and lead to a slight overstatement of the size of the ameliorative effects.
Because we observe no measurable macroeconomic benefits of capital controls, any potential
bias not accounted for by our different estimation methods thus seems harmless to the main
thrust of the results.

4. Why Were Capital Controls Ineffective at Boosting Recovery?

A. Policy Rate Interdependence
Our difference-in-difference regression estimates suggest that, relative to floaters,
countries imposing exchange controls exhibit no statistically significant difference in exports or
wholesale prices and show a somewhat smaller recovery in industrial production. These findings
are consistent with Ellis’ (1939) untested claim that capital controls discouraged foreign
investment and that capital control countries showed slower output growth. In the framework of
the international macroeconomics policy trilemma, this result might seem surprising since
countries imposing capital controls had policy flexibility after abandoning gold, and therefore
should have performed at least as well as the floaters. For example, in the presence of capital
controls, they could now conduct monetary policy with the aim of injecting liquidity into
banking systems, reflating prices, or stimulating output. Although he does not formally test it, in
his study of the interwar gold standard Nurkse (1944, p.169), suggests countries may have kept
19

When we consider the equivalent specification, but without instruments, results are similar to those reported in
Tables 3 and 4.

17

exchange controls in place to “permit the adoption of monetary expansion at home or to at least
avert the need for further deflation.”
To understand why we fail to see faster macroeconomic recovery, we analyze the extent
to which exchange-control countries availed themselves to autonomous monetary policymaking
after they change their policies by examining interest rate interdependence with key gold
standard countries. That is, if capital controls are tight, under fixed exchange rates it is not
necessary for a country’s interest rate to equal the base rate, given policymakers some room for
maneuver.20 We thus analyze changes in each capital control country’s discount rate (i.e., policy
variable) to changes in a base country’s discount rate (meant to represent a benchmark rate that
policymakers in other countries would have followed in order to maintain gold convertibility).
In particular, we examine the monthly movements of bank rates or discount rates before
and after capital controls were put in place since this was the policy variable that most central
banks targeted during our sample period (Eichengreen, 1992).21 We focus on the behavior of
changes in discount rates or bank rates (as denoted by Δ in the equation below) since results
from Augmented Dickey Fuller (ADF) tests cannot reject the null hypothesis of unit roots or near
unit roots in many of the bank rate series.22 For all countries imposing capital controls for which
we have data, we regress (in first differences) the discount rate for the country with capital
controls, i, on a constant term, the discount rate in a base country (Base), a dummy variable for
when capital controls are imposed (XControls), the interaction between the base country’s
discount rate and the capital control indicator variable, and a white-noise error term:
(2) Δit = αt + βXControli + γΔBASEt + σΔBASEt*XControli +µt.

We test whether the dummy variable indicating the presence of capital control interacted with the
base rate is statistically significant different from zero, i.e. whether a given country was

20

Alternatively, one could think of this as a wedge between a country’s interest rate and the base rate, where the
capital control is a tax on foreign borrowing that affords the country with monetary policy autonomy. See Farhi and
Werning (2012) and Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2012).
21
As a check on whether countries followed the base rate, we ran a panel regression of changes in discount rates for
all countries in our sample (not just exchange control countries) on a constant term and changes in England’s bank
rate for the pre-1929 period. We found the coefficient on the base rate to be positive and statistically significant.
22
Using ADF tests on the discount rates, we cannot reject the null hypothesis of a unit root in levels for all countries
except for Austria and Hungary. We reject the null hypothesis of a unit root for all countries in first differences.

18

following the base country more or less after capital controls were imposed. The base policy rate
in the regression represents either the United States or France, two countries which were at the
core of the interwar gold standard and which had accumulated large amounts of gold prior to
1929. After 1933, the choices of these two base countries diverge, with the U.S. floating and
France staying on gold, so this allows us to examine the monetary policy of capital control
countries relative to a base country which was a floater and a base country that stayed on gold.
That is, the efficient monetary policy choice of a given capital control country might not have
been entirely orthogonal of the decision made by a floater like the U.S.
Table 5 displays regression based on estimating equation (2).23 Comparisons of each
capital control country relative to the base-country France allow us to see if the discount rate
policies of capital control countries diverged significantly from the “stayers.” If this were true,
then the sign on the interaction should be negative and statistically significant. As shown in the
first column of results, we observe no such relationship. The interaction term is never statistically
significant different from zero. The next column examines the relationship relative to the U.S.
Positive and statistically significant coefficients would suggest that capital control countries
followed the U.S., which pursued very expansionary monetary policy after leaving gold (Romer,
1992). Again, the interaction term is never statistically significant,
As a robustness check, columns 3 and 4 include England and Germany as alternative base
countries. Although the U.S. and France were linchpins of the interwar gold standard, they were
not the most important trading partner for some countries; since exchange controls can affect
both the financial account and the current account, it may be that some countries monetary
policies in turn followed their principal trading partners even after capital controls were imposed.
Many countries in Central and Eastern Europe, for example, had close trade ties to Germany.24
That said, using England and Germany as base countries, the results similarly show no
systematic evidence of changing discount rate policies after capital controls were imposed.
We can exploit the panel nature of our data by pooling the countries together and retesting the model with standard errors clustered at the country level. We report the findings using
monthly differences in interest rates, however, the signs and significance of the interaction
23

Standard errors are Newey-West corrected for serial correlation.
Eichengreen and Irwin (1995) as well as Ritschl and Wolf (2003) document the breakup of the interwar gold
standard into trade and currency blocs after its collapse.
24

19

variable are virtually identical when we instead used annual differences.25 Panel B of Table 5
shows pooled regression results using the U.S., France, and England as base countries. The
additional power from pooling shows up in that we now find some significant results. With
respect to France, we see that capital countries do not follow France after they impose capital
controls; the coefficient is negative and statistically significant at the 5% level. Since France
continued to raise rates to defend the gold standard until it departed in 1935, it is in many ways
not surprising that there is a negative relationship with this base country. Next, consider the
coefficient on the capital control interaction when England is the base country, which is positive
and significant at the 10% level. While this suggests that countries followed the UK after
imposing capital controls, it also reflects discount rate inaction. England lowered the rate through
early 1932, but then held the rate absolutely fixed after it re-pegged (it pursued a one-shot
devaluation). When we compare capital control countries to the U.S., the interaction term is also
negative and significant at 10%.26 At best, one can conclude that policy rates in capital control
countries did not blindly follow France into further monetary tightening. At worse, one could
conclude they also did not follow the U.S. expansionary strategy.

B. Further Evidence on Monetary Policy
As has been widely noted by economic historians, the financial crisis of the 1930s
manifested itself as twin crises in many countries (Grossman, 1994; Eichengreen, 1992;
Grossman and Meissner, 2010). Countries that imposed capital controls found themselves with
the policy freedom to aid weak banking systems that they would not have had if they had stayed
on gold. As noted, central banks could have lent at lower rates (though we found little evidence
that they did) or governments could have injected liquidity by increasing the money supply,
perhaps by monetizing gold flows (as was done by the U.S. Treasury after 1933). Figure 11
therefore plots the average money growth rates (M0) for the three groups in our sample, before
and after countries in each group left gold. Although money supplies grew at an average rate of
0.45% per year after countries imposed capital controls, this group experienced the slowest rate
of growth after departing gold. Both floaters and stayers had faster rates of money growth after
25

The annual regressions are a useful robustness check since adjustment speeds may not be instantaneous. Annual
differences help smooth out differing speeds of adjustment.
26
Since Germany was a capital control country, the results would be difficult to interpret if it were used as a base
country in the pooled regression.

20

exiting the gold standard.27 If banks did not receive adequate liquidity support in the wake of
crises, this might have delayed recovery. However, if the countries that imposed capital controls
were particularly concerned with price stability (as the first stage of our IV suggests), this might
help explain why they failed to embrace their policy freedom and use it to help domestic banking
systems.
As a final test of the conduct of monetary policy after the imposition of capital controls,
we looked at whether covered interest parity (CIP) held. In particular, we examined the implied
profit opportunities that existed if CIP conditions were not met. Violations of CIP indicate
arbitrage opportunities, or in our case, that capital controls could have potentially been used to
maintain an interest rate different from the global interest rate. Evidence of such differences
could suggest that monetary policy was employed to stimulate the domestic economy.
Unfortunately, data on forward exchange for our sample period exist for just seven countries,
only two of which (Italy and Germany) imposed capital controls and kept them in place for more
than a year; hence, the conclusions one can draw from this exercise are more limited.28 However,
based on this limited sample, we find little evidence from either the time series plots or structural
break tests that the behavior of implied profits from interest rate arbitrage for capital control
countries were any larger or persisted longer in comparison to, for example, other gold bloc
countries that did not impose them and instead devalued.29

C. Why did Countries Maintain Capital Controls?
As noted, primary sources from the interwar period suggests that policymakers initially
imposed capital controls to stop capital flight; however, once the outflows abated, why did
countries keep the controls in place? Indeed, many policymakers at the time were opposed to
their maintenance. For example, the Bank for International Settlements which, even in its infancy
attempted to coordinate central bank activity, thought the maintenance of capital controls stood
in the way of reconstituting the gold standard; the BIS thus viewed exchange controls as partly
responsible for delaying recovery from the Depression (BIS, Annual Report, 1935, 1936).
27

To be clear, similar to Figures 8-10, the “off gold” period for the stalwart countries only refers to the months in
1935 and 1936, in which these countries had also abandoned the gold standard.
28
The five others are Belgium, Holland, France, Switzerland, and the U.S. Data are forward exchange are from
Einzig (1934) and interest rate data from Obstfeld, Shambaugh, and Taylor (2004).
29
Results are available upon request.

21

One reason we examine the somewhat longer-term effects of capital controls is that they
may have afforded additional room for maneuver given the constraints of the policy trilemma.
Our econometric evidence (albeit ex post) suggests capital controls had little effect on economic
recovery in the 1930s relative to other policy options. Further, our examination of monetary
policy seems to indicate that central banks did not substantially alter their discount rate policies
or dramatically increase their money growth rates.
As a proximate explanation, some exchange-control countries may have simply feared
floating (Calvo and Reinhart, 2002) and kept them in place alongside a peg to provide a stable
nominal anchor. The historical record points to several additional reasons why exchange controls
may have been maintained once gold-cover ratios stabilized. Although the initial focus was on
using them to contend with pressure on the financial/capital account, their persistence can likely
be attributed to concerns over the current account (likely reflecting exchange rates that were still
managed and overvalued) rather than an as an explicit tool to reflate economies and further
stabilize banking systems. As global trade collapsed and export earnings fell (due to falling
aggregate demand, rising trade barriers, and falling prices), the demand for foreign exchange
grew. One way to ensure that foreign exchange needs of governments could be met was to
restrict imports via quotas, import restrictions, and import substitution policies (Fishlow 1972,
Thorp, 1984). Another way to limit imports, however, was exchange controls. As Eichengreen
and Irwin (2010, pp.879) emphasize, “If the exchange controls were comprehensive and
effective, they could be administered in a manner that left no need for additional measures such
as tariffs or quotas. Import licensing and government allocation of foreign exchange meant that
officials could determine the total amount of spending on imports and the allocation of that
spending across different goods and country suppliers. Therefore, a country imposing exchange
controls might not have to resort to higher tariffs and quotas because it already had the ability to
limit imports through administrative action.”
As the decade progressed, it became increasingly clear that exchange controls were
working in conjunction with tariffs and quotas to restrict imports. Imports were often forbidden
without an exchange permit guaranteeing the distribution of foreign currency to pay for them.
“Traders were at liberty to import…but when it came to paying for the goods they often found
their exchange applications were met only in part or only after a long delay. This was the origin
22

of the ‘blocked’ commercial balances which many countries, whether or not they practiced
exchange control themselves, accumulated in their dealings with exchange-control countries, and
these blocked claims led to the use of clearing, funding or other arrangements designed to
liquidate them. As a result, there was a marked tendency for exchange and trade controls to be
more closely integrated” (Nurkse, 1944, p.175).
In addition, large external debt positions created ongoing demand for foreign exchange.
The American stock market boom, however, began to seriously drain liquidity from borrowing
regions toward the end of the 1920s.30 By 1929, after the Federal Reserve increased short-term
rates, investors found domestic bonds increasingly attractive. U.S. net short-term and long-term
lending turned negative (Eichengreen and Portes, 1990), and net external debtors (including the
British Colonies, Eastern and Central Europe, and Latin America) found themselves scrambling
to maintain sufficient foreign exchange to pay the interest on their loans abroad. Global
commodity prices collapsed at around the same time (Lewis, 1949), compounding the debt
servicing problem for many of these primary-product producers and triggering a compression of
imports and current expenditures. As the global economic situation deteriorated in the early
1930s, exchange controls became a means for acquiring the currency to service debt.
Government officials in Hungary, Greece, and Bulgaria imposed capital controls in 1931 to fend
off debt default, and Latin American countries kept capital controls in place after outflows
subsided in a futile attempt to avoid defaulting on external debt.
Countries also turned to clearing arrangements to earmark export earnings for debt
service. For example, Western European creditor countries that ran bilateral trade surpluses with
Germany could use the proceeds out of exports to service German loans via compulsory clearing
arrangements (Nurkse, 1944).31 Similarly, England used the stick of the Ottawa Agreements of
1932 (which gave preference to Commonwealth and Empire exports) and the carrot of the 1933
Roca-Runciman Treaty (granting Argentina favored access to these same markets) to secure
Argentine payments on its British held foreign debt (Eichengreen and Portes, 1990).

30

The U.S. and U.K. accounted for roughly two-thirds of all gross foreign investment during the interwar period,
with much of the U.K. investment channeled to the colonies or dominions (Eichengreen and Portes, 1986).
31
More than a quarter of Europe’s gross foreign obligations (excluding war debts and reparations) was German
external debt. It had continued to borrow heavily between the Dawes Loan and when it imposed capital controls in
1931. (Eichengreen and Portes, 1986)

23

5. Conclusion

The global economic crisis of the 1930s left an indelible mark on the evolution of the
world economy. One lasting remnant was restrictions on the movement of capital or “hot
money.” (It took until the 1980s for capital flows to regain their importance in the global
economy.) In this paper, we describe how capital controls first emerged in the 1930s as a
response to capital flight during a global financial crisis, and show that they appear to have
succeeded in slowing down capital flight by stabilizing gold cover ratios. Because capital
controls were not removed, we are able to examine whether they accelerated the recovery from
the crisis of the 1930s. Results from time-shifted, difference-in-differences regressions suggest
that countries that used capital controls fared worse than floaters and no better than the goldstandard stalwarts – those gold bloc countries that steadfastly maintained gold into the mid1930s. Capital controls do not appear to have stimulated recovery from the Great Depression.
Capital controls gave central banks additional scope to pursue autonomous monetary
policy while maintaining fixed exchange rates; however, we find little evidence that countries
took full advantage of this policy freedom. Interest-rate behavior relative to key gold interwar
standard countries like France and the U.S. does not suggest a bold break, rather a more muted
response of not following gold bloc countries down the path of further raising rates. Moreover,
money supplies of capital control countries did not grow more quickly in comparison to other
policy choices. For the countries that imposed capital controls in 1931 and 1932, these findings
are consistent with a large body of research suggesting that monetary policies were far too tight
in the early 1930s (Eichengreen, 1992; Temin, Friedman and Schwartz, 1962; Temin, 1989) –
promoting deflation and, in some cases, contributing to the collapse of banking systems. In
contrast, countries that moved to floating rates pursued expansionary monetary policies and
appear to have halted further deflation and declining incomes and production.
Capital controls appear not to have been successfully utilized as tools for rescuing
banking systems, stimulating domestic output, or for raising prices. Rather they appear to have
been maintained as a means for restricting trade (working alongside or in lieu of restrictions on
imports) and repayment of foreign debts. While our analysis suggests capital controls provided
little macroeconomic benefit relative to other policies that were implemented in the 1930s, it
24

would be difficult to conclude that they would have no ameliorative effects in other crises if
employed with that purpose in mind. On the other hand, the experience of the 1930s suggests
capital controls are often implemented with very short-run objectives in mind – to prevent capital
flight. If kept in place, however, macroeconomic objectives can end up sharing the stage with
other goals of policymakers.
REFERENCES
Alesina, Alberto, Vittorio Grilli and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti. (1993). “The Political Economy
of Capital Controls.” NBER Working Paper 4353 (May).
Bakker, Age F.P. (1996). The Liberalization of Capital Movements in Europe: the Monetary
Committee and financial integration 1958 - 1994. Dordrecht, Netherlands: Kluwer.
Bank of International Settlements (1935/36/37). Annual Report. Basel, Switzerland.
Bernanke, Ben S. (1995). “The Macroeconomics of the Great Depression: A Comparative
Approach.” Journal of Money Credit and Banking 27(1): 1-28.
Blouin, Arthur, Sayantan Ghosalyand, and Sharun W. Mukand. (2011). “Globalization and the
(Mis)Governance of Nations.” Working Paper, University of Warwick (December).
Bratter, Herbert M. (1939). Foreign Exchange Control in Latin America. New York: Foreign
Policy Association.
Calvo, Guillermo and Carmen Reinhart. (2002). “Fear Of Floating,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 107(2): 379-408.
Campa, José Manuel (1990). “Exchange Rates and Economic Recovery in the 1930s: An
Extension to Latin America,” The Journal of Economic History 50(3): 677-682.
Child, Frank (1978). The Theory and Practice of Exchange Control in Germany Arno Press:
New York.
Choudhri, Ehsan U. and Levis A. Kochin. (1980). “The Exchange Rate and the International
Transmission of Business Cycle Disturbances: Some Evidence from the Great Depression.”
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 12(4): 565-574.
DeLong, J. Bradford (2004). “Should we still Support Untrammeled Capital Mobility?”
Economists’ Voice B.E. Press 1(1).
Dimitrova, K., N. Nenovsky and G Pavanelly. (2007). “Exchange Control in Italy and Bulgaria
in the Interwar Period: History and Perspectives.” Working paper International Centre for
25

Economic Research (April).
Edwards, Sebastian (1995). “Introduction.” In Capital Controls, Exchange Rates, and Monetary
Policy in the World Economy, (Sebastian Edwards (ed.) Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Edwards, Sebastian (1999). “How Effective are Capital Controls?” Journal of Economic
Perspectives 13(4): 65-84.
Edwards, Sebastian and Roberto Rigobon (2009). “Capital Controls in Inflows, Exchange Rate
Volatility and External Vulnerability.” Journal of International Economics, 78(2): 256-267.
Eichengreen, Barry and Richard Portes (1986). “Debt and default in the 1930s: Causes and
Consequences.” European Economic Review 30(3): 599-640.
Eichengreen, Barry and Jeffrey Sachs (1985). “Exchange Rates and Economic Recovery in the
1930s.” The Journal of Economic History 45(4): 925-946.
Eichengreen, Barry and Richard Portes (1990). “The Interwar Debt Crisis and Its Aftermath.”
The World Bank Research Observer 5(1): 69-94.
Eichengreen, Barry. (1992). “The Origins and Nature of the Great Slump Revisited.” Economic
History Review 45(2): 213-239.
Eichengreen, Barry (1992). Golden Fetters: The Gold Standard and the Great Depression, New
York: Oxford University Press.
Eichengreen, Barry and Douglas Irwin (1995). “Trade blocs, currency blocs and the reorientation
of world trade in the 1930s.” Journal of International Economics 38: 1-24.
Eichengreen, Barry and Douglas Irwin (2010). “The Slide to Protectionism in the Great
Depression: Who Succumbed and Why?” Journal of Economic History 70(4): 871-897.
Einzig, Paul (1934). Exchange Control. London: Macmillian.
Ellis, Howard S. (1939). “Exchange Control in Austria and Hungary.” The Quarterly Journal of
Economics 54(1): 1-185.
Ellis, Howard S. (1941). Exchange Control in Central Europe, Cambridge: Harvard University
Press.
Ellis, Howard S. (1942). “The Problem of Exchange Systems in the Postwar World.” American
Economic Review 32(1): 195-205.

26

Farhi, Emmanuel and Ivan Werning. (2012). “Dealing with the Trilemma: Optimal Capital
Controls with Fixed Exchange Rates.” NBER Working Paper 18199.
Fishlow, Albert (1972). “Origins and Consequences of Import Substitution in Brazil.” In L. de
Marco, ed., International Trade and Development. New York: Academic Press.
Foreman-Peck, James (1983). A History of the World Economy: International Economic
Relations since 1850.
Friedman, Milton and Anna Schwartz. (1963). A Monetary History of the United States, 18671960. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Glick, Reuven and Andrew K. Rose (1999). “Contagion and Trade: Why Are Currency Crises
Regional?” Journal of International Money and Finance 18(4): 603-17.
Grossman, Richard. (1994). “The Shoe That Didn't Drop: Explaining Banking Stability During
the Great Depression.” Journal of Economic History 54(3): 654-82.
Grossman, Richard and Christopher Meissner. (2010). “International Aspects of the Great
Depression and the Crisis of 2007: Similarities, Differences, and Lessons.” Oxford Review of
Economic Policy 26(3): 318-38.
Harris, S.E. (1936). Exchange Depreciation: Its Theory and its History, 1931-35 with some
Consideration of Related Domestic Policies. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
International Monetary Fund. (1998). World Economic Outlook. Washington: IMF.
International Monetary Fund. (2011). IMF Survey Magazine: Countries and Regions, November
3.
Kaplan, Ethan and Dani Rodrik (2002). “Did the Malaysian Capital Controls Work?” In
Preventing Currency Crises in Emerging Markets, Sebastian Edwards and Jeffry Frankel (eds.).
Chicago: University of Chicago Press & NBER.
Kindleberger, Charles P. (1986). The World in Depression, 1929-1939. Berkeley: University of
California Press.
Klein, Michael and Jay Shambaugh. (2013). “Rounding the Corners of the Policy Trilemma:
Sources of monetary policy autonomy.” NBER Working Paper 19461 (September).
Klein, Michael. (2012). “Capital Controls: Gates and Walls,” Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity, vol.2 (Fall): 317-55. .
Krugman, Paul. (1998). “Saving Asia: It’s Time to get Radical,” Fortune September 7: 74-80.

27

Lampe, Markus and Paul Sharp. (2013). “Tariffs and Income: A Time Series Analysis for 24
Countries,” Cliometrica, vol.7, issue3, pp. 207-235.
League of Nations. (1937). Monetary Review, Money and Banking 1936/37, Volume 1, Geneva:
League of Nations.
League of Nations. (1938). Report on Exchange Control. Geneva: League of Nations.
League of Nations. (various years). Yearbook., Geneva: League of Nations.
Lehto-Sinisalo, Päivikki. (1992). “The History of Exchange Control in Finland.” Bank of
Finland Discussion Paper.
Lewis, W. Arthur. (1949). Economic Survey, 1919-1939. London: Allen & Unwin.
Neal, Larry. (1979). The Economics and Finance of Bilateral Clearing Agreements: Germany,
1934-1938," Economic History Review 32: 391-404.
Nurkse, Ragnar (League of Nations). (1944). International Currency Experience: International
Currency Experience. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press,
Obstfeld, Maurice and Alan M. Taylor. (1998). “The Great Depression as a Watershed:
International Capital Mobility over the Long Run.” In The Defining Moment: The Great
Depression and the American Economy in the Twentieth Century, Michael D. Bordo, Claudia
Goldin and Eugene N. White (eds.), Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 353 – 402.
Obstfeld, Maurice, Jay Shambaugh and Alan M. Taylor. (2004). “Monetary Sovereignty,
Exchange Rates and Capital Controls: The Trilemma in the Interwar Period,” IMF Staff Papers
51 (special issue).
Ostry, Jonathan, Atish Ghosh, Karl Habermeier, Marcos Chamon, Mahvash Qureshi and Dennis
Reinhardt. (2010). “Capital Inflows: The Role of Controls” IMF Staff Position Papers 10/04.
Ritschl, Albrecht und Nikolaus Wolf. (2003). “Endogeneity of Currency Areas and Trade Blocs:
Evidence from the Inter-war Period.” CEPR Discussion Paper 4112.
Romer, Christina. (1992). “What Ended the Great Depression?” Journal of Economic History 52:
757-784.
Schmitt-Grohe, Stephanie and Martin Uribe. (2012). “Prudential Policy for Peggers,” NBER
Working Paper 18031.
Statistisches Reichsamt. (1934). Statistisches Handbuch der Weltwirtschaft. Berlin: Verlag für
Sozialpolitik, Wirtschaft und Statistik Paul Schmidt.

28

Statistisches Reichsamt. (1936-7). Statistisches Handbuch der Weltwirtschaft. Berlin: Verlag für
Sozialpolitik, Wirtschaft und Statistik Paul Schmidt.
Simmons, Beth. (1997). Who Adjusts? Domestic Sources of Foreign Economic Policy During the
Interwar Years. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Temin, Peter. (1989). Lessons from the Great Depression. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Thorp, Rosemary. (1984). Latin America in the 1930s. London: Macmillan.
United States Tariff Commission (1942). Foreign-Trade and Exchange Controls in Germany,
Report No. 150, Second Series, Washington D.C.
Wandschneider, Kirsten (2008). “The Stability of the Interwar Gold Exchange Standard: Did
Politics Matter?” Journal of Economic History 68(1): 151-181.
Wei, Shang-Jin & Zhang, Zhiwei (2007). “Collateral Damage: Exchange Controls and
International Trade.” Journal of International Money and Finance 26(5): 841-63.
Wolf, Nikolaus (2008). “Scylla and Charybdis. Explaining Europe’s Exit from Gold.”
Explorations in Economic History 45(4): 383-401.

29

Table 1: Classifications of Exchange Rate Regimes
Panel A: Exchange control countries
Country

Official
Suspension

Exchange
Control

Argentina
Austria
Bolivia
Brazil
Bulgaria
Chile
China
Colombia
Costa Rica
Cuba**
Czechoslovakia
Denmark
Ecuador

12/29
4/33
9/31

El Salvador**
Estonia
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Iran

10/31
6/33

10/31
10/31
10/31
5/31
1918
7/31
9/34
9/31
1/32
6/34-7/34
10/31
11/31
5/32-10/35;
7/36
8/33-10/33
11/31
7/31
9/31
7/31
2/30-5/33;
3/36
5/34
7/32
10/31
11/31
5/32
2/30
9/31
12/36
10/31

Italy
Japan
Latvia
Nicaragua**
Romania
Turkey
Uruguay
Venezuela
Yugoslavia

4/32
9/31
11/33
9/31
2/32

4/32

12/31
9/36
11/31

7/29

30

Devaluation
or
depreciation
11/29
9/31; 4/34
3/30
12/29
4/32
1/32
4/33
2/34; 10/36
9/31
6/32
10/31
6/33
4/32

3/34; 10/36
12/31
9/36
1/32
7/35
4/29
9/30
7/32

Table 1: Classifications of Exchange Rate Regimes (continued)
Panel B: Free Currency – Floaters
Country
Official
Exchange
Suspension
Control
Australia
Canada
Egypt
Finland
Guatemala**
India
Iraq**
Irish Free State
Mexico
New Zealand
Norway
Peru
Philippines**
Portugal
South Africa
Sweden
UK
US

12/29
10/31
9/31
10/31

Devaluation
or
depreciation
3/30
9/31

10/31-12/31

9/31
9/31
7/31
9/31
9/31
5/32
12/31
12/32
9/31
9/31
4/33

9/31
8/31
4/30
9/31
5/32
4/33
10/31
1/33
9/31
9/31
4/33

10/22

3/33-11/34

Panel C: Countries on Gold after 1934
Country
Official
Exchange
Suspension
Control
Albania
Belgium
France
Hong-Kong**
Lithuania
Netherlands
Netherlands
Indies
Poland
Switzerland

3/35

10/31
4/33
9/31

Devaluation
or
depreciation

3/35-4/35

3/35
9/36

11/35
10/35
9/36
9/36

9/36
9/36
4/36
9/36

31

Table 1: Classifications of Exchange Rate Regimes (continued)
Panel D: Others
Country
Spain*
USSR*

Official
Suspension

Exchange
Control

Devaluation
or
depreciation

5/31
4/36

Source: League of Nations (1937), BIS (1936). Data on clearing agreements only extends to
1935.
*USSR and Spain were dropped from the econometric analysis since they were not on the gold
standard prior to floating or imposing exchange controls.
** These countries have exchange rate data, but no corresponding monthly observations for
industrial production, wholesale prices, and exports. Hence, they are excluded from the
econometric analysis.

32

Table 2: The Effects of Capital Controls on Prices, Exports and Production

Notes: Standard errors are shown in parentheses. * indicates significance at the 10% level and **
indicates significance at 5% level.

33

Table 3: Difference-in-Differences Estimates of the Effects of Capital Controls on
Wholesale Prices, Exports, and Industrial Production
Dependent Variable
Independent
Variable

Monthly
Change
in IP
-0.0151
(0.013)

Monthly
Change
in WPI
-0.0054
(0.004)

Monthly
Change
in EXP
0.0644
(0.035)

Monthly
Change
in IP
0.0082
(0.024)

Monthly
Chage in
WPI
-0.0173*
(0.010)

Monthly
Change
in EXP
-0.142**
(0.029)

Monthly
Change
in IP
-0.0098
(0.020)

Monthly
Change
in WPI
-0.033**
(0.008)

Monthly
Change
in EXP
-0.109**
(0.040)

OffGold

0.011**
(0.005)

0.0073**
(0.002)

0.0178**
(0.005)

0.0122**
(0.005)

0.0079**
(0.002)

0.0154**
(0.005)

0.017**
(0.007)

0.0096**
(0.003)

0.0234**
(0.005)

OffGold*
Xcontrol

- 0.007*
(0.003)

-0.0017
(0.002)

-0.0052
(0.004)

-0.008**
(0.004)

-0.0025
(0.002)

-0.0034
(0.004)

-0.007
(0.005)

-0.0012
(0.004)

-0.0036
(0.007)

OffGold*
Stalwart

0.0015
(0.006)

0.013*
(0.007)

0.0030
(0.010)

0.0008
(0.006)

0.0122*
(0.006)

0.0001
(0.010)

0.0071
(0.010)

0.0119
(0.008)

0.0076
(0.011)

Time Fixed
Effects

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

Country
Fixed Effects
Lagged
Discount
Rate

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

no

no

no

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

Trade
Barriers

No

no

no

no

no

no

yes

yes

yes

0.2

0.16

0.14

0.2

0.16

0.13

0.27

0.17

R squared

0.14
3343

3778

5124

3221

3463

4716

1756

1908

2560

25

37

36

25

32

34

14

17

19

Constant

Observations
Countries

Notes: The table displays regression estimates of equation (1) from the text. Variable are described in the text.
Standard errors are shown in parentheses and are clustered at the country level. * indicates significance at the 10%
level and ** indicates significance at the 5% level. All equations include time and country fixed effects.

34

Table 4. Additional Specifications Assessing the Effects of Capital Controls

Alternative Fixed Effects Estimates

Independent
Variable

Dependent Variable
Monthly
Monthly
Monthly
Change
Change
Change
in IP
in
in EXP
WPI

Xcontrol

OffGold*
Xcontrol
OffGold*
Stalwart
Time
Dummies
Country
Dummies
Observations
Countries

Dependent Variable
Monthly
Monthly
Monthly
Change
Change
Change in
in IP
in WPI
EXP

0.0097***
(0.0032)
-0.0066**
(0.0034)
0.0090
(0.0071)

0.0105***
(0.0013)
-0.0031
(0.0021)
0.0177*
(0.0082)

0.0138***
(0.0030)
-0.0031
(0.0042)
0.0350***
(0.0111)

-0.0012
(0.0030)
-0.0005
(0.0033)
0.0047
(0.0064)
0.0036
(0.0062)
0.0099
(0.0090)

no

no

no

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

no

no

no

3343
25

3778
37

5124
36

3057
23

3123
28

4123
29

Stalwart
Off Gold

Instrumental Variables Estimates

35

-0.0012
(0.0020)
0.0001
(0.0018)
0.0057***
(0.0021)
-0.0019
(0.0030)
0.0204**
(0.0095)

0.0100***
(0.0034)
0.0061
(0.0039)
0.0206***
(0.0065)
-0.0186***
(0.0058)
-0.0070
(0.0160)

Table 5: Explaining the Movement of Discount Rates for Capital Control Countries, 19251936
Panel A: Individual Countries
Country
Imposing
Capital
Controls
Austria

Independent
Variable

United
States

France

England

Germany

XControl

-0.069
(0.08)
0.178
(0.13)
-0.331
(0.21)
-0.064
(0.04)
0.113
(0.11)
-0.113
(0.11)
0.003
(0.04)
-0.007
(0.01)
0.085
(0.08)
-0.010
(0.08)
0.177
(0.11)
-0.177
(0.11)
-0.050
(0.07)
0.004
(0.01)
-0.197
(0.21)
0.026
(0.07)
0.021
(0.17)
-0.021
(0.17)

-0.084
(0.08)
0.287
(0.15)
-0.267
(0.16)
-0.064
(0.04)
0.039
(0.04)
-0.020
(0.04)
0.006
(0.04)
-0.126
(0.14)
0.126
(0.14)
-0.002
(0.08)
-0.062
(0.10)
0.062
(0.10)
-0.064
(0.07)
0.222
(0.15)
-0.232
(0.15)
0.025
(0.07)
0.020
(0.06)
-0.015
(0.06)

-0.033
(0.07)
0.563*
(0.24)
-0.273
(0.33)
-0.052
(0.04)
0.222
(0.17)
-0.148
(0.21)
0.012
(0.03)
-0.070
(0.05)
0.303
(0.25)
-0.001
(0.06)
0.320
(0.45)
0.146
(0.46)
-0.041
(0.07)
0.280
(0.31)
-0.053
(0.37)
0.012
(0.06)
0.247
(0.31)
-0.177
(0.33)

-0.071
(0.07)
0.607***
(0.16)
-0.451
(0.28)
-0.030
(0.03)
-0.072
(0.11)
0.547**
(0.21)
-0.004
(0.04)
-0.002
(0.05)
-0.032
(0.05)

Base
XControl*Base
Czechoslovakia XControl
Base
XControl*Base
Estonia

XControl
Base
XControl*Base

Germany

XControl
Base
XControl*Base

Greece

XControl
Base
XControl*Base

Hungary

XControl
Base
XControl*Base

36

-0.063
(0.07)
-0.312
(0.21)
0.269
(0.25)
0.013
(0.06)
0.478***
(0.10)
-0.267
(0.24)

Italy

XControl
Base
XControl*Base

Latvia

XControl
Base
XControl*Base

Romania

XControl
Base
XControl*Base

Argentina

XControl
Base
XControl*Base

Chile

XControl
Base
XControl*Base

Colombia

XControl
Base
XControl*Base

Japan

XControl
Base
XControl*Base

Observations

0.068
(0.06)
0.106
(0.07)
-0.106
(0.07)
0.009
(0.02)
-0.006
(0.01)
0.006
(0.01)
-0.055
(0.05)
0.114
(0.08)
-0.050
(0.12)
-0.053
(0.04)
-0.036
(0.04)
-0.118
(0.17)
-0.070
(0.05)
-0.156
(0.16)
-0.113
(0.22)
-0.041
(0.04)
-0.298
(0.19)
0.298
(0.19)
-0.008
(0.03)
-0.007
(0.01)
0.286**
(0.09)
143

0.068
(0.06)
0.019
(0.04)
-0.037
(0.04)
0.010
(0.02)
-0.017
(0.02)
0.017
(0.02)
-0.057
(0.06)
0.008
(0.03)
-0.009
(0.03)
-0.054
(0.03)
0.004
(0.01)
-0.142
(0.11)
-0.082
(0.05)
0.090
(0.08)
-0.119
(0.09)
-0.051
(0.04)
0.070
(0.07)
-0.070
(0.07)
-0.019
(0.03)
-0.017
(0.02)
0.024
(0.02)
143

37

0.056
(0.06)
0.261
(0.15)
0.230
(0.24)
0.008
(0.02)
0.004
(0.01)
-0.021
(0.01)
-0.062
(0.05)
0.015
(0.02)
0.369
(0.21)
-0.058
(0.04)
-0.038
(0.03)
-0.013
(0.05)
-0.052
(0.05)
-0.211
(0.15)
0.292
(0.20)
-0.049
(0.04)
-0.032
(0.07)
-0.018
(0.08)
-0.026
(0.03)
0.002
(0.00)
0.343*
(0.14)
143

0.063
(0.06)
-0.092
(0.11)
0.326
(0.25)
0.007
(0.02)
0.035
(0.04)
-0.052
(0.04)
-0.061
(0.05)
0.011
(0.01)
0.245
(0.23)
-0.057
(0.04)
0.000
(0.00)
-0.051
(0.04)
-0.082
(0.05)
0.082
(0.07)
-0.147
(0.09)
-0.033
(0.04)
-0.002
(0.03)
0.219
(0.22)
-0.022
(0.03)
-0.028
(0.02)
0.185
(0.16)
143

Table 5: Explaining the Movement of Discount Rates for Capital Control Countries, 19251936
Panel B: Pooled Regressions
Independent
Variable
Capital
Control
Indicator
Base
Country
Discount
Rate
Interaction
Term

United States

France

England

-0.033***
(0.010)

-0.035***
(0.011)

-0.021*
(0.012)

0.019
(0.027)

0.0407*
(0.022)

0.080*
(0.041)

-0.058*
(0.033)

-0.049**
(0.022)

0.195*
(0.102)

2334
17

2334
17

Observations 2334
Countries
17

38

Figure 1: Average Cover Ratios for Exchange Control Countries

40

Average Cover Ratios (percent)
50
60

70

Average Cover Ratios Before and After Imposing Exchange Controls
Exchange Control Countries

-40

-20
0
20
Months before and after the Imposition of Exchange Controls

40

Note: The cover ratio is calculated as the ratio of bank gold reserves and foreign assets to domestic
liabilities. Source: Statistisches Handbuch der Weltwirtschaft (1934, 1936/7).

39

Figure 2: Exchange Rates and Industrial Production, 1929-36
(1929=100)

Figure 3: Exchange Rates and Wholesale Prices, 1929-36
(1929=100)

40

Figure 4: Exchange Rates and Exports, 1929-36
(1929=100)

Figure 5: Industrial Production and Exchange Rates by Group, 1929-36
(1929=100)

41

Figure 6: Wholesale Prices and Exchange Rates by Group, 1929-36
(1929=100)

Figure 7: Exports and Exchange Rates by Group, 1929-36
(1929=100)

42

Figure 8: Average Growth in Industrial Production by Regime and Group

Figure 9: Average Inflation Rates by Regime and Group

43

Figure 10: Average Export Growth Rates by Regime and Group

0

Average Monthly Money Growth Rates
.5
1

Figure 11: Average Money Growth Rates by Regime and Group

ExC

FL

GB

ExC

On Gold

FL

Off Gold

44

GB

