                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    SAVING MORE TO BORROW LESS:
EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE FROM ACCESS TO FORMAL SAVINGS ACCOUNTS IN CHILE

                                             Felipe Kast
                                            Dina Pomeranz

                                         Working Paper 20239
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w20239


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2014

 We are grateful to Fondo Esperanza, Banco Credichile and Microdatos for outstanding collaboration
 in the implementation process. We thank Ronald Abraham, Samuel Asher, Lorenzo Casaburi, David
 Clingingsmith, Shawn Cole, David Cutler, Edward Glaeser, Jessica Goldberg, Johannes Haushofer,
 Daniel Hojman, Lakshmi Iyer, Sarah Janzen, Sandy Jencks, Dean Karlan, Lawrence Katz, Jake Kendall,
 Michael Kremer, David Laibson, Dan Levy, Jeffrey Liebman, Stephan Meier, Sendhil Mullainathan,
 Karthik Muralidharan, Joana Naritomi, Oyebola Olabisi, Owen Ozier, Rohini Pande, Silvia Prina,
 Simon Quinn, David Roodman, Nicola Fuchs-Schuendeln, Russell Toth, Richard Zeckhauser and
 participants of various conferences and seminars for helpful comments and discussions. This project
 would not have been possible without the generous support by the following institutions: the Ford
 Foundation, Banco Credichile, the Lab for Economic Applications and Policy (LEAP) at Harvard,
 the Women and Public Policy Program at the Harvard Kennedy School, the David Rockefeller Center
 for Latin American Studies, and the Russell Sage Foundation Small Grants Program. The experiment
 was carried out in accordance with Harvard GSAS IRB approval. Earlier versions of this paper
 circulated under the titles "Do Savings Constraints Lead to Indebtedness" and "Insurance through
 Savings Accounts." The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
 the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

 NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
 reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
 NBER publications.

 © 2014 by Felipe Kast and Dina Pomeranz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
 two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
 is given to the source.
Saving More to Borrow Less: Experimental Evidence from Access to Formal Savings Accounts
in Chile
Felipe Kast and Dina Pomeranz
NBER Working Paper No. 20239
June 2014
JEL No. D14,D91,G22,O16

                                            ABSTRACT

Poverty is often characterized not only by low and unstable income, but also by heavy debt burdens.
We find that reducing barriers to saving through access to free savings accounts decreases participants'
short-term debt by about 20%. In addition, participants who experience an economic shock have less
need to reduce consumption, and subjective well-being improves significantly. Precautionary savings
and credit therefore act as substitutes in providing self-insurance, and participants prefer borrowing
less when a free formal savings account is available. Take-up patterns suggest that requests by others
for participants to share their resources may be a key obstacle to saving.


Felipe Kast
Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile
fkast@uc.cl

Dina Pomeranz
Harvard Business School
Rock Center 213
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
dpomeranz@hbs.edu
1         Introduction

The lives of the poor are marked not only by low income, but also by frequent fluctua-
tions and costly debt (Collins et al., 2009; Deaton, 1997; Barr, 2012; Banerjee and Duflo,
2007). The question of whether using debt is their preferred mechanism to deal with
economic shocks arises. As many poverty-alleviation policies have focused on reducing
credit constraints, concerns have increasingly been voiced about potential overborrow-
ing by the poor (e.g. Roodman, 2012; Angelucci et al., 2013; Fafchamps, 2013; Schicks,
2013). We find that an oft-neglected aspect of financial exclusion, access to a formal
savings account, can lead to reduced reliance on short-term debt and significant welfare
improvements. Traditionally, the literature on consumption smoothing has focused on
the opposite mechanism, in which credit constraints increase the precautionary savings
motive (Deaton, 1991; Rosenzweig and Wolpin, 1993; Besley, 1995). The possibility to
save in the form of a riskless bond or savings account is usually taken as given (e.g., Zame,
1993), since in contrast to borrowing from others, individuals do not need anyone elses
money to save. An emerging literature shows, however, that individuals may not only be
credit constrained, but also savings constrained, due to lack of access to formal savings
accounts and problems of safety, self-control, and demands from others that limit the
ability to save at home (e.g., Burgess and Pande, 2005; Ashraf et al., 2006b; Brune et al.,
2011; Dupas and Robinson, 2013a,b). This issue is not limited to developing countries.
Even in the United States, 8.2% of all households are unbanked (FDIC, 2011) and several
government policies have aimed to improve access to bank accounts (Washington, 2006).
     In a randomized field experiment among over 3,500 low-income members of a micro-
finance institution in Chile, we find that barriers to saving are binding enough to affect
participants’ borrowing behavior and welfare. Reducing barriers to savings through free
and easy access to a formal savings account decreases participants’ dependence on short-
term debt. The propensity to have loans with informal networks of friends and family,
providers of basic services and utilities, business partners and money lenders is reduced.
The total amount of outstanding short-term debt is reduced by about 20%, mainly driven
by the reduction in the outstanding debt to family and friends. Reducing the barriers to
saving not only leads to a replacement of short-term debt by savings, but also improves
overall consumption smoothing. Participants with access to a savings account have less
need to reduce consumption when they experience an economic shock to their income.1
    1
        The loans that the participants received from the microfinance institution were on a rigid schedule and



                                                        2
The consumption cutbacks associated with a negative income shock are reduced by 44%.
The improvements correspond to the types of expenditures for which participants had
expressed desire to build a buffer stock, and their magnitudes are in line with the 66,900
Chilean pesos (about 135 USD) in average deposits made by those who took up the ac-
count. These findings suggest that savings and credit are used as substitute inputs for
consumption smoothing. As the cost of savings is reduced, demand for short-term credit
decreases and overall consumption smoothing increases. In contrast, we find no effect on
long-term debt such as mortgages or microfinance loans.
     Participants experience substantial improvements in subjective well-being, both back-
ward looking – they evaluate recent economic difficulties as less severe – and forward
looking – they experience less anxiety about their financial future. The magnitudes of
these improvements are large and correspond to more than half of the change in these
well-being measures associated with a job loss or severe business downturn. This suggests
that the original savings constraints alleviated by the intervention were substantial and
costly for participants’ well-being. Two specifically designed survey questions help us rule
out that these subjective measures are driven by demand effects.
     A formal savings account located away from the home potentially reduces both self-
control and “other-control problems.”2 For half of the treatment group, self-control prob-
lems were additionally reduced through a commitment device based on self-help peer
groups. In a separate study, we analyze this treatment, in which participants had the
option to make a weekly deposit commitment and be held accountable by their peers (see
Kast et al., 2013). Those who received this additional peer group support have signif-
icantly higher savings. This raises the question whether our findings are mainly driven
by this subgroup. For most outcomes, this is not the case. Despite limited statistical
power when analyzing differential impacts between the two sub-treatments, the reduction
in the propensity to borrow and the improved consumption smoothing for those with an
income shock remain significant also among those who only received the basic savings
account. The one outcome for which there is a significantly stronger effect for those with
the additional peer group support is the forward-looking measure of anxiety about the
financial future, consistent with the larger buffer stock accumulated by these participants.
could therefore not be used for unexpected shocks. In focus groups prior to the intervention, participants
expressed strong desire to increase precautionary savings for such occasions.
   2
     “Other-control” problems can result when individuals feel pressured to share their resources with
members of the family and the community (e.g., Hertzberg, 2010; Brune et al., 2011).




                                                    3
      The take-up patterns of who opens and uses the account are also informative about
what the obstacles to savings might have been prior to the intervention. They suggest that
other-control problems are a significant constraint. Take-up of the account is particularly
high among participants who are not the head of their household, who have conflicts with
their partner over money, and (in line with Dupas and Robinson, 2013b) those who are
“socially taxed” through their social network, i.e. those who are lending to others and
are not borrowing from their network themselves. In line with this, those who regretted
not having saved more before the intervention reduce their lending to others as a result
of having access to the savings account. Consistent with Ashraf et al. (2006b), take-up
is also substantially higher for those with hyperbolic time preferences, which may lead to
both increased self and other-control problems.
     This paper makes contributions to the literature on savings in several ways. First, our
findings provide what is, to our knowledge, the first micro-empirical evidence that reducing
barriers to savings reduces the reliance on debt. As mentioned above, the literature on
precautionary savings has long acknowledged that saving and borrowing are two substitute
mechanisms to help individuals smooth consumption in the face of shocks. In principle,
credit is simply a form of negative savings. Typically, it has been assumed that the
constraint in this substitutive relationship lies on the credit side, and that if individuals
are credit constrained, they have more of a need to build a buffer stock for self-insurance.3
On the other hand, even if individuals have the ability to borrow, they might prefer
to save, depending on their level of risk aversion and the cost of savings.4 We test
whether the limited accessibility of formal savings accounts leads to savings constraints
that are binding enough to push participants to borrow more than they otherwise would
and to affect participants’ economic well-being. As in many low-income contexts (e.g.,
Townsend, 1994; La Ferrara, 2003; Lusardi et al., 2011; Kinnan and Townsend, 2012;
Mazzocco and Saini, 2012), participants in our population often resort to informal credit
from their network of family and friends and other sources of short-term debt to help
smooth consumption.5 When participants gain access to the free savings accounts they
   3
     The use of buffer stocks for self-insurance has been shown empirically by, e.g., Paxson (1992), Udry
(1995) and Alderman (1996), who show how people use savings in response to income shocks. For an
overview on savings motives and precautionary savings see Browning and Lusardi (1996).
   4
     In addition to the forgone consumption, the costs of saving also include costly features of formal
savings accounts, as well as costs associated with saving at home, including fear of theft, self-control
problems to refrain from spending cash on hand, or other-control problems to resist demands from others
to share these resources with them.
   5
     A number of studies have analyzed the degree to which individuals are able to smooth shocks through
these methods and find that even though social networks can play an important role, they often do not


                                                   4
not only substitute towards precautionary savings, but also choose to increase overall
levels of smoothing. Even though building a buffer stock requires reducing consumption
in the short-run, participants prefer this form of smoothing to the measures that they
were using beforehand, suggesting that these measures were relatively costly.
      Second, our findings contribute to a rapidly growing literature showing benefits of
facilitating savings on a variety of outcomes such as poverty reduction (Burgess and
Pande, 2005), investment and income (Brune et al., 2011; Dupas and Robinson, 2013a;
Prina, 2013), and female intra-household bargaining power (Ashraf et al., 2010). This
paper provides what is, to our knowledge, the first direct evidence showing that access to
a fully liquid savings account can help individuals improve consumption smoothing in the
face of economic shocks. This growing body of research showing positive effects of savings
indicates that mechanisms aimed at helping individuals increase their savings (such as
studied by Ashraf et al., 2006a,b; Brune et al., 2011; Schaner, 2011; Kast et al., 2013;
Atkinson et al., 2013; Dupas and Robinson, 2013b) can be very beneficial. At the same
time, several of the commitment devices that have been found to help individuals in
developing countries increase their savings are withdrawal commitment devices which
limit the liquidity of the accounts. In order for the savings to serve a precautionary
purpose, liquidity is important. As discussed in more detail in the conclusion, our results
suggest that a trade-off may exist between the benefits of withdrawal commitment devices
and the ability to use savings for consumption smoothing.
     Third, our findings add to the literature on the relationship between poverty and
subjective well-being measures. They suggest that in addition to the importance of levels
of income and poverty for subjective well-being, their variance and the risk to which peo-
ple are exposed may play an important role. The poor often experience great worry and
anxiety about their economic future (e.g., Collins et al., 2009; Haushofer et al., 2012), and
a growing literature studies the impact of interventions aimed at reducing poverty and
its consequences on psychological and subjective well-being (e.g., Cattaneo et al., 2009;
Devoto et al., 2012; Ludwig et al., 2012). While such worry is an important issue to ad-
dress in itself, it can also have negative feedback effects on economic decision-making, and
potentially lead to a poverty trap (Shah et al., 2012). At low levels of income, mechanisms
to smooth consumption are particularly important since economic shocks can have devas-
provide full insurance (e.g., Townsend, 1994; Morduch, 1995; Ligon et al., 2002; Kinnan and Townsend,
2012). Jack and Suri (2014) find that the introduction of mobile money through cellphones can strongly
increase the degree of such insurance by facilitating redistribution across geographic locations where
shocks are less correlated.


                                                  5
tating effects and lead resources to fall below what is required to cover basic needs (e.g.,
Townsend, 1994; Morduch, 1995). At the same time, the poor are often faced with highly
variable income streams and expenditure shocks (e.g., Townsend, 1995; Deaton, 1997;
Fafchamps and Lund, 2003; Banerjee and Duflo, 2007; Munshi and Rosenzweig, 2009)
and have limited formal insurance (e.g., Jacoby and Skoufias, 1997; Banerjee and Duflo,
2007; Giné and Yang, 2009; Cai et al., 2012; Giné et al., 2012; Cole et al., 2013b). Being
dependent on the social network for insurance can also be psychologically or practically
costly (Dezső and Loewenstein, 2012; Jakiela and Ozier, 2012). All of these factors may
contribute to our finding of large improvements in participants’ assessment of their re-
cent economic difficulties and their anxiety about their financial future. More research
is required to study the relative importance of levels of income and poverty, versus their
variance, in affecting psychological health and subjective well-being.
      Finally, this paper provides evidence for a growing body of research showing that the
ability to save interacts with the relationships individuals have in their social network.
This interaction can play out in two directions with the social network can affecting
savings, and vice versa. In the first direction, peers and the social environment can make
it either harder for individuals to save (due, for example, to pressure to share resources,
as in Baland et al., 2011; Brune et al., 2011; Schaner, 2013) or easier (for example as a
commitment device, as in Kast et al., 2013). At the same time, access to savings can
in turn affect participants’ financial relationship to others in their social network (Flory,
2012; Comola and Prina, 2013). We find evidence for both directions. Participants who
are subject to more other-control problems are more likely to take up the account, and
access to the account in turn reduces lending to others among those who initially regretted
not having saved more. When thinking about different savings policies, it is therefore
important to also consider their possible interactions with the social environment.
    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 provides information
about the background, data and study design, Section 3 discusses results, robustness
checks, and determinants of take-up and Section 4 concludes.




                                             6
2     Background, Data and Study Design

2.1     Background and Data

The study was conducted in collaboration with Fondo Esperanza (FE), a Chilean micro-
finance institution, and Banco Credichile (BC), a large commercial bank. The savings
accounts that were offered to FE’s members as part of the intervention were held with
Banco Credichile because FE is not legally licensed to hold savings deposits. FE’s mem-
bers are self-employed micro-entrepreneurs (e.g., street vendors or cosmetics saleswomen),
many of whom work in the informal sector. About 91% are women, and most live and
work in urban areas. FE provides micro-loans to its members in three-month cycles,
repayment of which is monitored in weekly or biweekly group meetings.
     FE’s credit disbursement and repayment is on a very rigid schedule, and consequently
cannot be used as insurance for emergencies or for unexpected income or expenditure
shocks, similar to other micro-credit arrangements (Karlan and Mullainathan, 2010).6
Given the rigidity in the timing of the loans, it is not surprising that in focus groups
conducted prior to the intervention, many members expressed the desire to increase their
liquid savings to build a buffer stock for unexpected shocks and emergencies.7 Participants
emphasized several constraints to their current ability to save. First, monetary costs were
a major constraint and participants mentioned the need for cost-free accounts. Due to the
fee structure of the accounts that were generally available at that time, accounts with small
balances often faced potentially large negative returns. The concern with the fixed costs
of formal savings is in line with findings by Cole et al. (2011) in Indonesia and Dupas et al.
(2012) in Western Kenya. In addition to the financial costs, mental transaction costs also
seemed to contribute to the savings constraints. Many expressed concerns about feeling
intimidated to go into a bank or not knowing what would be required to be eligible to
open an account.
     This population is of particular interest to study since it has sometimes been ques-
tioned whether microcredit makes participants borrow too much, and whether it might
be in their interest to build up savings instead, in order to reduce the need for credit
(e.g., Ananth et al., 2007). It is therefore of interest to study whether increasing access
   6
     Field et al. (2012) show that relaxing this rigidity, and in particular, delaying the time when the loan
repayment starts, can increase business investment and profits.
   7
     None of the participants of the focus groups were subsequently included in the randomized study, to
avoid any possible contamination of the study by the pre-treatment discussions.


                                                     7
to a formal savings vehicle reduces borrowing. If participants continue borrowing, large
amounts of savings would be suboptimal, as they continue paying expensive interest rates
that they could reduce by paying down the debt. However, some amount of precautionary
savings is valuable at any level of debt because of the difference in liquidity of savings
and loans (Zinman, 2007). If the debt cannot be taken out flexibly, then having a small
savings cushion for emergencies can make an important difference in reducing the pres-
sure of economic fluctuations. This is particularly the case for a population such as the
participants in this study, who work predominantly in the informal sector and experience
frequent income and expenditure shocks.
     This study draws on three different sources of data. All outcome variables, as well
as most personal characteristics, were obtained through extensive baseline and follow-
up surveys. The baseline survey was conducted prior to the introduction of the savings
accounts in April-May 2008 during one of the group meetings. The follow-up survey
was administered in June-July 2009 at the participants’ home or work place so that
those who had left FE in the meantime could still be reached. The surveys include
detailed questions about participants’ savings and debt, their economic situation, recent
consumption patterns, as well as subjective measures such as participants’ anxiety about
their financial future, assessment of their recent economic difficulties, regret about not
having saved more, and time preferences.
     The questionnaires were administered by the independent survey agency, Centro de
Microdatos at the University of Chile. While participants were aware that the survey was
related to their membership with FE, they had no way of knowing that it was related
to the savings accounts offered by BC. As discussed below in Section 3.3, the survey
also included two questions specifically designed to test for demand effects to rule out
the possibility that receiving access to a savings account through FE affects participants’
propensity to respond to survey questions in a favorable or socially expected way.
     We complement this survey data with two sources of administrative records. Infor-
mation on savings in the study accounts was obtained directly from BC. Finally, we used
FE’s administrative files to obtain information on each participant’s estimated household
size, household income, and years of education.




                                            8
2.2     Balance of Randomization and Baseline Summary Statistics

Table 1 presents baseline summary statistics. Columns (1) and (2) show that in the overall
sample, characteristics in the treatment group are not statistically significantly different
from the control group. Participants are on average 43 years old and have 10 years of
schooling. The average household size is 4.3 and the mean monthly income per capita
in the household is 80 thousand Chilean pesos (about 160 USD), with a median of 66
thousand.8 Sixty eight percent of participants did not have a savings account prior to
the study. Correspondingly, the median amount of pre-existing formal savings in a bank
or a cooperative is zero, with a mean of 63 thousand pesos. While income is reported in
per capita terms, these figures may represent the savings of several household members
combined, especially those of participants’ children.

                                              [Table 1]

     Participants’ short-term borrowing and lending behavior is captured by two types
of measures. The first is the amount of short-term lending and borrowing. The second
measure is less noisy and captures the extensive margin of categories of people and institu-
tions that participants have borrowed from or lent to, such as parents, neighbors, business
partners etc. Table 1 shows that participants had an average of 166 thousand pesos in
outstanding short-term debt (66 thousand when winsorized at the 95th percentile) and
owed money to an average of 0.91 of the 15 possible categories of short-term creditors.
The average amount of lending was 110 thousand pesos (69 thousand when winsorized at
the 95th percentile) and this was lent to an average of 1.07 of 9 possible categories.
     To measure consumption smoothing, we develop a new approach. Rather than elic-
iting detailed consumption data, which is complex to capture and often provides quite
noisy measures, we asked participants directly whether they had to cut back consumption
on a series of specific items due to economic difficulties in the preceding three months.9
This approach follows the same logic as De Mel et al. (2009), who find that small business
owners are capable of reporting their overall profits directly with just as much or better
accuracy than surveys that elicit detailed cost and revenue data. In our sample, 70% of
participants reported having had to reduce at least one of the consumption items. We
   8
    500 Chilean pesos = approximately 1 USD.
   9
    The consumption items include meals, meat, medicine, school supplies, clothing, school snacks, walk-
ing instead of using public transportation, and eating out. These items resulted from the cutbacks
mentioned by other FE members in focus groups conducted prior to the intervention.

                                                   9
validate this new measure by testing whether it correlates in the predicted way with par-
ticipants’ personal economic situation. Indeed, we find that those who experienced a job
loss in the household or a significant downturn of their business in the preceding three
months reported cutting back consumption in 53% more categories than those who did
not.
     While this measure captures only the variance of consumption, rather than the level,
it has several advantages compared to alternative approaches that measure overall con-
sumption and then back out consumption cutbacks from there. It does not require par-
ticipants to recall the specific amounts consumed, which can be quite unreliable (Ahmed
et al., 2006), nor to fill out detailed consumption diaries. This allows the survey to be
shorter, thereby increasing the quality of response on other sections of the survey, as
participants are less fatigued (see e.g. Herzog and Bachman, 1981; Galesic and Bosnjak,
2009). At the same time, it also avoids any potential direct effects of keeping a consump-
tion diary on the behavior or perception of participants (for examples of such effects see
e.g. Deaton, 1997 and Zwane et al., 2011).
     With respect to measures of self-reported well-being, the survey includes one forward-
looking and one backward-looking question. The forward-looking question asked partic-
ipants if they were anxious about their financial future. The mean response was 2.9
on a scale of 1 to 4, where 1 means strongly agree and 4 means strongly disagree. The
backward-looking measure was asked after the specific questions about participants’ recent
economic shocks, consumption etc. in order to allow participants to recall and evaluate
their recent economic situation more accurately. The question on recent economic diffi-
culties asks, “In sum, thinking about all the economic difficulties of the last three months,
on a scale of one to ten, how difficult was this situation for you?” The mean answer was
5.1 on a range of 1 to 10.
     In the follow-up survey, conducted one year after the introduction of the accounts, 592
(14.2 percent) of the original 4,175 participants from the baseline could not be found by
the survey agency. For these participants, no outcome variables are available, and they
could therefore not be included in the impact evaluation. All final outcomes reported
in this paper therefore exclude these 592 individuals. Columns (3) and (4) of Table 1
show the baseline summary statistics for this sample. Similar to the full sample, none of
the characteristics are significantly different between the treatment and control groups.
Section 3.3 discusses the attrition in more detail and provides robustness checks to address
it.

                                             10
2.3     Implementation and Empirical Specification

Prior to any intervention, the baseline survey was conducted among 307 groups of Fondo
Esperanza’s (FE’s) members. The universe of study participants consists of all members
who were present in the meeting when the baseline survey was administered. Two-thirds
of the groups were randomly selected to be offered a free savings account while the control
group was not eligible for this type of savings account. The randomization was conducted
at the group level. All members of each group received the same treatment, such that
participants in the control group were not affected indirectly by the treatment through
spillover effects within the FE group.
     The opportunity to open a savings account was introduced during group meetings in
the weeks following the baseline survey. The accounts were set up in a way to minimize
both financial and mental transaction costs. In contrast to other savings accounts available
in the market at the time, the study accounts had no maintenance fees and no minimum
balance. The minimum opening deposit was only 1,000 Chilean pesos (about 2 USD).
Take-up of the account was completely voluntary. In order to overcome the frequently
expressed sentiment of feeling intimidated to enter a bank, interested participants were
offered an opportunity to go to the bank together with their peers to open an account and
were informed precisely which documents were required to open the account.10 Savings
in the accounts were fully liquid for withdrawal at the bank’s branches at any time.
     The standard accounts had a standard real interest rate of 0.3%. A subgroup of one
quarter of treated groups was randomly assigned to receive a preferential interest rate
of 5%, and in half of the treated groups, self-control problems were additionally reduced
through a peer group commitment mechanism. These conditions were guaranteed for a
minimum of two years. Kast et al. (2013) study the differential savings behavior resulting
from these different sub-treatments.11 The 5% interest rate did not affect savings for
the vast majority of participants, while the peer group commitment device significantly
increased the number of deposits and almost doubled the average balance in the accounts.
Section 3.3 therefore analyzes whether there are differential effects for those who had
additional support through the peer group deposit commitment device. The main analysis
  10
     In the baseline survey, 46% the of participants reported that they did not like entering a bank because
they felt intimidated.
  11
     Another intervention studied in Kast et al. (2013), in which feedback messages were sent to partici-
pants, was launched only after the follow-up survey and does therefore not affect the results presented in
this paper.



                                                    11
of the paper focuses on the overall impact of reducing barriers to saving through access
to any of the savings accounts.
     To analyze the effect of having a savings account on various outcomes of interest, we
estimate a simple difference-in-difference specification, comparing those in the treatment
group to those in the control group at the time of the baseline and follow-up survey:

                           Yit = α + βAccountAccessit + γi + δt + it ,                                 (1)

where Yit is the outcome variable of interest, AccountAccessit is a dummy variable that
takes on the value one if individual i is in the treatment group and period t is the treatment
period. Individual fixed effects are represented by γi , time fixed effects by δt , and it is
the error term. All standard errors are clustered at the group level.
      This analysis provides the Intent-to-Treat (ITT) effects of the intervention. We do
not calculate the Treatment-on-the-Treated (TOT) effects, since opening an account can
have potential spillover effects on other members of the group who do not take up the
account. The ITT specification incorporates such potential spillover effects. Assuming
spillovers are zero and given that the take-up rate is 39%, the TOT effect would be a
little under triple the size of the ITT effect.
     To capture participants’ short-term borrowing and lending behavior, we asked them
a series of detailed survey questions on whether they had lent to or borrowed from a
particular category of person or institution (such as a parent, neighbor, supplier, etc.)
and if so how much. These categories fall into one of five forms of debt or lending: (1)
informal borrowing from family and friends, (2) outstanding payments to service providers
and utilities, (3) debt to business contacts and short-term lending institutions, (4) lending
to family and friends, and (5) lending to business contacts.12 As outcome variables we
use both the amounts of debt or credit and the number of categories of debt or credit
that participants had.
     Many topics in our analysis are addressed by a series of related questions (e.g. cut-
   12
      The categories in each of these five forms are as follows. (1) & (4) Borrowing from and lending to
friends and family: parents, children, siblings, partner, friends, and other relatives. (2) Debt to service
providers: medical facilities, educational institutions, and utilities (water, gas, electricity, phone). (3)
Debt to business contacts and short-term lending institutions: suppliers, business partners, stores, non-
bank lending institutions (so called financieras and cooperativas), and money lenders. The variable does
not include long-term financial debt, such as mortgages, formal bank loans, promissory notes and loans
with FE, which cannot be used for quick emergency borrowing. (5) Finally, lending to business contacts:
clients, business partners, and FE partners.


                                                    12
back of a number of consumption items, forward-looking and backward-looking subjective
wellbeing, etc.). To assess the overall statistical significance of such related outcome vari-
ables, we also report the average effect size (AES), using the methodology in Kling et al.
(2004) and Clingingsmith et al. (2009). The AES of each grouping of outcome variables
serves as an index of the underlying individual treatment effects. It is calculated using
the average of the normalized treatment effects from each of the underlying regressions.13
Looking at the overall AES reduces the risk of falsely accepting individual treatment
effects that are significant only by chance.



3     Results

3.1     Impact of Access to a Savings Account

Account Usage
     Take-up of the account was voluntary. 53% of eligible participants opened an account
and 39% actively used it. An active user is defined as someone who deposited more than
the 1,000 pesos minimum opening amount. Following Dupas et al. (2012), we use active
use as our take-up measure. Section 3.2 discusses determinants of take-up and what they
suggest about underlying barriers to saving. For those who actively used the account,
the mean number of deposits over the course of a year was 4.4 and the median was 2.
They deposited an average of 66,900 pesos in total (about 135 USD) with a median of
9,000 pesos. The average number of withdrawals was 1.0 and the total amount withdrawn
was 46,700 (about 95 USD) on average. Over the year of the study, participants held an
average monthly savings balance of around 18,500 Chilean pesos (about 37 USD). This
balance amount represents about 23% of monthly income and corresponds in size to the
type of expenditures for which participants had expressed wanting to build a buffer, such
as unexpected doctor’s visits and payments for heating, electricity or food during periods
of short-term income fluctuation.

                                             [Table 2]


Borrowing
 13
    Since the AES cannot deal with large numbers of fixed effects, we include a treatment dummy in the
AES regressions in place of the individual fixed effects.

                                                 13
     We first analyze the impact of access to a savings account on the use of short-term
credit. If savings were to have a precautionary purpose, as participants had stated in the
focus groups, having more savings could reduce the need for short-term debt to cope with
economic fluctuations.

                                               [Table 3]

     Panel A in Table 3 shows that indeed, the amount of outstanding short-term debt
declines by 12,931 pesos for those with access to the account, significant at the 5% level.14
This represents a reduction of 20% compared to the post-intervention mean in the control
group. Looking at what type of short-term debt is reduced, we see the strongest reduction
on the amount owed to family and friends with 6,500 peso, significant at the 1% level.
This represents a 38% reduction compared to the post-intervention control group mean.
Within family and friends, the reduction is strongest for parents, significant at the 1%
level, who are the most frequent category participants borrowed from within family and
friends.
     Next, we look at an alternative, less noisy measure: the discrete number of categories
of people or institutions with which participants reported having any debt, such as parents,
siblings, neighbors, or suppliers. Panel B shows a reduction of 0.127 categories, significant
at the 5% level, for those with access to the account. This represents a decrease of 22%
compared to the control group mean in the post-treatment period.
     Looking at the three types of borrowing we see that the largest decrease again stems
from informal borrowing from family and friends, which is reduced by 0.072, significant
at the 5% level. This is a 36% decrease compared to the control group mean in the
post-treatment period. Among the specific categories, borrowing from parents was again
reduced the most, significant at the 1% level. With this discrete measure of borrowing, the
outstanding payments to service providers also decline significantly, by 0.057 categories,
significant at the 5% level, representing a reduction of 24% compared to the control group
mean in the post-treatment period. Within the components of outstanding payments, the
reduction in debt with utility providers (electric, gas, water, and telephone) is the largest
with 37%, significant at the 5% level. Outstanding payments to utility providers can have
particularly negative effects, as they can lead to participants’ families being left without
heating or electricity until payment is restored.
  14
     These results are winsorized at the 95th percentile due to large outliers. See Appendix Table A1 for
unwinsorized amounts.

                                                   14
     There is again no significant effect on the overall debt to business contacts and non-
bank lending institutions. Among the components of this form of borrowing, the prob-
abilities of borrowing from money lenders and from business partners were significantly
reduced at the 5% level. However, since both of these types of borrowing are not frequent,
they do not significantly affect the overall number of categories.
     To confirm that the decrease in borrowing is indeed concentrated on short-term debt
that serves to smooth economic shocks or emergencies, we also look at long-term borrowing
in the form of mortgages, loans with FE, formal bank loans, etc. Consistent with the role
of savings as a substitute for borrowing for self-insurance, we find no impact on long-term
borrowing amounts or categories.
     Since credit is expensive, one could imagine that participants use their savings ac-
count to build savings not only towards a buffer stock for self-insurance but also to reduce
their next installment of micro-credit for their business investments, or to pay down long-
term debt. The fact that we do not find evidence for this suggests that building a buffer
stock might be more urgent for this population than reducing debt. It is also consistent
with the notion that participants do not want to discontinue their micro-credit since par-
ticipating with FE provides them with other benefits. Whether or not it is beneficial for
this population to use micro-credit is a separate question that is beyond the scope of this
paper. It is nevertheless interesting to note that participants seem to reduce borrowing
from family and friends before reducing borrowing from the MFI.


Lending
     Having established the reduction in short-term borrowing, we look at the other di-
mension of debt, i.e. being a creditor. Having a savings account could lead participants
to become less generous in providing loans to their social network, since they now depend
less on loans from their network for insurance purposes. In addition, savings accounts
may allow individuals to shield their savings from requests of others to share. On the
other hand, having a buffer stock may allow individuals to help their social network with
a loan in times of need. The evidence on this issue is quite mixed. Chandrasekhar et al.
(2012) find no negative impact of access to savings on interpersonal transfers in a lab
experiment in India. Flory (2012) finds in Malawi that having a savings account increases
participants’ cash gifts to others.

                                         [Table 4]

                                            15
      Table 4 displays the impact on lending to others. For the full sample (Columns 1-3),
there are no statistically significant effects on amounts lent or categories of borrowers
lent to. However, for the 68% who indicated in the baseline survey that they always or
frequently regret not having saved more (Columns 4-6), there is a significant reduction
in lending both in amounts (12 thousand pesos) and in categories of borrowers (0.61
categories).15 For both amounts and categories, the effect is largest on lending to family
and friends, significant at the 1% level. In addition, the reduction for business contacts
is also marginally significant.
      This finding is consistent with the notion of other-control problems, i.e. the requests
for money by others may have presented an obstacle to building their own savings for this
group, which led them to regret not having saved more. Once they have a place to store
their savings away from home, they are able to reduce their loans to others and build
their own buffer stock of savings. As we will see in Section 3.2 below, this interpretation
is also consistent with the take-up pattern. However, since we did not start the analysis
with a hypothesis for the subgroup that regretted not having saved more in mind, further
research is required to investigate whether this differential effect is robust to replication.


Consumption Smoothing
     The preceding results showed that participants substitute credit with savings and
significantly reduce their use of short-term borrowing when given access to a savings
account. If savings and credit are substitute mechanisms for consumption smoothing, the
question arises of whether relaxing the savings constraint mainly leads to a replacement of
credit by savings, or whether overall smoothing is increased in addition. It is conceivable
that participants’ main response to access to the savings accounts is to substitute to a
different means of smoothing, while maintaining their overall level of smoothing. This
section analyzes how the intervention affects participants’ ability to smooth consumption
during times of economic shocks to their income.
     As discussed in Section 2.2 above, our measure of consumption smoothing asks par-
ticipants directly, whether they had to cut back various forms of consumption due to hard
times in the preceding three months. Overall in this population, the need to reduce con-
sumption due to economic difficulty is quite frequent. In the baseline, 70% of participants
reported having to cut back on at least one of the consumption items in the pre-treatment
  15
     The amounts are again winsorized at the 95th percentile due to large outliers. See Appendix Table A2
for the non-winsorized amounts.


                                                   16
period. For the individual items, this frequency ranges from 8% to 51%, with the largest
proportion of participants reducing clothing, eating out and meat consumption. To estab-
lish which participants were affected by a shock to their income, we asked whether they
had experienced a job loss in the household or a significant business downturn. Forty
percent of participants experienced at least one such shock in the three months preceding
the follow-up survey. Table 5 shows how their need to reduce consumption due to hard
times was affected by the treatment.

                                               [Table 5]

     First, the coefficients on the post-treatment dummy indicate that indeed, those who
experienced a recent shock had to increase the extent to which they had to cut back
consumption on many of the specific items. This increase is offset by more than half for
those who had access to the savings account. The effect is particularly large for meat and
walking instead of using public transportation.16 While the cutback is not statistically
significant for many of the individual coeffecients, the relevant question for the analysis
is whether there has been an overall reduction. Indeed, we find that the relatively small
buffer stock amounts seem to have a significant impact in helping participants cope with
income fluctuations. The overall AES for reduction in consumption cutbacks of -0.112 is
significant at the 5% level.17
     Quantitatively, these effects are substantial. Using a triple difference specification, we
find that for participants who were offered an account, the overall increase in consumption
cutbacks associated with an income shock (measured as the number of items for which
consumption had to be reduced) was mitigated by 44%. In the treatment group, a negative
income shock in the post-treatment period was associated with a 0.49 increase in cutbacks,
compared to a 0.88 increase in the control group (p-value of the difference = 0.059).18
These findings show that access to the savings accounts helped participants better smooth
their consumption following an income shock.
  16
     Specifically, in the urban Chilean context, the poor’s workplace is often far away from their home,
with business activities located in the city center and housing for the poor at the outskirts. Cutting
back on public transportation in these cases therefore often means a walk of two or more hours in each
direction.
  17
     Table A3 in the Appendix shows consumption cutbacks for the full population, including those who
did not experience a shock. Again, the frequency of reducing consumption is reduced for almost all items,
however, the overall impact is no longer statistically significant (AES p-value = 0.23).
  18
     These estimates result from a triple difference-in-difference regression that compares the impact of
an income shock in the post-treatment period on participants’ consumption cutbacks between those who
were and were not offered an account, controlling for time period and individual fixed effects.

                                                   17
Subjective Well-Being
     Both the reduced indebtedness and the improved consumption smoothing capability
can potentially contribute to alleviating participants’ perceived economic well-being and
anxiety about their financial future. Beyond the physical challenges of limited consump-
tion, worry and anxiety about one’s economic situation is one of the difficult characteristics
that mark the lives of many of the poor. Qualitative and correlational evidence suggests
that debt can be a particular source of such mental distress (e.g. Taylor et al., 2006;
Kuruvilla and Jacob, 2007).
      We assess whether participants experienced a subjective insurance effect from access
to the savings account through one forward- and one backward-looking measure: partici-
pants’ anxiety about their financial future and their overall assessment of recent economic
difficulties (see Section 2.2 for a more detailed description of these variables). Table 6
shows the impact on both of these outcomes. Since the units of measurement for anxiety
and economic difficulty are not quantitatively meaningful, we normalize them to have a
mean of zero and a standard deviation of one among the control group. This way, the
effects are expressed in terms of standard deviations. One year after receiving a savings
account, participants in the treatment group are 0.112 standard deviations less anxious
about their financial future than those in the control group and experience their overall
recent economic situation as 0.087 standard deviations less difficult. The overall AES on
subjective well-being is -0.102 and significant at the 5% level.


                                               [Table 6]


     To facilitate the interpretation of the magnitude of these treatment effects, we com-
pare them to changes in these measures associated with other economic events, such as
a job loss in the household and a significant business downturn.19 This benchmark com-
parison reveals that the effects are substantial. The magnitude of the backward-looking
effect of access to the account on perceived recent economic difficulties is 78% as large as
the change of this measure associated with a job loss in the household and 54% as large as
the change associated with a business downturn. The forward-looking effect of access to
the savings account on participants’ anxiety about their financial future is 117% as large
  19
     To measure this association, we compare the coefficients in Table 6 to the change associated with
having experienced an economic shock in the preceding three months, as captured by a difference-in-
difference regression of job loss or business downturn in the preceding three months on the two subjective
well-being measures respectively.


                                                   18
as the change in anxiety associated with a job loss, and 57% as large as the change as-
sociated with a business downturn. In sum, as a rough benchmark comparison, receiving
access to the savings account improves subjective well-being by more than half as much
as not losing a job or experiencing a business downturn – a quite sizeable amount.
     We can further examine the improvements on the self-reported well-being measures
through generalized ordered probit estimation. This allows us to see where in the distri-
bution the improvements are coming from. Tables A4 and A5 in the Appendix show the
results for anxiety and perceived recent economic difficulties, respectively. In Table A4,
Column (3) shows that the improvement in anxiety is particularly strong at the top of
the distribution, making participants significantly less likely to stay in the most anxious
category. With respect to the rating of recent economic difficulties (Table A5), the impact
seems to be strongest in the middle of the distribution. For both subjective well-being
measures, the coefficients point towards improvement throughout the whole range of the
distribution.
     Overall, the analysis of the impact on subjective well-being reveals sizeable improve-
ments in both participants’ assessments of their recent economic situation, and in their
outlook of the future.


Other Outcomes
     There are two groups of outcome variables that we tested, but for which we do not
find statistically significant effects – household dynamics and spending on bulky pur-
chases. Money is often a major source of conflict among couples, and in other contexts,
savings outside of the house have been found to play an important role as a strategy
for women to hide money from their husbands (Anderson and Baland (2002), looking at
ROSCAs in Kenya) or as a means for women to improve bargaining power and control over
their spending decisions (Ashraf, Karlan and Yin (2010) in the Philippines; Dupas and
Robinson (2013a) in Kenya). Our results, however, find no significant effect on household
dynamics.20 One reason why access to a savings account does not lead to a change in the
intra-household dynamics in our study might be that in Chile, women are traditionally
in charge of household finances and savings decisions, so the introduction of the savings
accounts may not have a significant impact on these power dynamics.
  20
    The questions in this module were: Who in the household makes decisions about spending? Who in
the household makes decisions about savings? Do you hide savings from your partner or other relatives?
Did you recently ask your partner for money? Do you have conflicts with your partner about money?


                                                 19
     We also find no effects on bulky expenditures. The sub-questions in this category
ask whether in the previous three months, participants made purchases in any of the
following categories: (1) a television, radio, or computer; (2) machinery or equipment for
their business; (3) making significant improvements in their home (painting, floor, roof,
etc.); (4) paying down their debt to FE in advance. While the lack of effect on these
bulky items might simply mean that the survey did not include the relevant items, it
is consistent with the interpretation that participants mainly used their liquid savings
accounts to build a buffer stock for insurance, and reserved their chunky credit with FE
for bulky expenditures and investments.


3.2    Take-up

The take-up patterns for the accounts provide interesting insights into the drivers of de-
mand for the formal savings accounts, and suggestive results as to what the underlying
savings constraints without an account may be. In Table 7, Panel A shows demographic
determinants of take-up and Panel B analyzes other personal characteristics that may
affect savings decisions, controlling for the demographics in Panel A. The personal char-
acteristics that are predictive of take-up are consistent with a situation where participants
use the account in order to reduce both their self-control and other-control problems.


                                         [Table 7]


     Household dynamics that are indicative of other-control problems are predictive of
take-up. Being head of the household – an indicator of having more control over intra-
household resource allocation – is negatively correlated with take-up. For heads of house-
hold, take-up is 4 percentage points lower, a reduction of 10 percent compared to the over-
all take-up rate, and is significant at the 10% level (controlling for demographic variables
and other personal characteristics). Participants who are not the head of the households
may be the most interested in reducing the exposure of their savings to the demands by
others in the household. Relatedly, having conflicts with one’s partner over monetary
issues increases take-up by 5 percentage points, an increase of 13 percent. Those with
more conflict might feel more of a need to put their resources out of reach of their partner.
    Consistent with Dupas and Robinson (2013b), we also find that individuals who are
“socially taxed” – i.e. those who lend to friends and family but do not receive such


                                             20
loans themselves – are significantly more likely to take up the accounts. Socially taxed
participants are 7 percentage points more likely to open and use the account, an increase
of 17% percent. Separating the two components of being socially taxed in Column (3),
we find the expected sign on both dimensions. Individuals who lent money to relatives
or friends are 5 percentage points more likely to take up the account, and there is a
statistically insignificant negative correlation of 2 percentage points for those who owe
money to family or friends. The correlations of take-up with both the household dynamics
and with being socially taxed suggest that other-control problems may be an important
driver of the demand for formal savings accounts.
     The evidence on the role of self-control problems for take-up is mixed. Our two mea-
sures indicating possible self-control problems – regret about not having saved more, and
hyperbolic time preferences21 – show somewhat different results. On the one hand, hyper-
bolic individuals are 5.5 percentage points more likely to take up the savings account.22
On the other hand, participants who indicate regretting not having saved more (and for
which analysis described above finds that they reduce lending to others in response to
receiving access to the account), are not significantly more likely to open the account.
     A third potential motivation for opening an account, in addition to self- and other-
control problems, could be safety concerns. However, we do not find that fear of hav-
ing one’s savings stolen affects take-up in a significant way. With respect to the socio-
demographic variables in Panel A, younger people and men are less likely to take up the
account. The former is consistent with statements from the focus groups that young peo-
ple are more likely to rely on their parents for a financial safety cushion and may therefore
not need precautionary savings as much. The latter is consistent with the social norm in
Chile that women tend to be in charge of household savings. Finally, it is interesting to
note the role of income. Lower income is associated with lower take-up. This is consistent
with Karlan and Zinman (2012) and Dupas and Robinson (2013a) who find a positive
association of wealth and income, respectively, with take-up of a savings account. Access
to an account may therefore not reach the poorest of the poor to the desired extent. This
reinforces the pattern found in many settings that getting buy-in by the lowest income
  21
     Hyperbolic preferences are determined by giving survey participants hypothetical choices between x
pesos in time t and y pesos (x < y) in time t+1 month, similar to e.g., Ashraf et al. (2006b) and Meier
and Sprenger (2010).
  22
     This is consistent with Ashraf et al. (2006b), who find that individuals with hyperbolic time prefer-
ences demonstrate a preference for commitment devices. Testing for subsequent usage, we find that being
hyperbolic does not reduce the probability of using the account conditional on opening one, and contrary
to the findings of Ashraf et al. (2006b), does not lead to a greater variance in the account balance.


                                                   21
population for socially beneficial programs can be challenging.


3.3     Robustness Checks

In the following section, we first analyze two potential threats to the validity of the
analysis: demand effects and attrition. We then analyze whether the effects are driven by
the sub-treatment, i.e. the additional alleviation of self-control constraints through the
peer group commitment device.


Demand Effects
     Demand effects refer to changes in behavior by experimental subjects due to cues
about what constitutes appropriate behavior (e.g., Crowne and Marlowe, 1964; Zizzo,
2010). In the context of this study, one concern is that participants who received access
to a savings account through FE might report more positive answers in the follow-up
survey out of gratitude or a sense of indebtedness towards the organization. This is not
very likely to be the case here, since participants did not know that the survey was related
to the savings account.23 Even so, we included two questions in the survey specifically
designed to test for possible demand effects. The goal was to include questions that would
be particularly susceptible to demand effects.


                                             [Table 8]


     The first question (at the very beginning of the survey) asked participants how com-
plicated they found the process of scheduling the interview. The second question was
asked at the very end of the survey, in case participants would find out during the survey
that it was related to the savings account. This question asked participants how satisfied
they were with FE. Table 8 shows that neither of these questions respond to the treat-
ment. Participants receiving the treatment rated the difficulty of the survey process as
0.04 points higher compared to 2.45 of the control group (on a scale from 1 to 4) and
satisfaction with FE as 0.01 point lower compared to 6.38 of the control group (on a
scale from 1 to 7), with neither effect being close to statistical significance. This gives us
reassurance that the self-reported findings in this paper are not driven by demand effects.
  23
    Participants knew that the survey was from FE, but FE has many different activities and products
and no specific mention of the savings account was made when presenting the survey.


                                                22
Attrition
     In order to ensure the inclusion of individuals who were no longer members of FE,
the follow-up survey was administered at the participants’ home or business location.
Despite special efforts aimed at limiting attrition,24 14.2% of participants could not be
found for the follow-up survey. Column 2 in Table A6 in the Appendix shows that when
comparing attrition rates across the treatment and control groups, we find that attrition is
2.8 percentage points higher in the treatment group. Using data from the baseline survey,
we can see that attrition is not fully balanced on characteristics. Participants who are
younger, live in smaller households, have more previous savings, or less short-term lending
in the baseline period are less likely to be found for the follow-up survey. Even though, as
shown in Columns (3) and (4) of Table 1, overall characteristics are still balanced between
the treatment and control groups among the non-attritors, the differential attrition still
raises some concerns about a potential bias being introduced.
     Given the fact that we use individual fixed effects, the analysis is controlling for all
time-invariant characteristics. We can therefore rule out any bias resulting from time-
invariant differences in the composition of treatment and control group. What we cannot
rule out, however, is that the somewhat different attrition rates between treatment and
control groups lead to differential trends over time among the non-attritors.
     We address this concern in two ways. First, we use the bounding approach of Lee
(2005) to construct upper and lower bounds for the treatment effect. Lee bounds are
based on trimming the distribution of the outcome variable once from each end of the
distribution by a “trimming proportion.” That proportion corresponds to the difference
in attrition rates between the treatment and control group as a proportion of the retention
rate of the treatment group, which is in our case 3.2%. Table A7 in the Appendix shows
that the coefficients do not change their sign within these conservative Lee bounds. The
range of the treatment effects on borrowing is between 3,140 and 13,839 pesos for the
total amount of outstanding short-term debt, and between 0.08 and 0.14 for the number
of categories. With respect to self-reported well-being, the effect ranges from 0.08 to 0.17
standard deviations for anxiety about the financial future and from 0.06 to 0.12 standard
deviations for recent economic difficulty.
  24
     During the baseline survey, we asked participants not only for their own contact information, but also
for the contact details of a close relative or friend through whom they could be reached. In addition, we
chose to work with the survey agency Microdatos, which has special expertise in following participants
for panel studies.



                                                    23
     Second, we recalculate the main results by reweighting our sample to compensate for
the differential composition between treatment and control groups using inverse proba-
bility weights (Wooldridge, 2002, 2007). This approach first predicts the probability that
based on observables, a participant will be in the follow-up survey, by using a probit
regression.25 Thereafter, each individual is weighted with the inverse of this probability.
Those who are less likely to be part of the follow-up survey hence receive a higher weight,
leading participants with characteristics that are underrepresented in the follow-up survey
to be counted more heavily.
     All results remain qualitatively unchanged when applying inverse probability weights
(see Table A8 in the Appendix). Being in the treatment group reduces the total amount
of outstanding short-term debt by 12,931 pesos without, and by 13,930 pesos with the
attrition weights. The number of categories that participants are indebted to is reduced by
0.13 both with and without attrition weights. On the question of the participant’s anxiety
about their financial future, treatment improved the average response by 0.11 standard
deviations without attrition weights, and by 0.12 standard deviations with the weights.
For recent economic difficulty, the improvement is 0.09 standard deviations without and
0.10 with attrition weights. Finally, being in the treatment group reduces the consumption
cutback index for individuals who had a shock by 0.38 units without, and by 0.40 with
attrition weights. Overall, reweighting the analysis to account for the slightly different
attrition proportion between treatment and control group does not substantially affect
the magnitudes of any of our main results.


Differential Effects by Type of Account
    As discussed in Section 2.3, for half of the sample, the access to the formal savings ac-
count was accompanied by a peer group savings commitment device.26 This commitment
device was designed to additionally remove barriers to savings by reducing self-control
problems and has been found by Kast et al. (2013) to significantly increase savings in
the accounts. It is therefore of interest to understand whether the results we find in
  25
     The following variables are used to construct the weights: all main outcome variables at baseline, all
variables for which there is a significant difference between attritors and non-attritors in Table A6, and
a number of additional characteristics which assure that conditional on all weight variables, being in the
treatment group is no longer statistically significantly associated with attrition (p=0.152).
  26
     In the groups that had been selected for the peer group savings commitment device, participants had
the option of making a pledge as to how much they were going to deposit into the account every week.
In the regular group meetings, participants followed up on each other’s commitments and checked who
had a deposit slip to prove that they had made their weekly deposit.



                                                    24
this paper are mainly driven by the subgroup who received the peer group support, or
whether they are also present for those who simply received access to the formal savings
account. Splitting the sample in half to compare the subgroups with and without peer
group support leads to a loss in statistical power since the number of observations in each
sub-treatment is smaller. This will tend to reduce the level of significance for individual
coefficients, so some of what follows is more of a suggestive nature.


                                          [Table 9]


     Table 9 shows the results for those with just the basic account, and the difference
for those with the additional peer group support. The first pattern to notice is that
overall, the peer group support does not seem to be driving the results. For three of
the five coefficients, the effect is not stronger for those with the additional peer group
support. The statistical power is generally reduced when just looking at the subgroups,
but the impact on two of the key variables, i.e. the reduction in categories of debt
and in consumption cutbacks, remain statistically significant when looking just at those
who did not receive the additional peer group support. The effect on the self-assessed
recent economic difficulty is no longer statistically significant but actually somewhat larger
among those with just the basic account without the peer group treatment. The reduction
in the amount of short-term borrowing is larger for those in the peer group treatment,
but this difference is also not statistically significant.
     The one outcome for which there is a significantly stronger effect for those with the
added deposit commitment device is the reduction in anxiety about the financial future.
Intuitively, it makes sense that those who have accumulated a higher buffer stock of savings
in the account would have the most improvement in this forward-looking measure.



4     Discussion and Conclusion

This paper investigates the impact of access to a free, liquid savings account for a low-
income population in Chile. When given access to the saving accounts, participants
substitute short-term informal credit with formal savings. They have less outstanding
debt and owe money to fewer categories of creditors. This behavior reveals that even
though in principle, participants could save at home or store money in their micro-business


                                             25
or in easily liquefiable assets, these forms of savings are not equivalent to savings in the
formal savings account, and are in fact quite costly.
     If savings and credit are substitute mechanisms for consumption smoothing, the ques-
tion arises whether reducing barriers to saving through a free savings account mainly leads
to a replacement of credit by savings, or whether overall smoothing is increased in addi-
tion. Looking at consumption smoothing as well as two self-reported welfare measures, we
find that the overall level of self-insurance increases substantially. For all three measures,
the effect corresponds in magnitude to about half or more of the change in that measure
associated with a job loss or severe income shock. Finally, the savings behavior interacts
with the social environment: take-up is particularly high for those who are more socially
taxed by demands from their network, and in turn those who originally regretted not
having saved more reduce their lending to others.
     These results have a number of implications for research and policy. First, as dis-
cussed in the introduction, they add to the growing evidence on the benefits of facilitating
savings on a variety of outcomes. These positive findings suggest that increasing access to
savings vehicles may be an effective way of improving the welfare of the poor. However,
private banks often do not find it in their interest to host savings accounts for low amounts
and charge such accounts with administrative hurdles, minimum balance requirements,
and maintenance fees, which can result in large negative interest rates. Given this lack of
private incentives, governments may have a role to play in facilitating access. Reducing
access costs would make formal savings more accessible to the poor. At the same time,
our survey results also suggest that reducing mental barriers and fear of entering a bank,
or generating trust by providing endorsement by a credible institution, may play an im-
portant role in encouraging take-up, consistent with the findings of Cole et al. (2013b)
for the case of micro-insurance.27 In designing these policies, more research is required
to study which contexts best allow for the different benefits of savings to be realized, for
example, with respect to the optimal level of liquidity, or for settings within or outside of
microfinance organizations.28
  27
      Free basic current accounts, for example, such as very recently introduced by the Chilean government,
may play an important role in providing access to savings. Similarly, policies that facilitate deposits into
savings accounts, such as dispensing welfare payments into government-provided savings accounts rather
than paying them out in cash, as currently considered by several countries, also have potentially large
benefits. On the other hand, based on the companion paper of this study (Kast et al., 2013), which shows
little response to a large increase in the interest rate, subsidies to the returns may be a less effective tool
for encouraging savings.
   28
      Microfinance clients might be different from others in many regards, such as financial literacy, en-



                                                      26
      Second, while many studies have found that withdrawal commitment devices, which
limit the liquidity of the accounts, can help people build their savings, this illiquidity may
come at a cost, as it reduces the usefulness of the savings for precautionary purposes by
impeding discretionary use in times of need.29 This suggests that depending on the goal
a particular savings vehicle is meant to serve, and depending on the savings constraints,
different levels of liquidity may be optimal. It is noteworthy that a liquid savings account
with no withdrawal restrictions is not necessarily at odds with facilitating longer-term
investments, e.g. for health and education, as found by (Prina, 2013) in Nepal. It may
be important in this regard to distinguish liquidity (in terms of a lack of withdrawal
restrictions) from ease and speed of access (e.g. through a debit card or mobile phone
banking). Too much accessibility may reduce the benefits of formal savings accounts
away from the home.30 An effective setup for precautionary savings might therefore be
characterized by a liquid account without withdrawal limits, but with some degree of
friction in the withdrawal process. More research is required to analyze this tradeoff of
liquidity for commitment devices available for this need.
     Third, the finding that those who initially regretted not having saved more are less
likely to provide credit to others in their social network after receiving access to the account
raises some questions about the overall social impact. However, these findings have to be
interpreted with caution, since we did not start the analysis with this subgroup in mind,
and it will be important to test their replicability. If these results hold, the overall social
impact is a priori ambiguous. On the one hand, access to savings vehicles increases the
peace of mind of those who can use them. In addition, if it lowers the pressure to share
money with others, this may reduce the disincentive effect of such a ‘social tax’ (e.g., Alger
and Weibull, 2010; Jakiela and Ozier, 2012). On the other hand, the reduced lending may
diminish the welfare of others in participants’ social network. Further research is required
to investigate these general equilibrium and distributional effects.
    Finally, our results show that precautionary savings can, to some degree, provide
an alternative mechanism to formal insurance. This may be particularly important in
trepreneurial spirit, having significant debt at the same time, or being more experienced with financial
institutions.
  29
     In contrast, deposit commitment devices such as in e.g. Madrian and Shea (2001); Thaler and Benartzi
(2004); Ashraf et al. (2006a) and Kast et al. (2013) encourage the deposit margin without necessarily
restricting withdrawals.
  30
     Too much ease of access may not only exacerbate self-control problems (e.g. in the form of impulse-
spending), but also other-control problems, as it can make it easier for others to pressure the saver to
disclose and share the savings (Schaner, 2013).



                                                   27
environments in which access to formal insurance options is limited. While insurance
contracts could in principle often provide protection from economic shocks at a lower cost
than self-insurance through savings, one benefit of self-insurance is that it does not suffer
from the two-sided asymmetric information problem that formal insurance products can
be faced with. In low-income environments, it is often not only difficult for the insurer
to verify the validity of insurance claims, but also for the insurance clients to trust that
the insurers will keep their future obligations. This is one of the reasons why providing
insurance to low-income populations in developing countries faces many challenges, even
for risks that seem to present relatively few problems of moral hazard or adverse selection,
such as weather risks (e.g., Giné and Yang, 2009; Cai et al., 2012; Giné et al., 2012; Cole et
al., 2013b). In addition, even for situations in which micro-insurance has been successfully
provided, there is no clear evidence yet on whether micro-insurance helps participants
smooth consumption.31 While for low-probability, high-loss events, self-insurance through
savings would be very costly and often not realistic, it may provide an effective alternative
for smaller loss, higher probability events such as short-term income shocks.




   31
      Several studies do, however, find that weather insurance can help farmers make riskier decisions (e.g.,
Vargas Hill and Viceisza, 2010; Cai, 2012; Karlan et al., 2012; Mobarak and Rosenzweig, 2012; Cole et
al., 2013a).


                                                     28
References
Ahmed, Naeem, Matthew Brzozowski, and Thomas Crossley, “Measurement Errors in
  Recall Food Consumption Data,” IFS Working Papers, 2006.
Alderman, Harold, “Saving and Economic Shocks in Rural Pakistan,” Journal of Development
  Economics, 1996, 51 (2), 343–365.
Alger, Ingela and Jörgen W. Weibull, “Kinship, Incentives, and Evolution,” American
  Economic Review, 2010, 100 (4), 1725–1758.
Ananth, Bindu, Dean Karlan, and Sendhil Mullainathan, “Microentrepreneurs and their
  Money: Three Anomalies,” Innovations for Poverty Action: Financial Access Initiative, 2007.
Anderson, Siwan and Jean-Marie Baland, “The Economics of ROSCAs and Intrahousehold
  Resource Allocation,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2002, 117 (3), 963–995.
Angelucci, Manuela, Dean Karlan, and Jonathan Zinman, “Win Some Lose Some?
  Evidence from a Randomized Microcredit Program Placement Experiment by Compartamos
  Banco,” Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2013.
Ashraf, Nava, Dean Karlan, and Wesley Yin, “Deposit Collectors,” Advances in Economic
  Analysis & Policy, 2006, 6 (2), Article 5.
  , , and , “Tying Odysseus to the Mast: Evidence from a Commitment Savings Product
  in the Philippines,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2006, 121 (1), 635–672.
  ,    , and     , “Female Empowerment: Impact of a Commitment Savings Product in the
  Philippines,” World Development, 2010, 38 (3), 333–344.
Atkinson, Jesse, Alain de Janvry, Craig McIntosh, and Elisabeth Sadoulet, “Prompt-
  ing Microfinance Borrowers to Save: A Behavioral Experiment from Guatemala,” Economic
  Development and Cultural Change, 2013, 62 (1), 21–64.
Baland, Jean-Marie, Catherine Guirkinger, and Charlotte Mali, “Pretending to be
  Poor: Borrowing to Escape Forced Solidarity in Cameroon,” Economic Development and
  Cultural Change, 2011, 60 (1), 1–16.
Banerjee, Abhijit and Esther Duflo, “The Economic Lives of the Poor,” Journal of Eco-
  nomic Perspectives, 2007, 21 (1), 141–167.
Barr, Michael S, No Slack: The Financial Lives of Low-income Americans, Brookings Insti-
  tution Press, 2012.
Besley, Timothy, “Savings, Credit and Insurance,” Handbook of Development Economics,
  1995, 3, 2123–2207.
Browning, Martin and Annamaria Lusardi, “Household Saving: Micro Theories and Micro
  Facts,” Journal of Economic Literature, 1996, 34 (4), 1797–1855.
Brune, Lasse, Xavier Giné, Jessica Goldberg, and Dean Yang, “Commitments to Save:
  a Field Experiment in Rural Malawi,” Policy Research Working Paper 5748, 2011, Develop-
  ment Research Group, The World Bank.
Burgess, Robin and Rohini Pande, “Do Rural Banks Matter? Evidence from the Indian
  Social Banking Experiment,” American Economic Review, 2005, 95 (3), 780–795.
Cai, Hongbin, Yuyu Chen, Hanming Fang, and Li-An Zhou, “The Effect of Microin-
  surance on Economic Activities: Evidence from a Randomized Field Experiment,” 2012.
Cai, Jing, “The Impact of Insurance Provision on Households’ Production and Financial De-
  cisions,” Working Paper, 2012.
Cattaneo, Matias D., Sebastian Galiani, Paul J. Gertler, Sebastian Martinez, and
  Rocio Titiunik, “Housing, Health, and Happiness,” American Economic Journal: Economic


                                             29
  Policy, 2009, 1 (1), 75–105.
Chandrasekhar, Arun, Cynthia Kinnan, and Horacio Larreguy, “Informal Insurance,
  Social Networks, and Savings Access: Evidence from a Framed Field Experiment,” MIT
  Working Paper, 2012.
Clingingsmith, David, Asim I. Khwaja, and Michael Kremer, “Estimating the Im-
  pact of the Hajj: Religion and Tolerance in Islam’s Global Gathering,” Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 2009, 124 (3), 1133–1170.
Cole, Shawn, Thomas Sampson, and Bilal Zia, “Prices or Knowledge? What Drives
  Demand for Financial Services in Emerging Markets?,” Journal of Finance, 2011, 66 (6),
  1933–1967.
  , Xavier Giné, and James Vickery, “How Does Risk Management Influence Production
  Decisions? Evidence from a Field Experiment,” Harvard Busines School, Working paper 13-
  080, 2013.
  ,    , Jeremy Tobacman, Petia Topalova, Robert Townsend, and James Vickery,
  “Barriers to Household Risk Management: Evidence from India,” American Economic Jour-
  nal: Applied Economics, 2013, 5 (1), 104–135.
Collins, Daryl, Jonathan Morduch, Stuart Rutherford, and Orlanda Ruthven, Port-
  folios of the Poor: How the World’s Poor Live on $2 a Day, Princeton University Press,
  2009.
Comola, Margherita and Silvia Prina, “Intervention-Driven Changes in Social Networks
  and Their Effects on Household Outcomes,” Working Paper, 2013.
Crowne, Douglas P. and David Marlowe, The Approval Motive, New York: Wiley, 1964.
Deaton, Angus, “Saving and liquidity constraints,” Econometrica, September 1991, 59 (5),
  1221–1248.
  , The Analysis of Household Surveys: A Microeconometric Approach to Development Policy,
  Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press for the World Bank, 1997.
Devoto, Florencia, Esther Duflo, Pascaline Dupas, William Pariente, and Vincent
  Pons, “Happiness on Tap: Piped Water Adoption in Urban Morocco,” American Economic
  Journal: Economic Policy, 2012, 4 (4), 68–99.
Dezső, Linda and George Loewenstein, “Lenders Blind Trust and Borrowers Blind Spots:
  A Descriptive Investigation of Personal Loans,” Journal of Economic Psychology, 2012.
Dupas, Pascaline and Jonathan Robinson, “Savings Constraints and Microenterprise De-
  velopment: Evidence from a Field Experiment in Kenya,” American Economic Journal: Ap-
  plied Economics, 2013, 5 (1), 163–192.
    and     , “Why Don’t the Poor Save More? Evidence from Health Savings Experiments,”
  The American Economic Review, 2013, 103 (4), 1138–71.
  , Green Sarah, Keats Anthony, and Jonathan Robinson, “Challenges in Banking
  the Rural Poor: Evidence from Kenya’s Western Province,” National Bureau of Economic
  Research, 2012, Africa Project Conference.
Fafchamps, Marcel, “Contraintes de Crédit, Collatéral et Prêts aux Pauvres,” Revue
  d’économie du développement, 2013, 27 (2), 79–100.
    and Susan Lund, “Risk-Sharing Networks in Rural Philippines,” Journal of Development
  Economics, 2003, 71 (2), 261–287.
FDIC, Unbanked/Underbanked Survey Study Group, “FDIC National Survey of Un-
  banked and Underbanked Households,” Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, 2011.
Ferrara, Eliana La, “Kin Groups and Reciprocity: A Model of Credit Transactions in Ghana,”

                                             30
  The American Economic Review, 2003, 93 (5), 1730–1751.
Field, Erica, Rohini Pande, John Papp, and Natalia Rigol, “Does the Classic Micro-
  finance Model Discourage Entrepreneurship Among the Poor? Experimental Evidence from
  India,” American Economic Review, 2012.
Flory, Jeffrey A., “Micro-Savings & Informal Insurance in Villages:How Does Financial Deep-
  ening Affect Safety Nets of the Very Poor?,” Working Paper 2011-008, 2012, Becker Friedman
  Institute for Research in Economics.
Galesic, Mirta and Michael Bosnjak, “Effects of Questionnaire Length on Participation
  and Indicators of Response Quality in a Web Survey,” Public Opinion Quarterly, 2009, 73
  (2), 349–360.
Giné, Xavier and Dean Yang, “Insurance, Credit, and Technology Adoption: Field Experi-
  mental Evidence from Malawi,” Journal of Development Economics, 2009, 89 (1), 1–11.
  , Lev Menand, Robert Townsend, and James Vickery, Microinsurance: A Case Study
  of the Indian Rainfall Index Insurance Market, in Ghate, C. (ed) Handbook of the Indian
  Economy, Oxford University Press, USA, 2012.
Haushofer, Johannes, Joost de Laat, and Matthieu Chemin, “Poverty Raises Levels
  of the Stress Hormone Cortisol: Evidence from Weather Shocks in Kenya,” Working Paper,
  2012.
Hertzberg, Andrew, “Exponential Individuals, Hyperbolic Households,” Working Paper
  Graduate School of Business, Columbia University, 2010.
Herzog, A. Regula and Jerald G. Bachman, “Effects of Questionnaire Length on Response
  Quality,” Public Opinion Quarterly, 1981, 45 (4), 549–559.
Hill, Ruth Vargas and Angelino Viceisza, “An Experiment on the Impact of Weather
  Shocks and Insurance on Risky Investment,” Discussion Paper 00974, 2010, International
  Food Policy Research Institute.
Jack, William and Tavneet Suri, “Risk sharing and Transaction Costs: Evidence from
  Kenyas Mobile Money Revolution,” American Economic Review, 2014, 104 (1), 183–223.
Jacoby, Hanan G. and Emmanuel Skoufias, “Risk, Financial Markets, and Human Capital
  in a Developing Country,” Review of Economic Studies, 1997, 64 (3), 311–335.
Jakiela, Pamela and Owen Ozier, “Does Africa Need a Rotten Kin Theorem? Experimental
  Evidence from Village Economies,” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper, 2012.
Karlan, Dean and Jonathan Zinman, “Price and Control Elasticities of Demand for Sav-
  ings,” Working Paper, 2012.
   and Sendhil Mullainathan, “Rigidity in Microfinancing: Can One Size Fit All?,” 2010.
  , Isaac Osei-Akoto, Robert Darko Osei, and Christopher Udry, “Agricultural De-
  cisions after Relaxing Credit and Risk Constraints,” Working Paper 110, 2012, Economics
  Department, Yale University.
Kast, Felipe, Stephan Meier, and Dina Pomeranz, “Under-Savers Anonymous: Evidence
  on Self-Help Groups and Peer Pressure as a Savings Commitment Device,” NBER Working
  Paper No. 18417, 2013.
Kinnan, Cynthia and Robert Townsend, “Kinship and Financial Networks, Formal Finan-
  cial Access and Risk Reduction,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 2012,
  102 (2), 289–293.
Kling, Jeffrey, Jeffrey Liebman, Lawrence Katz, and Lisa Sanbonmatsu, “Moving to
  Opportunity and Tranquility: Neighborhood Effects on Adult Economic Self-Sufficiency and
  Health from a Randomized Housing Voucher Experiment,” Faculty Research Working Papers

                                            31
  Series, 2004, Harvard University, John F. Kennedy School of Government.
Kuruvilla, Anju and K.S. Jacob, “Poverty, Social Stress & Mental Health,” Indian Journal
  of Medical Research, 2007, 126 (4), 273.
Lee, David S., “Training, Wages, and Sample Selection: Estimating Sharp Bounds on Treat-
  ment Effects,” NBER Working Paper 11721, 2005, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Ligon, Ethan, Jonathan P Thomas, and Tim Worrall, “Informal Insurance Arrangements
  with Limited Commitment: Theory and Evidence from Village Economies,” The Review of
  Economic Studies, 2002, 69 (1), 209–244.
Ludwig, Jens, Greg Duncan, Lisa Gennetian, Lawrence Katz, Ronald Kessler, Jef-
  frey Kling, and Lisa Sanbonmatsu, “Neighborhood Effects on the Long-Term Well-Being
  of Low-Income Adults,” Science, 2012, 337 (6101), 1505–1510.
Lusardi, Annamaria, Daniel J. Schneider, and Peter Tufano, “Financially Fragile House-
  holds: Evidence and Implications,” NBER Working Paper 17072, 2011.
Madrian, Brigitte and Dennis Shea, “The Power of Suggestion: Inertia in 401(k) Partici-
  pation and Savings Behavior,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2001, 116 (4), 1149–1187.
Mazzocco, Maurizio and Shiv Saini, “Testing Efficient Risk Sharing with Heterogeneous
  Risk Preferences,” The American Economic Review, 2012, 102 (1), 428–468.
Meier, Stephan and Charles Sprenger, “Present-Biased Preferences and Credit Card Bor-
  rowing,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2010, 2 (1), 193–210.
Mel, Suresh De, David J. McKenzie, and Christopher Woodruff, “Measuring Mi-
  croenterprise Profits: Must We Ask How the Sausage is Made?,” Journal of Development
  Economics, 2009, 88 (1), 19–31.
Mobarak, Ahmed and Mark Rosenzweig, “Selling Formal Insurance to the Informally
  Insured,” Yale University Economic Growth Center Discussion Paper, 2012, (1007).
Morduch, Jonathan, “Income Smoothing and Consumption Smoothing,” Journal of Eco-
  nomic Perspectives, 1995, 9 (3), 103–114.
Munshi, Kaivan and Mark Rosenzweig, “Why is Social Mobility in India So Low? Social
  Insurance, Inequality, and Growth,” NBER Working Paper 14850, 2009, National Bureau of
  Economic Research.
Paxson, Christina H., “Using Weather Variability to Estimate the Response of Savings to
  Transitory Income in Thailand,” The American Economic Review, 1992, pp. 15–33.
Prina, Silvia, “Banking the Poor Via Savings Accounts: Evidence from a Field Experiment,”
  Case Western Reserve Working Paper, 2013.
Roodman, David, Due Diligence: An Impertinent Inquiry into Microfinance, CGD Books,
  2012.
Rosenzweig, Mark and Hans Binswanger, “Wealth, Weather Risk and the Composition
  and Profitability of Agricultural Investments,” The Economic Journal, 1993, 103 (416), 56–78.
   and Kenneth I. Wolpin, “Credit Market Constraints, Consumption Smoothing, and the
  Accumulation of Durable Production Assets in Low-Income Countries: Investments in Bul-
  locks in India,” Journal of Political Economy, 1993, pp. 223–244.
Schaner, Simone, “Intrahousehold Preference Heterogeneity, Commitment, and Strategic Sav-
  ings: Theory and Evidence from Kenya,” Working Paper, 2011.
  , “The Cost of Convenience? Transaction Costs, Bargaining Power, and Savings Account Use
  in Kenya,” Working Paper, 2013.
Schicks, Jessica, “The Definition and Causes of Microfinance Over-Indebtedness: A Customer
  Protection Point of View,” Oxford Development Studies, 2013, (ahead-of-print), 1–22.

                                              32
Shah, Anuj, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Eldar Shafir, “Some Consequences of Having
  Too Little,” Science, 2012, 338 (6107), 682–685.
Taylor, Mark P., David J. Pevalin, and Jennifer Todd, “The Psychological Costs of
  Unsustainable Housing Commitments,” Cambridge University Press, 2006.
Thaler, Richard and Shlomo Benartzi, “Save More TomorrowTM : Using Behavioral Eco-
  nomics to Increase Employee Saving,” Journal of Political Economy, 2004, 112 (S1), 164–187.
Townsend, Robert, “Risk and Insurance in Village India,” Econometrica, 1994, pp. 539–591.
  , “Financial Systems in Northern Thai Villages,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1995, 110
  (4), 1011–1046.
Udry, Christopher, “Risk and Saving in Northern Nigeria,” The American Economic Review,
  1995, 85 (5), 1287–1300.
Washington, Ebonya, “The Impact of Banking and Fringe Banking Regulation on the Number
  of Unbanked Americans,” Journal of Human Resources, 2006, 41 (1), 106–137.
Wooldridge, Jeffrey, “Inverse Probability Weighted M-Estimators for Sample Selection, At-
  trition, and Stratification,” Portuguese Economic Journal, 2002, 1 (2), 117–139.
  , “Inverse Probability Weighted Estimation for General Missing Data Problems,” Journal of
  Econometrics, 2007, 141 (2), 1281–1301.
Zame, William, “Efficiency and the Role of Default when Security Markets are Incomplete,”
  American Economic Review, 1993, 83 (1), 1142–1164.
Zinman, Jonathan, “Household Borrowing Bigh and Lending Low Under No-Arbitrage,” Dart-
  mouth University, 2007.
Zizzo, Daniel, “Experimenter Demand Effects in Economic Experiments,” Experimental Eco-
  nomics, 2010, 12 (1), 75–98.
Zwane, Alix Peterson, Jonathan Zinman, Eric Van Dusen, William Pariente, Clair
  Null, Edward Miguel, Michael Kremer, Dean S. Karlan, Richard Hornbeck,
  Xavier Giné, Esther Duflo, Devoto Florencia, Bruno Crepon, and Abhijit Ba-
  narjee, “Being Surveyed Can Change Later Behavior and Related Parameter Estimates,”
  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 2011, 108 (5), 1821–1826.




                                             33
         Table 1: Baseline Summary Statistics and Balance of Randomization


                                               Full Sample                             Excluding Attritors
                                         (1)               (2)                     (3)                 (4)
                                      Control         Difference:               Control          Difference:
                                       means      treatment - control            means       treatment - control
Age                                     43.29             0.10                    43.44              0.12
                                       (11.61)           (0.44)                  (11.55)            (0.47)
Years of education                       9.81             -0.16                    9.76              -0.13
                                        (3.12)           (0.16)                   (3.08)            (0.16)
Household size                           4.27             0.06                     4.30              0.05
                                        (1.73)           (0.07)                   (1.69)            (0.07)
Per capita monthly                     79,955              564                   79,419               965
household income                      (64,495)          (2,492)                 (65,695)           (2,622)
                                      [66,000]          [1,500]                 [65,429]           [1,571]
Has prior savings account                0.32             0.01                     0.32              0.01
                                        (0.47)           (0.02)                   (0.47)            (0.02)
Prior formal savings amount            63,260             5,720                  60,408              2,984
                                     (241,301)          (8,541)                (225,865)           (8,335)
                                          [0]               [0]                     [0]                [0]
Short-term borrowing amount           165,957           -61,059                 171,272            -65,063
                                    (1,642,180)        (44,801)               (1,741,846)         (50,762)
                                          [0]               [0]                     [0]                [0]
Short-term borrowing amount            65,616            -3,613                  66,692             -4,699
(winsorized at 95%)                  (130,687)          (5,085)                (131,801)           (5,162)
Short-term borrowing                     0.91              0.03                    0.91               0.05
categories                              (1.13)           (0.05)                   (1.12)            (0.05)
Short-term lending amount             110,118            28,101                 114,074             30,936
                                     (621,082)         (27,169)                (660,584)          (31,464)
                                      [13,000]          [2,000]                 [15,000]               [0]
Short-term lending amount              68,763             6,256                  68,052              6,963
(winsorized at 95%)                  (113,236)          (4,451)                (111,995)           (4,732)
Short-term lending categories            1.07              0.06                    1.08               0.05
                                        (1.20)           (0.05)                   (1.19)            (0.05)
Need to cut back consumption             0.70              0.01                    0.70               0.01
                                        (0.46)           (0.02)                   (0.46)            (0.02)
Anxious about financial future           2.90              0.04                    2.91               0.04
                                        (0.97)           (0.04)                   (0.97)            (0.05)
Recent economic difficulty               5.03              0.14                    5.00               0.18
                                        (2.79)           (0.12)                   (2.78)            (0.13)
Number of individuals in                1,488             2,687                   1,304             2,279
control and treatment group


  Notes: Columns (1) and (3) show the control group mean for the full sample and the sample excluding the attritors
  respectively, with the standard deviation in parenthesis. Columns (2) and (4) show the coefficients of regressions
  of the pre-treatment variable in question on a treatment dummy, with robust standard errors, clustered at the
  group level, in parenthesis. Medians are displayed in brackets, and all financial figures are in Chilean pesos. 500
  Chilean pesos = about 1 USD. The variables “anxious about financial future” and “recent economic difficulty”
  range from 1 to 4 and 1 to 10 respectively. Level of significance: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.


                                                       34
           Table 2: Descriptive Statistics On Take-Up and Account Usage


Panel A: Take-Up Statistics
                                                                     Number of       Total    Percent of
                                                                     individuals    sample     sample
Opened account                                                          1,218        2,279       53%
Active user                                                              886         2,279        39%

Panel B: Account Usage Conditional on Being an Active User
                                                                        Mean        Median     Std. Dev.
Number of deposits                                                        4.4          2          5.4
Amount deposited                                                        66,898       9,000      215,523
Number of withdrawals                                                     1.0          0          1.8
Amount withdrawn                                                        46,664         0        148,549
Average end of month balance                                            18,456       5,000      77,672
Number of observations                                                   886          886         886


  Notes: This sample is restricted to participants who are included in the follow up survey. Active user is
  defined as a participant who used the account beyond the minimum opening deposit. All financial figures
  are in Chilean pesos. 500 Chilean pesos = about 1 USD.




                                              35
                  Table 3: Effects on Short-Term Borrowing

                                             Components of Short-Term Borrowing
                               (1)                  (2)         (3)              (4)
                             Total               Owed to     Owed to          Owed to
                           short-term           family and    service         business
                           borrowing              friends    providers     contacts and
                                                                            institutions
Panel A: Amounts (Winsorized at 95th Percentile)
Account x post       -12,931**       -6,480***                  428            -1,689
                      (5,867)         (2,465)                 (1,363)         (1,694)
Post                            226               2,523        -1,010         -2,655*
                              (5,006)            (2,279)      (1,141)         (1,401)
Constant                    61,112***           13,622***    12,056***      13,773***
                             (1,333)              (510)        (316)          (396)
Control group mean       64,357         17,053                 10,985         11,380
Panel B: Categories of Short-Term Borrowing
Account x post          -0.127**       -0.072**               -0.057**         0.001
                         (0.052)        (0.029)                (0.027)        (0.021)
Post                        -0.341***           -0.106***    -0.102***       -0.133***
                             (0.043)             (0.025)      (0.023)         (0.018)
Constant                     0.936***           0.304***     0.372***        0.261***
                              (0.012)            (0.007)      (0.006)         (0.005)
Control group mean             0.571              0.199        0.235           0.137
Individual fixed effects        Yes                Yes          Yes             Yes
Individuals                    3,572              3,572        3,572           3,572
Observations                   7,144              7,144        7,144           7,144

  Notes: For a description of the categories included in each component of short-term
  borrowing, see Section 2.3. Robust standard errors, clustered at the group level, re-
  ported in parenthesis. Level of significance: All financial figures are in Chilean pesos.
  500 Chilean pesos = about 1 USD. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                           36
                                  Table 4: Effects on Lending


                                       Full Sample                      Always or Frequently Regret
                              (1)       (2)        (3)                  (4)           (5)           (6)
                             Total   Lent to    Lent to                Total        Lent to       Lent to
                            lendingfamily and business                lending     family and      business
                                     friends   contacts                             friends       contacts
Panel A: Amounts (Winsorized at 95th Percentile)
Account x post              -3,154    -5,620      2,707               -11,852*    -11,783***       1,747
                           (5,671)   (3,491)    (2,524)                (6,495)      (4,093)       (3,006)
Post                      8,757**     -1,241     3,168*              13,309***       2,390         2,561
                           (4,368)   (2,778)    (1,844)                (5,062)      (3,235)       (2,341)
Constant                 74,896*** 35,739*** 30,910***               76,386***     37,841***     31,086***
                           (1,401)    (842)      (642)                 (1,595)       (992)         (736)
Control group mean         79,543    31,599      34,763                83,099       34,129        35,657
Panel B: Categories of Borrowers
Account x post              -0.078    -0.047     -0.031              -0.159***      -0.102**       -0.056*
                           (0.052)   (0.037)    (0.027)                (0.058)       (0.041)       (0.032)
Post                     -0.324*** -0.230*** -0.093***               -0.290***     -0.214***     -0.076***
                           (0.042)   (0.030)    (0.021)                (0.045)       (0.031)       (0.024)
Constant                  1.110***  0.564***   0.546***               1.145***      0.593***      0.552***
                           (0.012)   (0.009)    (0.007)                (0.014)       (0.010)       (0.008)
Control group mean          0.759     0.321       0.438                 0.804         0.344         0.460
Individual fixed effects      Yes       Yes        Yes                   Yes           Yes           Yes
Individuals                 3,566      3,566     3,566                  2,438         2,438         2,438
Observations                 7,132     7,132      7,132                 4,876         4,876         4,876

 Notes: Participants were asked if they regretted not having saved more in the preceding three months.
 Columns (4)-(6) contain the sample of participants who indicated that they ‘always’ or ‘frequently’ regretted
 not having saved more. Robust standard errors, clustered at the group level, reported in parenthesis. All
 financial figures are in Chilean pesos. 500 Chilean pesos = about 1 USD. Level of significance: *** p<0.01,
 ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.




                                                  37
                                   Table 5: Consumption Variation in the Face of Economic Shocks


                                                               Individual Treatment Effects                                               AES
                                  (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)        (5)         (6)             (7)         (8)               (9)
                                 Meals       Meat       Medicines    School    Clothing     School           Public      Eating        Consumption
                                                                    supplies                snacks         transport      out            variation
                                                                                                                                        (Cols 1-8)
     Account x post              -0.014    -0.083**       -0.019        -0.036      -0.057      -0.040*     -0.101**      -0.029        Coefficient:
                                (0.026)     (0.039)      (0.035)       (0.026)     (0.043)      (0.021)      (0.040)     (0.043)         -0.112**
     Post                        0.035     0.117***       -0.019     -0.052***    0.096***     0.033**      0.159***      0.044         Robust SE:
                                (0.022)     (0.031)      (0.029)      (0.019)      (0.035)     (0.016)       (0.033)     (0.036)          0.055
     Constant                  0.118***    0.440***     0.300***      0.215***    0.546***     0.093***     0.341***    0.426***          P-value:
                                (0.006)     (0.009)      (0.008)       (0.007)     (0.010)      (0.005)      (0.009)     (0.010)           0.042
     Individual                   Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes
38




     fixed effects
     Individuals                 1,435       1,435        1,435         1,435       1,435        1,435       1,435        1,435
     Observations                2,870       2,870        2,870         2,870       2,870        2,870       2,870        2,870
     R-squared                   0.005       0.015        0.004         0.027       0.011        0.003       0.030        0.002
     Control group mean          0.146       0.530        0.274         0.144       0.609        0.109       0.472        0.446
     in post period

      Notes: Participants were asked whether they had to cut back their consumption of the particular item due to economic difficulties in the preceding
      three months. The consumption item variable is a dummy that takes the value of 1 when the answer is yes. Robust standard errors, clustered at
      the group level, reported in parenthesis. Level of significance: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.
                       Table 6: Self-Reported Economic Well-Being


                                 Individual Treatment Effects             Average Effect Size (AES)
                               Anxiety about Recent economic                     Subjective
                              financial future     difficulty               economic well-being
Account x post                    -0.112*           -0.087*                      Coefficient:
                                  (0.059)           (0.051)                       -0.102**
Post                              -0.106**            0.154***                    Robust SE:
                                   (0.051)             (0.041)                      0.046
Constant                           0.000                0.000                       P-value:
                                  (0.013)              (0.012)                       0.027
Individual fixed effects            Yes                  Yes
Individuals                        3,519                3,515
Observations                       7,038                7,030
R-squared                          0.022                0.008


  Notes: Both “anxiety about financial future” and “recent economic difficulty” are expressed in standard
  deviations. Individuals are excluded in case of non-response to a particular question, which explains
  the differences in the number of observations. Robust standard errors, clustered at the group level,
  reported in parenthesis. Level of significance: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                 39
                                     Table 7: Take-up of the Account

                                        (1)                                                  (2)        (3)
     Panel A: Demographics                        Panel B: Other Characteristics
                                    Take-up                                               Take-up    Take-up
     Female                          0.079**      Head of household                        -0.032     -0.032
                                     (0.039)                                              (0.022)    (0.022)
     Age                            0.027***      Conflict with partner over money        0.052**    0.052**
                                     (0.005)                                              (0.024)    (0.024)
     Age squared                   -0.0002***     Socially taxed                          0.063**
                                    (0.0001)                                              (0.024)
     Years of education                0.005      Lent to family or friends                           0.047**
                                     (0.004)                                                          (0.024)
     Children at home                 -0.013      Owes to family or friends                            -0.030
                                     (0.009)                                                          (0.025)
     Log income                       0.005       Regret not saving more                   0.006       0.006
                                     (0.019)                                              (0.011)     (0.011)
40




     Has prior savings account       0.038*       Hyperbolic preferences                  0.052**     0.052**
                                     (0.022)                                              (0.025)     (0.025)
                                                  Fear savings stolen in the home          0.007       0.006
                                                                                          (0.034)     (0.034)
     Constant                        -0.473*      Constant                                -0.483*     -0.475*
                                     (0.281)                                              (0.280)     (0.282)
                                                  Demographics from panel A                 Yes         Yes
     Individuals                      2,149       Individuals                              2,052       2,052
     R-squared                        0.029       R-squared                                0.041       0.040
     Mean take-up                     0.389       Mean take-up                             0.393       0.393

       Notes: Linear probability regressions among individuals who were offered an account and were present
       in both surveys, regressing baseline characteristics on take-up. Take-up is defined as actively using the
       account beyond the minimum opening deposit. The regressions in Panel B include the demographic
       controls from Panel A. “Children at home” is the total number of individuals aged 18 years or younger
       living at home. The variable “socially taxed” is a dummy indicating that an individual has lent to family
       and friends and does not owe to family or friends. Individuals are excluded in case of non-response to a
       particular question, which explains the lower number of observations in Panel B. Robust standard errors,
       clustered at the group level, reported in parenthesis. Level of significance: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
       p<0.1.
           Table 8: Demand Effects

                  (1)                         (2)
             Difficulty of               Satisfaction
            survey process                with FE
Account          0.040                      -0.014
                (0.043)                    (0.052)
Constant       2.45***                     6.38***
                (0.033)                    (0.042)
Individuals      3,366                      3,573
R-squared        0.001                      0.000


  Notes: Participants were asked to rate how compli-
  cated they found the survey process (scale of 1 to 4)
  and how satisfied they were with Fondo Esperanza
  (scale of 1 to 7). Individuals are excluded in case of
  non-response to a particular question, which explains
  the differences in the number of observations. Robust
  standard errors, clustered at the group level, reported
  in parenthesis. Level of significance: *** p<0.01, **
  p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                          41
                                 Table 9: Differential Effects by Type of Account

                                                       (1)            (2)             (3)         (4)          (5)
                                                    Short-term     Short-term     Anxiety      Recent      Consumption
                                                    borrowing      borrowing        about     economic       cutback
                                                     amount        categories     financial   difficulty    categories
                                                                                    future
     Any account x post                               -9,774        -0.139**        -0.044      -0.095        -0.457**
                                                     (6,975)         (0.063)       (0.068)     (0.061)         (0.215)
     Additional peer group treatment x post           -5,831          0.022       -0.126**      0.015           0.146
                                                     (6,206)         (0.060)       (0.060)     (0.062)         (0.202)
     Constant                                       61,111***       0.936***         0.000      0.000         2.479***
                                                     (1,331)         (0.012)       (0.013)     (0.012)         (0.043)
42




     R-squared                                         0.005          0.111          0.023      0.008           0.011
     Individual fixed effects                           Yes            Yes            Yes        Yes             Yes
     Year dummy                                         Yes            Yes            Yes        Yes             Yes
     Individuals                                       3,572          3,572          3,519      3,515           1,435
     Observations                                      7,144          7,144          7,038      7,030           2,870

       Notes: Regressions for the key results from Tables 3, 6 and 5. The first row shows treatment effects for those with
       just the savings account, the second row shows the difference of the effects for those with the additional peer group
       support. The outcome variable in Column (5) is the total number of categories of spending a participant had to cut
       back on and the sample is the same as in Table 5. Individuals are excluded in case of non-response to a particular
       question, which explains the differences in the number of observations. Robust standard errors, clustered at the
       group level, in parenthesis. All financial figures are in Chilean pesos. 500 Chilean pesos = about 1 USD. Level of
       significance: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
A   Appendix

                  Table A1: Effects on Short-Term Borrowing:
               Non-Winsorized and Winsorized at the 99th Percentile

                                                 Components of Short-Term Borrowing
                                  (1)                (2)         (3)            (4)
                                Total             Owed to     Owed to        Owed to
                              short-term         family and    service       business
                              borrowing            friends    providers   contacts and
                                                                           institutions
    Panel A: Non-Winsorized Amounts
    Account x post          44,151                 -3,116      42,518          4,749
                           (50,172)               (13,479)    (37,894)       (13,417)
    Post                        -73,086            -6,108      -43,515      -23,463**
                               (49,067)           (12,450)    (37,665)       (11,133)
    Constant                 129,840***          37,943***    39,645***     52,251***
                               (9,504)            (2,794)      (6,960)       (3,123)
    Control group mean         98,299      43,358              21,271         33,670
    Panel B: Amounts Winsorized at 99th Percentile
    Account x post              -9,846    -12,129*               2,000        -2,494
                              (11,193)     (6,460)             (2,761)       (5,491)
    Post                        -9,982      7,387               -2,929       -8,689*
                               (9,529)     (6,019)             (2,280)       (4,620)
    Constant                 90,784***   25,185***            18,844***     33,087***
                               (2,547)     (1,323)               (646)       (1,263)
    Control group mean         89,375      36,665              16,733        25,673
    Individual fixed effects      Yes        Yes                  Yes           Yes
    Individuals                 3,572       3,572                3,572         3,572
    Observations                 7,144      7,144               7,144         7,144

     Notes: Robust standard errors, clustered at the group level, reported in parenthesis.
     For categories included in each component of short-term borrowing, see Section 2.3.
     All financial figures are in Chilean pesos. 500 Chilean pesos = about 1 USD. Level of
     significance: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                            43
                           Table A2: Effects on Lending:
                 Non-Winsorized and Winsorized at the 99th Percentile


                                       Full Sample                      Always or Frequently Regret
                              (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)            (5)          (6)
                             Total        Lent to       Lent to        Total         Lent to      Lent to
                            lending     family and      business      lending      family and     business
                                          friends       contacts                     friends      contacts
Panel A: Non-winsorized Amounts
Account x post             -16,744    -15,243    -1,501               -22,676        -35,512       12,836
                          (31,272)   (24,408)  (18,836)              (41,193)       (34,777)      (19,753)
Post                         -873       -846       -27                 8,332         13,644         -5,312
                          (17,532)   (10,922)  (13,120)              (25,177)       (14,807)      (19,051)
Constant                 133,705*** 73,474*** 60,231***             133,858***     81,480***     52,378***
                           (8,833)    (7,221)   (4,917)              (11,400)       (10,448)       (3,797)
Control group mean        115,477     56,401    59,076               129,630         66,675        62,954
Panel B: Amounts Winsorized at 99th Percentile
Account x post                -58      -4,203     4,080               -18,804*     -15,774**       1,195
                           (9,766)    (6,497)   (4,521)               (11,123)      (7,988)       (5,108)
Post                       10,675      -1,423  8,421**               23,458***       8,472        7,624*
                           (7,707)    (5,075)   (3,362)                (8,775)      (6,255)       (3,890)
Constant                 96,449***  52,107*** 39,331***              97,055***     54,242***     39,380***
                           (2,371)    (1,587)   (1,139)                (2,704)      (1,949)       (1,271)
Control group mean        101,133     45,143    48,396                108,888        51,071       49,157
Individual fixed effects     Yes         Yes       Yes                   Yes           Yes          Yes
Individuals                 3,566       3,566    3,566                  2,438        2,438         2,438
Observations                7,132       7,132     7,132                 4,876         4,876        4,876

 Notes: Participants were asked if they regretted not having saved more in the preceding three months.
 Columns (4)-(6) contain the sample of participants who indicated that they ‘always’ or ‘frequently’ regretted
 not having saved more. Robust standard errors, clustered at the group level, reported in parenthesis. All
 financial figures are in Chilean pesos. 500 Chilean pesos = about 1 USD. Level of significance: *** p<0.01,
 ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.




                                                 44
                                           Table A3: Consumption Variation (Entire Sample)


                                                               Individual Treatment Effects                                               AES
                                  (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)        (5)         (6)             (7)         (8)               (9)
                                 Meals       Meat       Medicines    School    Clothing     School           Public      Eating        Consumption
                                                                    supplies                snacks         transport      out            variation
                                                                                                                                       (Cols 1 – 8)
     Account x post              -0.013     -0.047*       -0.024        -0.008      0.006        -0.004     -0.050*       -0.021        Coefficient:
                                (0.016)     (0.027)      (0.022)       (0.018)     (0.032)      (0.013)     (0.028)      (0.030)          -0.046
     Post                        0.005       0.022      -0.039**     -0.092***      -0.029       -0.008     0.061**       -0.022        Robust SE:
                                (0.013)     (0.022)      (0.018)      (0.014)      (0.027)      (0.010)     (0.023)      (0.026)          0.038
     Constant                  0.107***    0.408***     0.263***      0.202***    0.513***     0.085***     0.317***    0.416***          P-value:
                                (0.004)     (0.006)      (0.005)       (0.004)     (0.007)      (0.003)      (0.007)     (0.007)           0.229
     Individual                   Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes
45




     fixed effects
     Individuals                 3,583       3,583        3,583         3,583       3,583        3,583       3,583        3,583
     Observations                7,166       7,166        7,166         7,166       7,166        7,166       7,166        7,166
     R-squared                   0.001       0.002        0.011         0.043       0.002        0.001       0.004        0.003
     Control group mean          0.109       0.409        0.212         0.107       0.482        0.072       0.365        0.380
     in post period

      Notes: Participants were asked whether they had to cut back their consumption of the particular item due to economic difficulties in the preceding
      three months. The consumption item variable is a dummy that takes the value of 1 when the answer is yes. Robust standard errors, clustered at
      the group level, reported in parenthesis. Level of significance: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.
     Generalized Ordered Probit


                                  Table A4: Anxiety about the Financial Future

                                                           (1)              (2)             (3)
                                                       Anxiety > 1      Anxiety > 2     Anxiety > 3

                       Account x post                      -0.067           -0.093         -0.177**
                                                          (0.106)          (0.077)          (0.080)
                       Account                             0.040            -0.007            0.084
                                                          (0.068)          (0.062)          (0.057)
                       Post                                0.062         -0.224***           -0.100
                                                          (0.088)          (0.067)          (0.064)
                       Constant                          1.191***         0.576***        -0.496***
                                                          (0.053)          (0.052)           0.044
46




                       Observations                         7,038            7,038            7,038

                         Notes: The dependent variable in each Column is “anxiety about financial
                         future” taking a value of 0 or 1, depending on the threshold in question. In
                         Column (1), “anxiety” takes a value of 1 if anxiety is rated above ‘1’ and zero
                         otherwise. In Column (2), “anxiety” takes a value of 1 if it is rated above
                         ‘2’ and zero otherwise, etc. Robust standard errors, clustered at the group
                         level, reported in parenthesis. Level of significance: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
                         p<0.1.
                         Table A5: Recent Economic Difficulty

                                 (1)              (2)               (3)               (4)
                            Economic          Economic         Economic          Economic
                          difficulty > 2    difficulty > 4   difficulty > 6    difficulty > 8
     Account x post            -0.079          -0.150**           -0.077            -0.052
                              (0.078)           (0.069)          (0.071)           (0.077)
     Account                   0.077             0.088             0.074             0.072
                              (0.058)           (0.056)          (0.057)           (0.062)
     Post                    0.358***          0.262***            0.082            -0.015
                              (0.061)           (0.053)          (0.060)           (0.058)
     Constant                0.752***          0.218***        -0.578***         -1.121***
                              (0.046)           (0.044)           0.046            (0.049)
     Observations               7,030            7,030            7,030              7,030
47




       Notes: The dependent variable “recent economic difficulty” ranges from 1 to 10. For
       this regression it has been aggregated into bins of two. In Column (1), “past economic
       difficulty” takes a value of 1 if past economic difficulty is rated above ‘2’ and zero
       otherwise. In Column (2), “past economic difficulty” takes a value of 1 if it is rated
       above ‘4’ and zero otherwise, etc. Robust standard errors, clustered at the group level,
       reported in parenthesis. Level of significance: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
Attrition
                                   Table A6: Balance of Attrition


                                          (1)             (2)                    (3)                      (4)
                                       Control        Difference:            Non-attritors           Difference:
                                       means      treatment - control          means          attritors - non-attritors
 Attrition                               0.12           0.03**
                                        (0.33)          (0.01)
 Age                                                                              43.52                 -1.18**
                                                                                 (11.58)                 (0.50)
 Years of education                                                                9.68                    0.21
                                                                                  (3.08)                 (0.14)
 Household size                                                                    4.33                 -0.16**
                                                                                  (1.73)                 (0.08)
 Per capita monthly household                                                    80,034                   2,025
 income                                                                         (62,091)                (2,492)
 Has prior savings account                                                         0.33                   -0.00
                                                                                  (0.47)                 (0.02)
 Prior formal savings amount                                                     62,306                32,687*
                                                                               (232,150)               (18,416)
 Short-term borrowing amount                                                    129,852                 -22,767
                                                                              (1,111,991)              (25,813)
 Short-term borrowing amount                                                     63,701                  -2,910
 winsorized at 95%                                                             (129,018)                (5,862)
 Short-term borrowing categories                                                   0.94                   -0.06
                                                                                  (1.16)                 (0.05)
 Short-term lending amount                                                      133,747               -39,117**
                                                                              (1,047,081)              (19,440)
 Short-term lending amount                                                       72,480                   2,170
 winsorized at 95%                                                             (120,306)                (5,296)
 Short-term lending categories                                                     1.11                   -0.01
                                                                                  (1.22)                 (0.05)
 Need to cut back consumption                                                      0.71                   -0.02
                                                                                  (0.45)                 (0.02)
 Anxious about financial future                                                    2.93                   -0.05
                                                                                  (0.97)                 (0.05)
 Recent economic difficulty                                                        5.12                    0.02
                                                                                  (2.77)                 (0.12)
 Individuals                            1,488              2,687                  3,583                    592


   Notes: Columns (1) and (2) show the regression of attrition on the treatment dummy and a constant term for the full
   sample. Columns (3) and (4) show the coefficients from the regressions of the pre-treatment variable in question on
   the attrition dummy and a constant term. Columns (1) and (3) report standard deviation in the parenthesis, whereas
   Columns (2) and (4) report standard errors from the respective regression in parenthesis. The variables “anxious about
   financial future” and “recent economic difficulty” range from 1 to 4 and 1 to 10 respectively. All financial figures in
   Chilean pesos. 500 Chilean pesos = about 1 USD. Level of significance: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                      48
                                  Table A7: Lee Bounds

                                         (1)            (2)             (3)         (4)
                                      Short-term     Short-term     Anxiety      Recent
                                      borrowing      borrowing        about     economic
                                       amount        categories     financial   difficulty
                                                                      future
     Point estimate                    -12,931**       0.127**       -0.112*     -0.087*
     Lower bound                        [-13,839,      [ -0.138,     [-0.170,    [-0.123,
     Upper bound                         -3,140 ]       -0.076]      -0.080]     -0.056]
     Individuals after trimming           3,572          3,572         3,478      3,475
     Observations after trimming          7,144          7,144         6,956       6,950

       Notes: Lee bounds for the main results from Tables 3 and 6, calculated using the
49




       methodology discussed in Section 3.3. Rows 2 and 3 show the Lee bounds. The
       bounds cannot be calculated for the improvements in consumption smoothing in case
       of economic shocks (Table 5), since by construction, we do not know, which attritors
       had shocks. The first row shows the point estimates from the original regression. All
       financial figures are in Chilean pesos. 500 Chilean pesos = about 1 USD. Level of
       significance: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
                        Table A8: Inverse Probability Weighting

                            (1)             (2)           (3)         (4)          (5)
                           Total           Total      Anxiety      Recent      Consumption
                        short-term     short-term       about     economic       cutback
                        borrowing      borrowing      financial   difficulty    categories
                          amount       categories       future
     Account x post      -13,930**       -0.127**      -0.117*     -0.096*        -0.396**
                          (5,847)         (0.051)      (0.060)     (0.051)         (0.188)
     Post                   576         -0.334***      -0.097*    0.157***        0.417***
                          (4,977)         (0.042)      (0.051)     (0.041)         (0.157)
     Constant           60,939***       0.927***        -0.008      0.002         2.483***
                          (1,339)         (0.012)      (0.013)     (0.012)         (0.043)
     Individual
     fixed effects          Yes            Yes          Yes          Yes             Yes
     R-squared             0.006          0.109        0.021        0.008           0.011
50




     Individuals           3,572          3,572        3,519        3,515           1,435
     Observations          7,144          7,144        7,038        7,030           2,870

       Notes: Regressions for the key results from Tables 3, 6 and 5, weighted using the inverse
       probability weights described in Section 3.3. The outcome variable in Column (5) is the
       total number of categories of spending a participant had to cut back on and the sample
       is the same as in Table 5. All financial figures are in Chilean pesos. 500 Chilean pesos
       = about 1 USD. Robust standard errors, clustered at the group level, in parentheses.
       Level of significance: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.
