NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ESCAPING THE GREAT RECESSION
Francesco Bianchi
Leonardo Melosi
Working Paper 20238
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20238

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2014

We are grateful to Gadi Barlevy, Dario Caldara, Jeff Campbell, Gauti Eggertsson, Marty
Eichenbaum, Martin Ellison, Jesus Fernandez-Villaverde, Jonas Fisher, Alejandro Justiniano,
Christian Matthes, Maurice Obstfeld, Giorgio Primiceri, Ricardo Reis, David Romer, Chris Sims,
Martin Uribe, Mike Woodford, and seminar participants at the NBER Monetary Economics
group, Princeton University, University of Chicago, Stanford University, Northwestern
University, and numerous other institutions for useful comments and suggestions. The views in
this paper are solely the responsibility of the authors and should not be interpreted as reflecting
the views of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, any other person associated with the Federal
Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2014 by Francesco Bianchi and Leonardo Melosi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Escaping the Great Recession
Francesco Bianchi and Leonardo Melosi
NBER Working Paper No. 20238
June 2014, Revised January 2017
JEL No. D83,E31,E52,E62,E63
ABSTRACT
We show that policy uncertainty about how the rising public debt will be stabilized accounts for
the lack of deflation in the US economy at the zero lower bound. We first estimate a Markovswitching VAR to highlight that a zero-lower-bound regime captures most of the comovements
during the Great Recession: a deep recession, no deflation, and large fiscal imbalances. We then
show that a micro-founded model that features policy uncertainty accounts for these stylized
facts. Finally, we highlight that policy uncertainty arises at the zero lower bound because of a
trade-off between mitigating the recession and preserving long-run macroeconomic stability.

Francesco Bianchi
Social Sciences Building, 201B
Department of Economics
Duke University
Box 90097
Durham, NC 27708-0097
and CEPR
and also NBER
francesco.bianchi@duke.edu
Leonardo Melosi
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago
230 S. LaSalle street
Chicago, IL 60604
lmelosi@frbchi.org

1

Introduction

The recent …nancial crisis and the deep recession that followed have led to a substantial change in the conduct of monetary policy, with interest rates stuck at
the zero lower bound for the past eight years. A key prediction of the New Keynesian paradigm is that, in this situation, we should have observed de‡ation.
However, this prediction has not materialized. Following Hall’s Presidential
Address to the American Economic Association, some researchers have labeled
this observation “Hall’s puzzle”(Hall 2011). Simultaneously, the crisis has triggered a vibrant debate about the best way to deal with the zero lower bound.
Two polar views have emerged. The …rst one advocates a robust …scal stimulus
sometimes even accompanied by a reduced emphasis on in‡ation stabilization
(Romer 2009, Sims 2010a). The second one strongly opposes the idea of abandoning policies that worked in the past (Plosser 2012). This debate has occurred
against a background of acute …scal strain. In 2009, the US de…cit-to-GDP ratio
was the highest since the Korean war. Furthermore, by 2012 the debt-to-GDP
ratio had reached levels unprecedented since the end of World War II and, based
on the Congressional Budget O¢ ce projections, is expected to continue increasing for the foreseeable future (CBO 2016). It is conceivable that this debate
and the severe …scal imbalance have led to a rise in uncertainty about how debt
will be stabilized. In this paper, we show that policy uncertainty can account
for the absence of de‡ation that characterized the Great Recession.
We …rst establish a series of stylized facts by …tting a Markov-switching
VAR to post-World War II data. We include in‡ation, GDP growth, the federal
funds rate, and the de…cit-to-debt ratio. The model identi…es three distinct
regimes. The movements between the …rst two regimes capture a low frequency
relation between the de…cit-to-debt ratio and in‡ation. During the 1960s and
1970s, when Regime 1 is in place, real interest rates are low, the de…cit-to-debt
ratio trends up, and so does in‡ation. These dynamics revert once the economy
moves to Regime 2 in the early 1980s: Real interest rates increase, in‡ation
falls, and so does the de…cit-to-debt ratio. Instead, the third regime captures
the bulk of the dynamics during the Great Recession: a large contraction in
real activity, a short lasting drop in in‡ation, a jump in primary de…cits, and
1

the zero lower bound. During this zero-lower-bound regime, …scal shocks have
large e¤ects on in‡ation, providing evidence that …scal imbalances play a role
in explaining in‡ation dynamics during the Great Recession.
These …ndings suggest that the following are desirable properties of a structural model whose objective is to study the Great Recession. First, the model
should feature three policy regimes in line with the VAR evidence. Second,
the model should ideally capture the large in‡ationary consequences of …scal
imbalances during the zero-lower-bound regime. At the same time, this zerolower-bound regime should also be inherently di¤erent from any other regime
to the extent that a policy change is triggered by a large contractionary shock.
Third, a successful model should be able to capture the core of the macroeconomic comovements during the Great Recession as the result of this single large
initial shock and the associated change in policymakers’behavior.
We construct and estimate a dynamic general equilibrium model that re‡ects these …ndings and captures a key policy trade-o¤ that arises at the zero
lower bound: choosing between mitigating a large recession and preserving a
reputation for …scal discipline. In the model, when the zero lower bound is
not binding, policymakers’behavior is characterized by two very distinct policy combinations. Under the monetary-led policy mix, the central bank reacts
strongly to deviations of in‡ation from its target, whereas the …scal authority
passively accommodates the behavior of the monetary authority by adjusting
primary surpluses to keep debt on a stable path. If agents expect this regime
to prevail for a long time, any …scal imbalance is backed by future …scal adjustments and the economy is largely insulated with respect to these disturbances.
Under the …scally-led policy mix, the …scal authority does not react strongly
enough to debt ‡uctuations. It is now the monetary authority that passively
accommodates the behavior of the …scal authority by allowing in‡ation and real
activity to move so as to stabilize debt.1 Finally, the economy is occasionally
hit by a large demand shock that forces policymakers into a zero-lower-bound
regime in which the central bank sets the interest rate to zero and the …scal
1

In the language of Leeper (1991) the monetary-led regime corresponds to active monetary
policy and passive …scal policy, whereas the …scally-led regime is associated with passive
monetary policy and active …scal policy.

2

authority temporarily disregards the level of debt.
Agents’beliefs about policymakers’behavior once the economy is out of the
zero lower bound play a key role in determining macroeconomic outcomes at
the zero lower bound. We model this idea by introducing a parameter that
controls agents’beliefs about policymakers’exit strategy. We …nd that during
the recent crisis the probability assigned to a switch to the …scally-led regime
experienced a noticeable increase, even if agents still regard a return to the
monetary-led regime as more likely (around 92%). While the estimated probability of a switch to the …scally-led regime remains relatively low, the in‡ationary
pressure deriving from the large stock of debt is enough to prevent the economy from experiencing de‡ation. Thus, uncertainty about the future monetary
and …scal policy mix can account for the lack of de‡ation. To show this, we
run a counterfactual simulation in which policy uncertainty is removed. As in
the standard New Keynesian model, this counterfactual model predicts a large
de‡ation.
The last part of the paper is devoted to highlighting a policy trade-o¤ that
arises at the zero lower bound. To this end, we study the consequences of fully
credible announcements about policymakers’future behavior in the aftermath
of the large demand shock. If policymakers announce the monetary-led regime,
in‡ation expectations drop, leading to de‡ation and a severe recession. If instead policymakers announce that they will move to the …scally-led policy mix,
in‡ation immediately increases because agents expect that debt will be in‡ated
away. This, in turn, leads to a drop in the real interest rate that lifts the economy out of the recession. However, such an announcement would also increase
macroeconomic volatility once the economy is out of the recession. This happens because under this regime the macroeconomy is not insulated anymore
with respect to …scal disturbances. Thus, a policy trade-o¤ between mitigating
the recession and preserving long-run macroeconomic stability arises at the zero
lower bound. As views of the relative importance of the two goals di¤er, so do
the policy prescriptions, with the result that policy uncertainty is likely to arise
at the zero lower bound.
Other papers have addressed the Hall’s puzzle (King and Watson 2012; Del

3

Negro et al. 2015) and have proposed resolutions (Christiano et al. 2015 and
Coibion and Gorodnichenko 2015). The novelty of this paper is to show that
policy uncertainty about the way debt will be stabilized can account for the
lack of de‡ation during the Great Recession. This mechanism also allows us
to explain why in‡ation expectations rose between 2009 and 2011. Accounting
for policy uncertainty is important in light of a growing literature that argues
that there were in fact changes in policymakers’behavior over the past 60 years
(Clarida et al. 2000; Lubik and Schorfheide 2004; and Bianchi 2013). Baker
et al. (2016) construct a comprehensive index of policy uncertainty. FernandezVillaverde, Guerron-Quintana, et al. (2015) study the role of …scal volatility in
slowing down the recovery during the current crisis. However, …scal volatility
shocks do not provide an explanation for the absence of de‡ation observed in
the data, whereas the uncertainty about future policy rules considered in this
paper does.
Our work is related to the vast literature on the zero lower bound.2 Our
work di¤ers from previous contributions in one or more of the following dimensions. First, we conduct a structural estimation of a general equilibrium model
and investigate the e¤ects of policy uncertainty at the zero lower bound. In
this respect, the paper is related to the literature on the macroeconomic e¤ects
of uncertainty (Bloom 2009, Gilchrist et al. 2014, Fernandez-Villaverde et al.
2011, Basu and Bundick 2012). Second, we work in a stochastic environment
with a standard New Keynesian model augmented with a …scal block. This
makes our framework suitable for a quantitative assessment of the di¤erent exit
strategies. Third, zero-lower-bound episodes are recurrent and agents take this
into account when forming expectations. In contrast, the literature generally
considers situations in which the economy is currently at the zero lower bound
and it will never be there again. Moreover, our paper proposes an alternative way for modeling recurrent zero-lower-bound events in dynamic stochastic
general equilibrium (DSGE).
Finally, our work is related to the study of the interaction between …scal and
2

See Benhabib et al. (2001, 2002), Mertens and Ravn (2014), Fernandez-Villaverde, Gordon, et al. (2015), Fernandez-Villaverde et al. (2014), Coibion et al. (2012), Werning (2012),
Correia et al. (2013), Gust et al. (2013), Aruoba et al. (2016).

4

monetary policies in determining in‡ation dynamics (Sargent and Wallace 1981;
Leeper 1991; Sims 1994; Woodford 1994, 1995, 2001; Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe
2000; Cochrane 1998, 2001; Reis 2016). In this respect this paper is related to
Bianchi and Ilut (2015) and Bianchi and Melosi (2013), but di¤ers from these
two papers across several dimensions. First, we here allow for the zero lower
bound and show that policy uncertainty can account for the absence of de‡ation
during the Great Recession. Second, we outline that at the zero lower bound
a policy trade-o¤ between mitigating a large recession and preserving long-run
macroeconomic stability emerges. Finally, we use a Markov-switching VAR to
establish a series of stylized facts about the zero lower bound and the 60 years
of data that preceded it.
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the stylized facts based
on the Markov-switching VAR. These results are used to motivate the benchmark model presented in Section 3. Section 4 shows that policy uncertainty can
account for the lack of de‡ation. Section 5 compares the benchmark model to
a nested model in which policy uncertainty is removed. Section 6 outlines the
policy trade-o¤ that arises at the zero lower bound. Section 7 concludes.

2

Motivating Evidence

We introduce a Markov-switching VAR (MS-VAR) to motivate the key mechanism studied in this paper; that is, the growing US …scal imbalances can account
for why in‡ation did not persistently drop during the Great Recession. With
respect to the seminal contribution by Sims and Zha (2006), our MS-VAR includes a measure of the US …scal stance. This reduced-form analysis will also be
valuable for designing a structural model to study the last eight years of data.
Estimating Bayesian VAR models with Markov-switching parameters proves
to become quickly computationally challenging as the number of observables and
lags grows. We therefore opt for a parsimonious speci…cation with two lags,
four observables, and quarterly data. This is in line with the literature that
allows for smoothly time-varying parameters in VARs (Primiceri 2005, Cogley
and Sargent 2006). We include GDP growth, in‡ation, and the federal funds

5

VAR coefficients

1

0.5
Regime 1
Regime 2
Regime 3

0
1960

1965

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

1995

2000

2005

2010

Covariance matrix

1

0.5
Regime 1
Regime 2
Regime 3

0
1960

1965

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

Figure 1: Smoothed Probabilities of Regimes of MS-VAR. The top panel reports
the probabilities for the three regimes characterizing the VAR coe¢ cients, whereas the lower
panel reports the probabilities for the three regimes of the covariance matrix.

rate (FFR) to capture the behavior of the macroeconomy. We then add the
ratio of primary de…cit-to-debt as a parsimonious observable that captures the
…scal stance of the US government over time. In order for debt to be …scally
sustainable, this ratio needs to be negative on average, as the …scal authority
needs to run primary surpluses.3 We allow for three Markov-switching regimes
for the constants and the autoregressive parameters and three Markov-switching
regimes for the volatility of the innovations:
1=2

Zt = c t + A t ;1 Zt 1 + A t ;2 Zt 2 +
!t
t
i
h
= c t ; A t ;1 ; A t ;2 ; ! t N (0; I)
t

(1)
(2)

where Zt is an (n 1) vector of data. The unobserved states t and t control the
regimes in place for the VAR coe¢ cients and the covariance matrix, respectively.
The regimes evolve according to two transition matrices, H and H : Since we
want to keep this analysis as agnostic as possible, we do not impose any exante restrictions on the property of these regimes. Therefore, we estimate the
MS-VAR model by using Bayesian techniques with ‡at priors.
3

Other VAR studies have used this ratio as an observable. See Sims (2010b) and Kliem
et al. (2016). Appendix A contains details about the model, the dataset, and the estimation.

6

De…cit/Debt
GDP Growth
In‡ation
Interest Rate
Real Interest Rate

Conditional Steady States
Regime 1
Regime 2
Median 16% 84%
Median
16%
2:99
1:44 6:21
3:63
8:72
3:45
1:91 4:25
3:00
2:69
5:11
3:45 8:61
2:48
2:06
6:15
4:87 8:89
4:68
3:53
1:07
0:23 1:48
2:21
1:27

84%
0:49
3:28
2:81
5:83
3:21

Table 1: Conditional steady states implied by the MS-VAR. For each draw of the VAR
coe¢ cients we compute the implied conditional steady states. These represent the values to
which the observable converge once a regime is in place for a prolonged period of time.

Figure 1 reports the smoothed probabilities at the posterior mode for the
three regimes controlling the VAR coe¢ cients and the three regimes of the
covariance matrix. As far as the covariance matrix, Appendix A shows that the
three regimes imply increasing levels of volatility. Regime 2 can be thought of
as a regime associated with recessions and the turbulent periods of the 1970s
until the beginning of the Great Moderation, which is instead dominated by the
low volatility Regime 1. The volatility Regime 3 captures exceptional events,
like the acceleration of the Great Recession in 2008Q3. However, we are mostly
interested in the dynamics captured by the regimes for the VAR coe¢ cients.
Regime 1 dominates the 1960s and the 1970s. The switch from Regime 1 to
Regime 2 occurs in 1981Q2. In order to understand what distinguishes these two
regimes, Table 1 reports their conditional steady states. These are the values
to which the variables converge if a regime is in place for a prolonged period
of time. Regime 1 is characterized by primary de…cits, as opposed to primary
surpluses under Regime 2, higher in‡ation, and a lower real interest rate.
In order to understand the role of regime changes in capturing the properties
of the data, Figure 2 presents a simulation in which all Gaussian shocks are set
to zero and only regime changes occur. The light gray area and the dark gray
area correspond to the periods during which Regime 1 and Regime 3 were in
place, respectively. The early switch from Regime 2 to Regime 1 captures the
low frequency increase in in‡ation that occurred starting in the late 1960s and
that lasted until the Volcker disin‡ation of the early 1980s. This low frequency
increase in in‡ation is associated with a similar low frequency movement in the

7

Figure 2: E¤ects of regime changes. The …gure presents a simulation in which all
Gaussian shocks are set to zero and only regime changes occur. The light gray area and the
dark gray area correspond to the periods during which Regime 1 and Regime 3 were in place,
respectively. The dashed line corresponds to the data, whereas the dotted line corresponds
to the conditional steady states for Regime 1 and Regime 2.

de…cit-to-debt ratio that stabilizes around a positive value. The increase in the
federal funds rate is visibly smaller than the increase in in‡ation. This is in line
with the drop in the conditional steady state of the real interest rate presented
in Table 1. As will become clear when considering the structural model, these
stylized facts can be rationalized in light of a change in the monetary-…scal
policy mix from …scally-led to monetary-led. Under Regime 1, higher de…cits
lead to higher average in‡ation. Real interest rates remain low because the
monetary authority does not react aggressively to in‡ation. We refer to Regime
1 as the …scally-led regime and Regime 2 as the monetary-led regime.4
Regime 3 dominates the last part of the sample starting in 2008Q3. This
quarter marks the acceleration of the …nancial crisis and the worst period of the
Great Recession. The large contraction in real activity prompted policymakers
to take extraordinary actions on both the monetary and the …scal sides. The
4
This interpretation of the data is consistent with Bianchi and Ilut (2015), who …nd a
similar sequence of regime changes for the pre-crisis period when estimating a microfounded
model. They identify a switch from a …scally-led regime, which characterized the 1960s and
1970s, to a monetary-led regime exactly in 1981:Q2, after the appointment of Volcker as Fed
Chairman and Reagan’s election as President of the United States.

8

…scal authority swiftly introduced massive measures of …scal stimulus that raised
the de…cit-to-debt ratio by 11 percentage points within the next three quarters.
The Federal Reserve cut the FFR aggressively to reach the zero lower bound.
Consequently, we label Regime 3 the zero-lower-bound regime. At the end of
the sample, we observe an increase in the probability of Regime 2, which we
interpret as the monetary-led regime. However, Regime 3 is still the most likely
regime. Furthermore, this result is in part driven by end-of-sample uncertainty.
Our MS-VAR model explains the key macroeconomic dynamics during the
Great Recession and the ensuing slow recovery as a result of the shock that
pushed the economy from the monetary-led regime to the zero-lower-bound
regime in 2008:Q3. To highlight this point, Figure 3 extends the previous analysis by focusing on the e¤ects of entering the zero-lower-bound regime in 2008:Q3.
All Gaussian shocks are still shut down in this simulation and the starting point
is 2008:Q3. The 70% posterior bands (gray areas) for the e¤ects of this discrete
shock capture remarkably well the dynamics of the data (solid line). This result
suggests that the dynamics of the macroeconomy during the Great Recession
can in principle be explained by only one adverse discrete shock. This shock
lowered both output growth and in‡ation for a few quarters while it triggered
radical and persistent changes in the conduct of …scal and monetary policies.
The switch to the zero-lower-bound regime seems to capture all of these stylized
facts.
Of particular interest is the quick deterioration of the …scal position as the
Great Recession started. A crucial question for this paper is whether these
…scal imbalances had noticeable e¤ects on price dynamics during the zero-lowerbound period. The following exercise serves the purpose of providing evidence
of the key mechanism studied in this paper and hence motivates our ensuing
structural analysis. We compute the response of in‡ation to …scal shocks in the
estimated MS-VAR so as to assess the in‡ationary consequences (if any) of the
quickly deteriorating …scal position during the Great Recession. We identify
…scal shocks as those shocks that raise the de…cit-to-debt ratio upon impact
while stimulating the economy for at least 5 quarters.5 The positive comovement
5
We restrict the de…cit-to-debt ratio to respond positively only upon impact to accommodate the fact that primary de…cits tend to be countercyclical and that …scal rules, whose

9

Figure 3: Entering the zero-lower-bound regime. The blue solid line reports the actual
data. The black dashed line denotes the posterior median of the variables simulated from
the MS-VAR by using only the dynamics implied by the VAR coe¢ cients under Regime 3
starting in 2008:Q3. We initialize the simulations by using the actual value of the observables
in 2008Q2. The gray areas capture the 70% posterior set of the simulated variables.

between de…cit dynamics and GDP growth is the salient identifying feature of
…scal shocks. Non-…scal shocks that a¤ect economic activity, such as technology
shocks, should arguably lead to a negative comovement between de…cit and GDP
growth, given that tax revenues go down during recession, while transfers tend
to increase.
The results are reported in Figure 4, which shows three snapshots of the
macroeconomic e¤ects of …scal shocks before, at, and after the onset of the Great
Recession. These …ndings suggest that the in‡ationary e¤ects of a growing …scal
imbalance due to the Great Recession may have been fairly sizable. The plots
report a …scal shock that raises the de…cit-to-debt ratio by slightly more than
one percentage point in 2008:Q3. In the data this ratio went up by more than
four percentage points in 2008:Q3 and 11.20 percentage points from 2008:Q3
through 2009:Q2 (peak). Consequently, it is conceivable that the deterioration
objectives are to stabilize the business cycles, feature feedbacks to the real economy. Also, a
higher de…cit today will imply a higher stock of debt tomorrow, making the impact of …scal
shocks on this observable variable ambiguous ex-ante. As is standard in the structural VAR
literature, this identi…cation scheme is consistent with our DSGE model.

10

Figure 4: Fiscal shocks before and at the zero lower bound. The solid line denotes
the posterior median of the response of the observable variables to a one-standard-deviation
…scal shock that raises the de…cit-to-debt ratio upon impact and GDP growth within the next
…ve quarters. Gray areas denote the 70% posterior set for the responses.

in the government’s …scal position observed in the data contributed to raising
in‡ation quite substantially in the …rst quarters of the Great Recession.
Another interesting …nding is that …scal imbalances started to have in‡ationary consequences only in 2008:Q3, that is, when the zero-lower-bound regime
arises. Before that period, the in‡ationary implications of …scal imbalances are
found to be statistically not signi…cant (see upper panel in Figure 4). Before
the Great Recession, the Federal Reserve was used to raising the rate relatively
aggressively in response to …scal shocks and in doing so kept a …rm control over
price dynamics. Furthermore, when the zero lower bound becomes binding in
post-2008:Q3, the impact of …scal imbalances on in‡ation was reduced as the
Federal Reserve could not lower the rate further as it did in 2008:Q3.
The …ndings presented in this section suggest that the following are desirable properties for a structural model whose objective is to study the Great
Recession. First, a successful model should be able to explain the dynamics
of macro aggregates during the Great Recession as the result of a single large
initial shock. Second, the model should feature three policy regimes as the VAR
clearly identi…es a switch to a third regime once the Great Recession began and
two distinct periods before that. Third, the model should ideally capture the
11

large in‡ationary consequences of …scal imbalances during the zero-lower-bound
regime. This third regime should be characterized by extremely low variability
in the policy rate and hence must be di¤erent from the regimes that were in
place before the crisis. Even if this third regime should feature an important
role for …scal imbalances, it should be associated with the realization of a large
negative demand shock, unlike the …scally-led regime that arose in the 1960s and
1970s. In the next section, we build a model in line with these key properties.

3

A Model with Policy Uncertainty

In this section we introduce the model that we will …t to US data in order
to quantify the importance of policy uncertainty. The model is obtained by
augmenting the prototypical New Keynesian model with a …scal block and a
discrete shock that can push the economy to the zero lower bound (ZLB).

3.1

A New Keynesian model

Households. The representative household maximizes expected utility:
E0

P1

s=0

t

exp

d
t

log Ct

CtA 1

ht

(3)

subject to the budget constraint:
Pt Ct + Ptm Btm + Pts Bts = Pt Wt ht + Bts

1

+ (1 + Ptm ) Btm 1 + Pt Dt

Tt + T R t

where Dt stands for real dividends paid by the …rms, Ct is consumption, ht
is hours, Wt is the real wage, Tt is taxes, T Rt stands for transfers, and CtA
represents the average level of consumption in the economy. The parameter
captures the degree of external habit. Following Woodford (2001), we assume
that there are two types of government bonds: one-period government debt, Bts ,
in zero net supply with price Pts and a more general portfolio of government
debt, Btm , in non-zero net supply with price Ptm . The former debt instrument
satis…es Pts = Rt 1 . The latter debt instrument has payment structure T (t+1)

12

for T > t and 0 < < 1. The asset can be interpreted as a portfolio of in…nitely
many bonds with average maturity controlled by the parameter . The value of
m j
m
such an instrument issued in period t in any future period t+j is Pt+j
= j Pt+j
.
The preference shock d is the sum of a continuous and discrete component:
d = dt + d dt : The continuous component dt follows an AR(1) process: dt =
d dt 1 + d "d;t . The discrete component d dt can assume two values: high or low
(dh or dl ). The variable dt controls the regime in place and evolves according
to the transition matrix H d :
"
#
p
1
p
hh
ll
Hd =
;
1 phh
pll
where pji = P dt+1 = jj dt = i . The values of H d ; dh ; and dl are such that the
unconditional mean of the discrete shock d dt is zero. This speci…cation is in
the spirit of Christiano et al. (2011). However, in the current setup shocks to
preferences that are able to trigger the ZLB are assumed to be recurrent, and
agents take into account that these episodes can lead to unusual policymakers’
responses, as discussed later on.
Firms. The representative …rm j faces a downward-sloping demand curve,
Yt (j) = (Pt (j)=Pt ) 1= t Yt , where the parameter 1= t is the elasticity of substitution between two di¤erentiated goods. Firms take as given the general price
level, Pt , and the level of real activity, Yt . Whenever a …rm changes its price, it
faces a quadratic adjustment cost:
ACt (j) = :5' (Pt (j)=Pt 1 (j)

)2 Yt (j)Pt (j)=Pt

(4)

where t = Pt =Pt 1 is gross in‡ation at time t and
is the corresponding
deterministic steady state. Shocks to the elasticity of substitution imply shocks
to the markup @t = 1= (1
t ) : We assume that the rescaled markup
t =
log (@t =@) follows an autoregressive process, t =
;t , where
t 1 +
1
is the slope of the Phillips curve. The …rm chooses the price Pt (j) to
' 2
maximize the present value of future pro…ts:
P
Et [ 1
s=t Qs ([Ps (j)=Ps ] Ys (j)
13

Ws hs (j)

ACs (j))]

where Qs is the marginal value of a unit of consumption good. Labor is the only
input in the …rm production function, Yt (j) = At h1t (j), where total factor
productivity At evolves according to an exogenous process: ln (At =At 1 ) = +
at , at = a at 1 + a "a;t , a;t N (0; 1).
Government. Imposing the restriction that one-period debt is in zero net
supply, the ‡ow budget constraint of the federal government is given by:
Ptm Btm = Btm 1 (1 + Ptm )

T t + Et + T P t

where Ptm Btm is the market value of debt and Tt and Et represent federal tax
revenues and federal expenditures, respectively. Government expenditure is the
sum of federal transfers and goods purchases: Et = Pt Gt + T Rt . The term T Pt
is a shock that is meant to capture a series of features that are not explicitly
modeled here, such as changes in the maturity structure and the term premium.
This shock is necessary because we treat all the components of the government
budget constraint as observables. We rewrite the federal government budget
m m
constraint in terms of debt-to-GDP ratio bm
t = (Pt Bt ) = (Pt Yt ):
m
m
bm
t = bt 1 Rt 1;t = (

t Yt =Yt 1 )

t

+ et + tpt

where Rtm 1;t = (1 + Ptm ) =Ptm 1 is the realized return of the maturity bond,
all the variables are expressed as a fraction of GDP, and we assume tpt =
N (0; 1).
tp tpt 1 + tp "tp;t , tp;t
e t ; follow the following process:
The linearized transfers as a fraction of GDP, tr
et
tr

et
tr

=

et =
tr

tr

tr

et
tr

et
tr

1

1

+

e t + (1
tr
tr

tr ;t ;

tr )

tr ;t

y

(b
yt

ybt ) +

N (0; 1) ;

tr;t

tr tr;t

N (0; 1)

e t represents a long-term component that is meant to capture the large
where tr
programs that arise as the result of a political process that is not modeled
here.6 Transfers move around this trend component as a result of business cycle
6

In what follows, x
bt denotes the percentage deviation of a detrended variable from its own
steady state. For all the variables normalized with respect to GDP (debt, expenditure, and
taxes) x
et denotes a linear deviation, while for all the other variables x
et denotes a percentage

14

‡uctuations captured by the log-linearized output gap (b
yt ybt ), where ybt is
potential output. The government also buys a fraction Gt =Yt of total output.
We de…ne gt = 1=(1 Gt =Yt ) and we assume that get = ln(gt =g) follows an
autoregressive process: get = g get 1 + g g;t ; g;t N (0; 1) :
Policy Rules. When the high value for the preference shock is realized
d
( t = h), the economy is out of the ZLB and monetary and …scal policies are
not constrained. In this case, the central bank follows a standard Taylor rule
and the evolution of the policy mix can be described by a two-regime Markov
switching process pt , whose properties will be described in the next section.
When the low value for the preference shock is realized ( dt = l), the central
bank lowers the FFR until the ZLB is reached and the …scal authority focuses
on stabilizing the economy as opposed to trying to stabilize the stock of debt.
Speci…cally, the monetary policy rule reads as follows:
Rt =R =

1

Z

d
t

(Rt 1 =R)

+Z dt (Rt 1 =R)

R;Z

p
R; t

h

(

t=

(1=R)(1

R;Z

p
; t

)
)

Z

e

(Yt =Yt )
Z R;t

p
y; t

i

1

p
R; t

e

R R;t

(5)

where R;t
N (0; 1), R is the steady-state gross nominal interest rate, Yt
is the output target, and
is the deterministic steady-state level for gross
in‡ation. The parameters ; pt and y; pt capture the central bank’s response to
in‡ation and output gap, which depends on the policy mix pt in place at time
t. The dummy variable Z dt is zero when the value of the preference shock is
high ( dt = h) and one when it is low ( dt = l). To match the behavior of the
FFR in the data during the zero-lower-bound period, we need to allow for small
disturbances and a gradual decline toward a value close, but not exactly equal,
to zero. The size of the monetary policy shocks at the ZLB, Z , is assumed
to be a tenth of the standard deviation of the monetary policy shocks when
out of the ZLB: Z = R =10. The persistence of changes in the federal funds
rate at the ZLB is controlled by R;Z and …xed to :2. Finally, the parameter
0< Z
1 controls the average level of the FFR when at the ZLB. It can be
thought of as the fraction of the steady-state net interest rate. Notice that if
deviation.

15

we set Z = 0; R;Z = 0; and Z = 1; we would obtain Rt = 1 at the ZLB and
the net nominal interest rate would be exactly zero.7
The …scal authority moves taxes according to the following rule:
et =

1
+Z

Z
d
t

d
t

h

;

;Z et 1

p
t

et

1

+ 1

+ 1
;Z

;

p
t

h

[ e eet +

b;
y

p
t

ebm +
t 1

(b
yt

et
ee

ybt )] +

+

y

(b
yt
;t

ii
ybt )

(6)

e t + g 1 get ; ;t N (0; 1) ; and et is the level of tax revenues with
tr
where eet
respect to GDP in deviations from the steady state. When the economy is
in the high state of demand (Z dt = 0), tax revenues respond to the state of
the economy, captured by the output gap, to the sum of the long-run level of
transfers and government purchases, and to the level of debt. The parameter
b; pt captures the …scal authority’s attitude toward debt stabilization, which
depends on the type of policy mix pt in place at time t. When the large negative
preference shock hits (Z dt = 1), the …scal authority temporarily disregards the
level of debt to focus on stabilizing the economy. However, the …scal authority
still responds to the level of spending.

3.2

Policy changes

To characterize policymakers’behavior out of the ZLB, we will make use of the
partition of the parameter space introduced by Leeper (1991). For the sake
of the exposition, we will assume that the Taylor rule reacts only to in‡ation,
whereas the …scal rule reacts only to debt. In this simpli…ed version of the
model, we can distinguish four regions based on the properties of the model
under …xed coe¢ cients. When the values of model parameters are …xed, the two
policy rules are key in determining the existence and uniqueness of a solution.
There are two determinacy regions. The …rst region, Active Monetary/Passive
7

When estimating the model we verify that the ZLB would be binding in response to
the large negative preference shock. Our approach to modeling the ZLB di¤ers from the
conventional one, which implies Rt = max (0; Rt ) ; where Rt is the interest rate implied by
the Taylor rule. While our approach cannot rule out the possibility of states of the world in
which the nominal rate Rt assumes negative values, it has the advantage of keeping the model
tractable while it allows us to study the consequences of policy uncertainty.

16

Fiscal (AM/PF), is the most familiar one: The Taylor principle is satis…ed and
the …scal authority moves taxes to keep debt on a stable path: AM > 1 and
PF
> 1 1. We refer to this policy combination as the monetary-led regime.
b
The second determinacy region, Passive Monetary/Active Fiscal (PM/AF),
corresponds to the case in which the …scal authority is not committed to stabi< 1 1. Now it is the monetary authority that
lizing the process for debt: AF
b
passively accommodates the behavior of the …scal authority, disregarding the
Taylor principle and allowing in‡ation to move in order to stabilize the process
for debt: P M < 1. Under this regime, even in the absence of distortionary taxation, shocks to net taxes can have an impact on the macroeconomy as agents
understand that they will not be followed by future o¤setting changes in the …scal variables. We label this policy combination the …scally-led regime. Finally,
when both authorities are active, no stationary equilibrium exists, whereas when
both of them are passive, the economy is subject to multiple equilibria.
In the benchmark model, when the preference shock is high ( dt = h), the
economy is out of the ZLB (Z dt = 0) and the evolution of policymakers’ behavior is captured by a two-regime Markov chain that evolves according to the
transition matrix H p :
"
#
p
1
p
M
M
F
F
Hp =
;
1 pM M
pF F
where pji = P pt+1 = jj pt = i . This transition matrix is supposed to capture
the stochastic outcome of a game between the monetary and …scal authorities
that is not explicitly modeled in this paper. Regime M is the monetary-led
AM
regime:
> 1 and b;M = Pb F > 1 1. Regime F is the …scally;M =
PM
led regime:
< 1 and b;F = AM
< 1 1.
;F =
b
When the low value for the preference shock occurs ( dt = l), the ZLB becomes binding (Z dt = 1), and policymakers’ behavior is now constrained. In
this third regime, the central bank lowers the FFR until it hits the ZLB and
the …scal authority temporarily disregards the level of debt in order to focus
on stabilizing the economy.8 Notice that the zero-lower-bound policy mix can
8

Our results are robust to relaxing the assumption regarding the behavior of the …scal

17

be considered as an extreme version of the …scally-led policy mix. However,
while out of the ZLB, switches to the …scally-led regime capture the deliberate
choices of policymakers, the zero-lower-bound regime is triggered by an exogenous negative preference shock that prompts the …scal authority to forgo …scal
adjustments to counter the e¤ects of a deep recession. Once the preference shock
is back to its high value, policymakers’behavior is not constrained anymore.
Even if the ZLB imposes a constraint on policymakers’behavior, agents’beliefs are not constrained. Therefore, beliefs about the exit strategy and policy
uncertainty are going to be key to understanding the macroeconomic dynamics
at the ZLB. To capture this feature, we introduce a parameter controlling the
expected exit strategy from the ZLB. The parameter pZM represents the probability that once the discrete preference shock is reabsorbed, the economy will
move to the the monetary-led regime.
The joint evolution of policymakers’ behavior and the discrete preference
p d
shock is controlled by the combined chain t
t ; t = f[M; h] ; [F; h] ; [Z; l]g.
The corresponding transition matrix H is obtained by combining the transition
matrices H d and H p with the parameter pZM :
2

6
H=4

3.3

phh H p
(1

(1

pll )

"

phh ) [1; 1]

pZM
1 pZM

pll

# 3

7
5:

Solving the MS-DSGE model

The technology process At is assumed to have a unit root. The model is then
rescaled and linearized around the unique deterministic steady state. The model
can be solved with any of the solution methods developed for Markov–switching
DSGE models. We use the solution method of Farmer et al. (2009). It is
worth emphasizing that in our model, agents form expectations while taking
into account the possibility of entering the ZLB and of changes in policymakers’
behavior. Furthermore, they understand that entering the ZLB is an event
induced by an exogenous shock that can modify policymakers’ behavior even
authority because the dynamics at the zero lower bound mostly depend on the exit strategy.

18

once the constraint stops being binding. In other words, our approach allows
us to model recurrent zero-lower-bound episodes and to capture the impact of
di¤erent exit strategies for policymakers’behavior at the ZLB. The solution can
be characterized as a MS-VAR:
St = c ( t ; ; H) + T ( t ; ; H) St

1

+ R ( t ; ; H) Q ( v ) "t

(7)

where ; v ; and St are vectors that contain the structural parameters, the
stochastic volatilities, and all the variables of the model, respectively. Appendix
B provides more details about the linearization and the solution algorithm.
It is worth emphasizing that the law of motion of the model depends on
the structural parameters ( ), the regime in place ( t ), and the probability of
moving across regimes (H). This notation highlights that the properties of one
regime depend not only on the structural parameters describing that particular
regime, but also on what agents expect is going to happen under alternative
regimes and on how likely it is that a regime change will occur in the future
(see also Davig and Leeper 2007). In other words, agents’beliefs about future
regime changes matter for the law of motion governing the economy.

4

The E¤ects of Policy Uncertainty

The model solution is combined with a system of observation equations. We
estimate the model with Bayesian methods. We include seven observables spanning the sample 1954:Q4-2014:Q1: real GDP growth, annualized GDP de‡ator
in‡ation, annualized FFR, annualized debt-to-GDP ratio, federal tax revenues
to GDP ratio, federal expenditure to GDP ratio, and a transformation of government purchases to GDP ratio. All variables are expressed in percentage points
when reporting the results. For tractability, we …x the regime sequence for the
out-of-the-zero-lower-bound regimes based on the VAR evidence presented in
Section 2. The zero-lower-bound regime is assumed to start in 2008:Q4 and
remains in place until the end of the sample.9
9

As the starting date of the ZLB we choose 2008:Q4, instead of 2008:Q3 as implied by the
MS-VAR, in light of a model comparison exercise in which we considered all quarters between

19

;M
y;M
R;M
b;M
;M
;F
y;F
R;F
;F

dl
phh
pll
pM M
pF F
pZM
Z

tr
y
e
y

g
a
d
tp

100 R
100 g
100 a
100
100 d
100 tr
100 tp
100
100
100
:25bm
g
:25

Mean
1:6019
0:5065
0:8652
0:0712
0:9652
0:6356
0:2709
0:6663
0:6874
0:3662
0:9995
0:9306
0:9923
0:9923
0:9225
0:9678
0:0073
0:4599
0:2766
0:3661
0:2910
0:8628
0:9796
0:4053
0:3944
0:3267
0:4784
0:1934
0:2826
0:7708
0:4547
7:6949
0:3007
2:8511
0:1774
0:4631
0:4185
0:2672
1:0865
0:0430

5%
1:1758
0:2980
0:8135
0:0457
0:9439
0:5007
0:2005
0:5927
0:5358
0:4827
0:9984
0:8936
0:9872
0:9888
0:8108
0:9596
0:0052
0:3677
0:1899
0:2096
0:3433
0:8299
0:9742
0:1522
0:2881
0:2276
0:4053
0:1767
0:2614
0:4713
0:4174
6:3336
0:2750
2:6336
0:1530
0:3955
0:3523
0:2342
1:0779
0:0417

95%
2:0207
0:7688
0:9108
0:1041
0:9816
0:7546
0:3458
0:7401
0:8438
0:2789
0:9999
0:9599
0:9965
0:9951
0:9861
0:9761
0:0098
0:5537
0:3707
0:5137
0:2435
0:8928
0:9839
0:6480
0:4963
0:4218
0:5513
0:2115
0:3049
1:1552
0:4951
9:3354
0:3282
3:0922
0:2037
0:5369
0:4849
0:2995
1:0960
0:0445

Type
N
G
B
G
B
G
G
B
B
N
D
D
D
D
D
B
G
B
N
N
N
B
B
B
B
B
B
IG
IG
IG
IG
IG
IG
IG
IG
G
G
N
N
N

Mean
2:5
0:4
0:5
0:07
0:5
0:8
0:15
0:5
0:5
0:3
0:96
0:83
0:96
0:96
0:50
0:95
0:3
0:2
0:4
0:5
0:4
0:5
0:5
0:5
0:5
0:5
0:5
0:5
1:00
1:00
2:00
10:00
2:00
1:00
1:00
0:5
0:4
0:25
1:06
0:045

Std
0:3
0:2
0:2
0:02
0:2
0:3
0:1
0:2
0:2
0:1
0:03
0:10
0:03
0:03
0:22
0:02
0:15
0:05
0:2
0:2
0:2
0:2
0:2
0:2
0:2
0:2
0:2
0:5
1:00
1:00
2:00
2:00
2:00
1:00
1:00
0:05
0:05
0:05
0:04
0:0025

Table 2: Posterior means, 90% posterior error bands and priors of the model parameters.
For the structural parameters, M stands for the monetary-led regime, and F stands for the
…scally-led regime. The letters in the column "Type" indicate the prior density function: N,
G, B, D, and IG stand for Normal, Gamma, Beta, Dirichlet, and Inverse Gamma, respectively.

20

4.1

Parameter estimates

Table 2 reports priors and posterior parameter estimates. The priors for the parameters that do not move across regimes are in line with previous contributions
in the literature and are relatively loose. As for the parameters of the Taylor
rule, the prior for the autoregressive component is symmetric across regimes,
whereas we have chosen asymmetric and truncated priors for the responses to
in‡ation and the output gap in line with the theoretical restrictions outlined
above: Under the monetary-led regime (M) monetary policy is active, whereas
under the …scally-led regime (F), monetary policy is passive. In a similar way,
the priors for the response of taxes to government debt are asymmetric across
the two regimes: Under the …scally-led regime and the ZLB regime, this parameter is restricted to zero, whereas under the monetary-led regime it is expected
to be fairly large. In order to separate the short- and long-term components
of transfers, we restrict the persistence of the long-term component ( eL = :99)
and the standard deviation of its innovations ( eL = :1%). We …x the discount
factor to :9985, a value broadly consistent with an annualized 2% real interest
rate, and the average maturity to 5 years (this is controlled by the parameter
). We assume that the persistence of the …scal rule at the ZLB coincides with
its value in the …scally-led regime: ;Z = ;F .
We choose priors for the persistence of the policy regimes in line with the
persistence of the two regimes implied by the regime sequence recovered when
estimating the MS-VAR. Finally, we choose a loose and symmetric prior for the
parameter pZM , which captures the uncertainty about the policy that will be
carried out after the lifto¤ of the interest rate from the ZLB. Our symmetric and
broad prior implies that we maintain an agnostic view with respect to which
exit strategy agents regard as most likely.
Regarding the parameters of the Taylor rule, under the monetary-led regime
the federal funds rate reacts strongly to both in‡ation and the output gap.
The opposite occurs under the …scally-led regime. Under the …scally-led and
ZLB regimes the response of taxes to debt is restricted to zero, while under the
2008:Q1 and 2009:Q3 as possible starting dates. The results of this exercise, the dataset, and
evidence for convergence of the MCMC algorithm can be found in Appendix C.

21

monetary-led regime it turns out to be signi…cantly larger than the threshold
value described in Subsection 3.2 ( 1 1 = :0015).
Since we …xed the regime sequence, the estimates of the transition matrix
are determined by the model dynamics across the di¤erent regimes and not by
the frequency of regime changes. Both the monetary-led regime and the …scallyled regime turn out to be quite persistent, implying that when one of the two
regimes is in place, agents expect to spend a signi…cant amount of time under
such a regime. The persistence of the high state for the discrete preference shock
is also very high. This implies that when out of the ZLB, agents attach a small
weight to the possibility of a large contraction in real activity deriving from the
negative preference shock. This result is consistent with the fact that before the
recent crisis, the US economy had always been able to avoid the ZLB. When at
the ZLB, agents regard it as more likely that once the negative preference shock
is reabsorbed, policymakers will move to the monetary-led regime (pZM = 92%
at the posterior mean). However, this probability is smaller than the estimated
persistence of the monetary-led regime (pM M is around 99%). Therefore, when
the economy entered the ZLB, the probability attached to switching to the
…scally-led regime increased and agents’ uncertainty about the future policy
mix rose.
It is worth clarifying the importance of estimating the model over the whole
sample, as opposed to focusing exclusively on the zero-lower-bound period. For
the sake of argument, we can think that the properties of the …scally-led regime
are mostly identi…ed by the study of the e¤ects of …scal imbalances during
the 1960s and 1970s.10 Similarly, the properties of the monetary-led regime are
mostly pinned down by the behavior of the economy during the post-Volcker disin‡ation period. As we shall explain in greater detail in Section 6, for given properties of the monetary-led and …scally-led regimes, the parameter pZM highly
in‡uences the e¤ects of …scal imbalances on the macroeconomy at the ZLB.
Thus, this key parameter is identi…ed by the joint dynamics of …scal variables,
in‡ation, and real activity during the ZLB period.
10

The discussion here is simpli…ed to the extent that the properties of one regime depend
in part on the properties of the other regimes. Furthermore, there are feedback e¤ects from
the macroeconomy to the …scal variables.

22

Figure 5: Macroeconomic dynamics at the zero lower bound. Response of GDP
growth, in‡ation, FFR, and debt-to-GDP ratio to a discrete negative preference shock. The
red dashed line reports actual data.

4.2

Dynamics at the zero lower bound

Figure 5 reports the estimated impulse response to a discrete negative preference
shock dl . To compute the impulse response, we use the actual data in 2008:Q3.
The shock occurs in 2008:Q4 and is marked by a vertical line.11 The model
is able to replicate the key changes that occurred starting with the 2008 crisis
as a result of the single discrete negative preference shock, in line with the
VAR evidence. The economy experiences a drop in real activity and a large
increase in the debt ratio, monetary policy enters the ZLB, but in‡ation remains
relatively stable. It is also interesting to notice that the model is able not only
to replicate the absence of de‡ation, but also the fact that in‡ation has been
trending up. The model rationalizes this behavior as a result of increasing
in‡ationary pressure coming from the large debt accumulation.
The absence of de‡ation is tightly linked to uncertainty about policymakers’future behavior. To show this, Figure 6 compares the e¤ects of the discrete
negative preference shock under the benchmark estimated model with its e¤ects
in a counterfactual economy in which the monetary-led policy mix is the only
possible regime when out of the ZLB (dashed line). Thus the vertical distance
11

Using actual data is important because the impulse response is not invariant with respect
to the state of the economy, namely the observed …scal imbalances. This is because the
negative preference shock a¤ects agents’beliefs about policymakers’future behavior.

23

Figure 6: Actual and counterfactual impulse responses to a discrete negative
preference shock. The solid blue line corresponds to the estimated model, whereas the
black dashed line corresponds to a counterfactual economy in which the monetary-led policy
mix is the only possible policy mix.

between the two lines captures the e¤ects of uncertainty about the exit strategy
on the output gap, in‡ation, and the debt-to-GDP ratio. Notice that under the
counterfactual economy, the negative preference shock has now a much larger
impact on in‡ation and real activity. The economy experiences a very large and
persistent de‡ation and a much larger contraction in output. Furthermore, the
massive increase in the debt-to-GDP ratio does not have any mitigating e¤ect
on in‡ation: Agents expect that the entire debt-to-GDP ratio will eventually
be repaid with an increase in taxation. Thus, paradoxically, the uncertainty
about future policy was bene…cial, rather than harmful, to macroeconomic performance. This does not mean that policy uncertainty is bene…cial in itself,
but it implies that when monetary policy becomes constrained by the ZLB, the
resulting policy uncertainty mitigates the consequences of the ZLB by creating
in‡ationary pressure.
Note that in the counterfactual economy the contraction in output and the
drop in in‡ation are unrealistically large because we are removing the key mechanism of the estimated model. In Section 5, we will formally compare our benchmark model to an estimated nested model that removes policy uncertainty in a
way that puts the two models on the same ground. The goal in this section is
instead to isolate the key mechanism that prevents de‡ation in the estimated
model. In this respect, the fact that the model can in principle reproduce the
standard features of the ZLB is important: The data could have rejected the
role played by policy uncertainty in explaining in‡ation dynamics. For example,
the estimates could have suggested a very small probability of ever moving to
24

the …scally-led regime and a counteracting mark-up shock that keeps in‡ation
positive. Instead, a large preference shock is found to explain the sharp decline
in real activity. The absence of de‡ation is then rationalized in light of the
possibility of a change in the monetary/…scal policy mix.12
It is also important to emphasize that the amount of policy uncertainty required to explain the absence of de‡ation during the Great Recession is quite
moderate. As shown in Table 2, the posterior mean of the probability of moving
to the monetary-led policy mix once out of the ZLB regime is pZM = 92:25%.
This implies that at the ZLB agents mostly believe that policymakers will eventually resume the same policy mix observed before the Great Recession. Such a
belief is plausible for the US in light of the long spell of monetary-led policy mix
observed between the Volcker disin‡ation and the onset of the Great Recession.
However, as noted earlier, this value implies a higher probability of moving to
the …scally-led regime than that in the pre-crisis period. Finally, in the estimated model, the magnitude of the in‡ationary e¤ects of uncertainty about the
exit strategy largely depend on the pre-crisis level of government debt, which is
observed to be above its estimated steady-state value (around 42:5%).
Figure 7 provides further corroborating evidence in favor of the mechanism
proposed in this paper. The …gure reports the evolution of the one-year-ahead
and …ve-year-ahead in‡ation expectations as implied by the model and compares
them with the Michigan surveys. The error bands re‡ect parameter uncertainty.
Even though we do not use in‡ation expectations for estimation, the model is
able to replicate the salient features of the Michigan surveys. First, the model
captures the upward trend in in‡ation expectations that is visible right before
the recession started. This pattern can be partially explained by the increase in
the US …scal burden during those years. Second, the model captures remarkably
well the swing in in‡ation expectations that occurred once the crisis started.
From above trend, in‡ation expectations quickly moved below trend. However,
they never became negative and they quickly recovered. Finally, at the ZLB
in‡ation expectations exhibit an upward trend. The model explains this pattern
12

In Appendix D we show that our results do not depend on the shock that triggers the
zero lower bound. To that end, we consider a prototypical New Keynesian model in which we
can directly shock the natural rate as in Eggertsson and Woodford (2003).

25

Figure 7: In‡ation expectations. The …gure reports the evolution of the model-implied
one-year-ahead and …ve-year-ahead in‡ation expectations together with the Michigan surveys
(red dashed dotted line).

as a result of the large debt accumulation.
We …nd it reassuring that the model is able to replicate these key facts even if
in‡ation expectations are not used for estimating the model. This result shows
that the in‡ationary pressure coming from the …scal burden delivers in‡ation
expectations that are very much in line with the data. It is important to emphasize that in‡ation expectations moved down, as predicted by our model, when
the ZLB was encountered, but they never entered negative territory. In other
words, agents were con…dent that de‡ation would not have occurred. Instead,
in the baseline New Keynesian model, where the monetary-led policy mix is the
only possible regime, agents should expect de‡ation once the economy enters
the ZLB. The fact that in‡ation expectations, and not just in‡ation, behave in
a way that is not consistent with the baseline New Keynesian model suggests
that the absence of de‡ation in the United States cannot be easily rationalized
ex-post with a series of lucky realizations of in‡ationary shocks.

4.3

Inspecting the …scal mechanism

In our model, how shocks propagate depends on the policy regime in place as
well as the state variables of the economy. This property is key for the model
to rationalize the absence of de‡ation at the ZLB. Figure 8 reports the impulse
responses to an increase in the long-term component of transfers under the three
di¤erent regimes. This shock has a direct impact on the debt-to-GDP ratio
26

Figure 8: Impulse responses to a shock to transfers. The impulse responses are
computed assuming a regime in place over the the relevant horizon. However, agents form
expectations taking into account the possibility of regime changes.

and, consequently, on the amount of spending that would have to be …nanced
with future taxes. Impulse responses are computed conditionally on each policy
regime being in place over the entire horizon. Nevertheless, model dynamics
re‡ect the possibility of regime changes.
When the …scally-led regime is in place, agents understand that in the near
future the probability of a …scal adjustment in response to the current increase
in the primary de…cit is fairly low. This determines an increase in in‡ation that
is made possible by the accommodating behavior of the monetary authority
that adjusts the interest rate less than one-to-one to in‡ation. The resulting
decline in the real interest rate determines an increase in real activity. The
debt-to-GDP ratio is then stabilized because of the fall in the real interest rate
and the faster GDP growth.
Under the monetary-led regime the primary de…cit shock triggers a much
smaller increase in in‡ation because the …scal authority is expected to implement the necessary …scal adjustments. However, the response of in‡ation is not
zero because agents form expectations taking into account the small possibility of moving to the …scally-led regime. As a result, a high level of spending
determines some in‡ationary pressure even when the monetary-led regime is in
place. However, the rise in in‡ation is moderate compared to the case in which
the …scally-led policy mix is in place. Given that the Taylor principle holds,
the central bank reacts more than one-to-one to the increase in in‡ation. The
result is a prolonged period of slightly negative output gaps that last as long as
the …scal imbalance is not fully reabsorbed.

27

Figure 9: Macroeconomic dynamics at the zero lower bound for a model without
the …scal block. Response of GDP growth and in‡ation to a discrete negative preference
shock based on a model that excludes the …scal block. The red dashed line reports actual
data, while the shaded areas report the 90% error bands for the benchmark model.

Under the zero-lower-bound regime the e¤ects of the …scal shock are quite
similar to those that characterize the …scally-led regime even though the probability to a return to the monetary-led regime (pZM ) is quite large. The increase
in spending triggers a large increase in in‡ation. Given that the FFR is stuck
at zero, the resulting drop in the real interest rate is ampli…ed with a consequent large increase in the output gap. However, in‡ation is slightly smaller
than under the …scally-led policy mix because the faster output growth ends up
ameliorating the …scal imbalance.

5

No Policy Uncertainty

In the previous section, we used a counterfactual simulation to isolate the role of
policy uncertainty in accounting for the absence of de‡ation. In such an exercise,
since it is a counterfactual simulation, all shocks and non-policy parameters of
the model are kept …xed. In this section, we go one step further and formally
compare the benchmark model with an estimated nested model that does not
feature policy uncertainty about the way debt will be stabilized. Given that
both models are now estimated, we can conduct a formal assessment of the role
played by the …scal block in explaining the joint dynamics of GDP and in‡ation
as well as in‡ation expectations at the ZLB.
The nested model is similar to the traditional New Keynesian model used by
28

Variable
GDP growth
In‡ation
Variable
GDP growth
In‡ation

Benchmark Model
M edian
5%
95%
0:2997
0:2324 0:4172
0:0638
0:0312 0:1897
Model without Fiscal Block
M edian
5%
95%
0:4134
0:3607 0:4723
0:1042
0:0331 0:3075

16%
0:2552
0:0351

84%
0:3595
0:1338

16%
0:3807
0:0461

84%
0:4485
0:2066

Table 3: Mean squared distance between the actual data and the path implied by the discrete
preference shock. The top panel refers to the benchmark model, and the lower panel refers
to a nested New Keynesain model that excludes the …scal block. The period considered is
2008:Q4-2014:Q1.

Clarida et al. (2000) and Lubik and Schorfheide (2004) and it does not feature
any uncertainty about the way debt will be …nanced. We still allow for the
possibility of changes in policymakers’ behavior, but now such changes only
concern the behavior of the monetary authority. As observables, we use four of
the seven series used to estimate the benchmark model: GDP growth, in‡ation,
federal funds rate, and government expenditure.13 Figure 9 reports the impulse
responses to the discrete negative preference shock based on this alternative
model. The …gure is analogous to Figure 5 shown above for the benchmark
model. To ease the comparison, the shaded areas report the bands for the
benchmark model. As before, we use the actual data until 2008:Q3 and we then
have the discrete shock occurring in 2008:Q4. Unlike the benchmark model, the
model without the …scal block is not able to account for the joint dynamics of
in‡ation and output growth as a result of the single discrete preference shock.
The model is able to track relatively well the behavior of in‡ation, even if
in‡ation is often outside the 90% error bands. On the other hand, it clearly
misses the magnitude of the contraction in growth.
To formalize this visual impression, Table 3 reports the mean squared distance between the actual data and the path in response to the discrete demand
shock implied by the two models. The benchmark model delivers better results
both for in‡ation and output growth. However, in line with what could already
13

Including the remaining …scal series would be irrelevant for the dynamics of the macroeconomy because Ricardian equivalence applies when assuming that …scal policy is always
passive. Details about the model and the parameter estimates can be found in Appendix E.

29

Figure 10: In‡ation expectations for a model without the …scal block. The …gure
reports the evolution of the one-year-ahead and …ve-year-ahead in‡ation expectations implied
by a model that excludes the …scal block. The red dashed lines correspond to the Michigan surveys in‡ation expectations. The shaded areas report the 90% error bands for the
benchmark model.

be inferred by the picture, the gains are particularly large for output growth.
Not only is the median of the mean squared distance signi…cantly smaller, but
also the 68% bands do not overlap. As shown in Appendix E, the model without
the …scal block uses the discrete shock to …t in‡ation dynamics, leaving the behavior of output to be explained by a contemporaneous TFP shock. Therefore,
when excluding the …scal block we obtain the standard result of the literature:
A combination of shocks is necessary in order to explain the joint dynamics of
in‡ation and output following the recent recession.
As further evidence in favor of the mechanism proposed in this paper, Figure
10 reports the evolution of in‡ation expectations implied by the model without
the …scal block. Once again, we use shaded areas to denote the 90% error bands
for the benchmark model. Even in this case, we …nd that the alternative model
performs worse than the benchmark model. The model without a …scal block
tends to constantly underestimate in‡ation expectations, which lie outside the
90% error bands most of the time. This is true for both the one-year-ahead
and the …ve-year-ahead expectations. Furthermore, the alternative model does
worse both before and after the economy entered the ZLB.
Table 4 formally compares the two models with respect to their ability to
replicate the dynamics of in‡ation expectations. For each model, we compute
the mean squared distance between the model-implied in‡ation expectations
and the actual in‡ation expectations. It is important to check that the im30

Benchmark Model
Variable
M edian
5%
95%
Whole sample: 1-year
0:0569
0:0374 0:0857
0:0451
0:0345 0:0641
Whole sample: 5-year
Pre-ZLB: 1-year
0:0424
0:0317 0:0615
Pre-ZLB: 5-year
0:0493
0:0383 0:0734
0:1001
0:0368 0:2067
Post-ZLB: 1-year
Post-ZLB: 5-year
0:0181
0:0037 0:0958
Model without Fiscal Block
Variable
M edian
5%
95%
Whole sample: 1-year
0:1675
0:1399 0:1955
Whole sample: 5-year
0:1563
0:1106 0:2141
0:1496
0:1241 0:1880
Pre-ZLB: 1-year
Pre-ZLB: 5-year
0:1836
0:1281 0:2557
0:2309
0:1005 0:3008
Post-ZLB: 1-year
Post-ZLB: 5-year
0:0656
0:0139 0:1369

16%
0:0440
0:0378
0:0349
0:0415
0:0551
0:0066

84%
0:0733
0:0557
0:0529
0:0625
0:1595
0:0532

16%
0:1510
0:1307
0:1349
0:1510
0:1577
0:0298

84%
0:1840
0:1894
0:1696
0:2229
0:2778
0:1058

Table 4: Mean squared distance between model-implied and actual in‡ation expectations
for the 1-year and 5-year horizons. The top panel refers to the benchmark model, and the
lower panel refers to a nested New Keynesain model that excludes the …scal block. We report
results for the whole sample for which expectations are available (1978:Q1-2014:Q1), for the
subsample before the economy entered the zero lower bound (1978:Q1-2008:Q3), and for the
subsample after the economy entered the zero lower bound (1978:Q4-2014:Q4).

provement in the ability to match the behavior of in‡ation expectations does
not occur only at the ZLB, because this could be just a lucky coincidence. We
therefore take the mean squared distance over the whole sample for which in‡ation expectations are available (1978:Q1-2014:Q1) and for two subsamples:
before and after entering the ZLB. The benchmark model performs better than
the alternative model over all subsamples and for both horizons.

6

Policy Trade-o¤

In this section, we are interested in assessing why policy uncertainty is likely
to increase once the economy enters the ZLB. We will show that while the
monetary-led regime leads to a more stable macroeconomic environment during
regular times, a policy trade-o¤ characterizes the ZLB: mitigating a large recession or preserving long-run macroeconomic stability. Policy uncertainty rises
when policymakers do not o¤er a clear resolution of this policy trade-o¤.

31

Let us revisit the e¤ects of the large negative preference shock dl under three
di¤erent scenarios concerning policymakers’behavior. In the …rst scenario, we
consider the benchmark model in which no announcement is made. In the
second and third scenarios policymakers make credible announcements about
the exit strategy. Speci…cally, in the second scenario, policymakers announce
that …scal discipline will be abandoned and that the economy will move to the
…scally-led regime. In the third scenario, policymakers announce that once the
economy is out of the zero-lower-bound period, …scal discipline will be restored,
implying that the economy will move back to the monetary-led regime.14
Figure 11 reports the results. If policymakers announce that …scal discipline
will be abandoned (dashed line), agents expect that the rising stock of debt will
be in‡ated away. Therefore, they revise upward their in‡ation expectations and,
consequently, in‡ation increases today through the expectation channel. Notice
that the recession is in this case substantially mitigated and the economy is
e¤ectively avoiding the ZLB. If instead policymakers explicitly announce …scal
discipline, the economy enters a recession and de‡ation arises (dashed-dotted
line). Compared to the case in which no announcement is made (solid line),
announcing …scal discipline worsens the recession and brings about a larger drop
in prices. This is because this announcement lowers the probability that the
growing stock of debt will be in‡ated away, which raises the real interest rate and
consequently leads to a recession deeper than the one we actually observed. The
outcomes for this case are qualitatively in line with the traditional view about
the ZLB. However, the drops in real activity and in‡ation are substantially
mitigated compared to the counterfactual economy presented in Subsection 4.2,
in which the monetary-led policy mix is the only possible regime. The reason is
that when policymakers announce …scal discipline, rational agents understand
that a switch to the …scally-led regime can still occur in the more distant future.
Figure 12 illustrates the evolution of uncertainty for the three scenarios
presented above. We consider three horizons: 1 quarter, 1 year, and 2 years.
Uncertainty is computed taking into account the possibility of regime changes
and future Gaussian shocks (Bianchi 2016). For a variable Xt and a horizon q,
14

Appendix B.3 presents the transition matrix for the economy with announcements.

32

Figure 11: E¤ects of policy announcements following the discrete negative preference shock. Three cases are considered. The …rst case corresponds to the benchmark
model with no announcement; in the second case, policymakers announce a return to the
monetary-led regime; in the third case, a switch to the …scally-led regime is announced.

it corresponds to the conditional standard deviation sdt (Xt+q ). At the ZLB,
uncertainty is higher than in the pre-crisis period because of the uncertainty
about the end of the recession and the lack of a systematic monetary policy
response to shocks hitting the macroeconomy. When policymakers announce
the …scally-led regime as the exit strategy, the economy avoids hitting the ZLB
and consequently macroeconomic uncertainty remains very close to the pre-crisis
levels. Hence, promising to follow the …scally-led policy mix has the e¤ects of
mitigating the recession and of lowering macroeconomic uncertainty in the short
run.
Longsta¤ et al. (2013), following Kitsul and Wright (2013), extract the objective distribution of in‡ation from the market prices of in‡ation swaps and
options by using data at daily frequency. They …nd substantial swings between
fears of in‡ation and fears of de‡ation. Such a large level of uncertainty about
in‡ation is consistent with our …ndings. We regard the study of the link between policy uncertainty and macroeconomic uncertainty in the context of asset
pricing as an interesting and promising venue for future research.
The measure of uncertainty reported here re‡ects the level of uncertainty
faced by the agent in the model, taking into account the possibility of regime
changes, along the simulations presented above. Therefore, they cannot be immediately compared with measures of uncertainty based on reduced-form sta33

Figure 12: Evolution of uncertainty under policy announcements. The graphs report
the evolution of uncertainty at di¤erent horizons following an adverse discrete preference shock
and di¤erent announcements about policymakers’future behavior.

tistical models such as the ones presented by Jurado et al. (2015). If we were to
estimate a reduced-form model with time-varying parameters and heteroskedasticity on the economy simulated above, we would …nd that uncertainty spikes
when the economy enters the ZLB. Nevertheless, uncertainty would stay low
while the economy remains at the ZLB because no large changes in real activity
or in‡ation occur.15 Such a measure of uncertainty would be in line with the
evidence presented in Jurado et al. (2015). Therefore, our results should be
interpreted as showing that the ZLB implies an increase in uncertainty for a
given level of volatility of the exogenous shocks.
While moving to the …scally-led regime would largely mitigate the recession
and reduce uncertainty in the short run, it would also imply an increase in
macroeconomic uncertainty in the long run. Figure 13 reports the evolution of
uncertainty at di¤erent horizons, from 1 quarter to 10 years, when the monetaryled and the …scally-led regime are in place. When policymakers follow the
monetary-led policy mix, agents anticipate that with high probability future
…scal imbalances will be neutralized through the actions of the …scal authority.
This leads to a reduction in macroeconomic uncertainty. At the same time,
15
See Justiniano and Primiceri (2008), Bianchi (2013), Fernandez-Villaverde et al. (2010),
and Bianchi and Ilut (2015) for examples of DSGE models that allow for heteroskedasticity.

34

Figure 13: Evolution of uncertainty when out of the zero lower bound. Evolution of
uncertainty at di¤erent horizons conditional on being in a speci…c regime today, taking into
account the possibility of future regime changes.

the central bank responds strongly to in‡ation, leading to a further reduction
in volatility. If instead policymakers follow the …scally-led regime, uncertainty
increases at all horizons. This is because the central bank reacts less aggressively
to economic ‡uctuations and agents anticipate that all …scal imbalances will now
strongly a¤ect in‡ation and real economic activity.
Mitigating a large recession by pledging to abandon …scal discipline and the
rise in uncertainty as the economy exits the ZLB are two sides of the same
coin. The announcement e¤ectively softens the recession if and only if it is able
to convince agents that the …scally-led policy mix will prevail for a long time.
Only under these circumstances do agents expect that debt will be in‡ated away.
If the …scally-led regime had low persistence, the announcement would fail to
mitigate the recession because in‡ation would not rise. In fact, agents would
simply expect a change in the timing of …scal adjustments. The existence of this
trade-o¤ between short-run bene…ts and long-run costs provides an explanation
for the ample spectrum of opinions about the best path of action at the zero
lower bound and the consequent increase in policy uncertainty.

7

Conclusions

The US is arguably facing uncertainty about the way policymakers will handle
the large stock of debt that was accumulated during the Great Recession. Part
of the debt is expected to be absorbed by higher growth once the economy fully
35

recovers. However, it is quite unlikely that this factor alone will be enough
to correct the dynamics of US sovereign debt in the absence of substantial
…scal adjustments. A large stock of debt, combined with no clear plan for
…scal stabilization, is likely to create uncertainty about the future policy course
because the monetary authority cannot control in‡ation without the necessary
…scal backing (Sims 2010a). We have shown that this type of policy uncertainty
can explain why the US economy has not experienced de‡ation despite the
several years spent at the zero lower bound.

References
Aruoba, S., P. Cuba-Borda, and F. Schorfheide (2016). Macroeconomic Dynamics Near the Zero Lower Bound: A Tale of Two Countries. NBER working
paper 19248.
Baker, S., N. Bloom, and S. Davis (2016). Measuring Economic Policy Uncertainty. Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming.
Basu, S. and B. Bundick (2015). Uncertainty shocks in a model of e¤ective demand. NBER Working Papers 18420, National Bureau of Economic Research,
Inc.
Benhabib, J., S. Schmitt-Grohe, and M. Uribe (2001). The Perils of Taylor
Rules. Journal of Economic Theory 96 (1-2), 40–69.
Benhabib, J., S. Schmitt-Grohe, and M. Uribe (2002). Avoiding Liquidity Traps.
Journal of Political Economy 110 (3), 535–563.
Bianchi, F. (2013). Regime Switches, Agents’Beliefs, and Post-World War II
U.S. Macroeconomic Dynamics. Review of Economic Studies 80 (2), 463–490.
Bianchi, F. (2016). Methods for Measuring Expectations and Uncertainty in
Markov-switching Models. Journal of Econometrics 190 (1), 79 –99.
Bianchi, F. and C. Ilut (2015). Monetary/Fiscal Policy Mix and Agents’Beliefs.
CEPR discussion paper 9645, NBER working paper 20194.
Bianchi, F. and L. Melosi (2013). Dormant Shocks and Fiscal Virtue. In NBER
Macroeconomics Annual 2013, Volume 28, NBER Chapters, pp. 1–46. National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
36

Bloom, N. (2009). The Impact of Uncertainty Shocks. Econometrica 77, 623–
685.
CBO (2016). An Update to the Budget and Economic Outlook: 2016 to 2026.
(CBO Publication No. 51129). Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing
O¢ ce.
Christiano, L., M. Eichenbaum, and S. Rebelo (2011). When is the Government
Spending Multiplier Large? Journal of Political Economy 119 (1), 78–121.
Christiano, L. J., M. S. Eichenbaum, and M. Trabandt (2015). Understanding
the Great Recession. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 7 (1),
110–67.
Clarida, R., J. Gali, and M. Gertler (2000). Monetary Policy Rules and Macroeconomic Stability: Evidence and Some Theory. Quarterly Journal of Economics 115, 147–180.
Cochrane, J. H. (1998). A Frictionless Model of U.S. In‡ation. In B. S. Bernanke
and J. J. Rotemberg (Eds.), NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1998, pp. 323–
384. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Cochrane, J. H. (2001). Long Term Debt and Optimal Policy in the Fiscal
Theory of Price Level. Econometrica 69, 69–116.
Cogley, T. and T. J. Sargent (2006). Drifts and Volatilities: Monetary Policies
and Outcomes in the Post WWII U.S. Review of Economic Dynamics 8,
262–302.
Coibion, O. and Y. Gorodnichenko (2015). Is the Phillips Curve Alive and Well
after All? In‡ation Expectations and the Missing Disin‡ation. American
Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 7 (1), 197–232.
Coibion, O., Y. Gorodnichenko, and J. Wieland (2012). The Optimal In‡ation Rate in New Keynesian Models: Should Central Banks Raise Their In‡ation Targets in Light of the Zero Lower Bound? Review of Economic
Studies 79 (4), 1371–1406.
Correia, I., E. Farhi, J. P. Nicolini, and P. Teles (2013). Unconventional Fiscal
Policy at the Zero Bound. American Economic Review 103 (4), 1172–1211.
Davig, T. and E. M. Leeper (2007). Generalizing the Taylor Principle. American
Economic Review 97 (3), 607–635.

37

Del Negro, M., M. P. Giannoni, and F. Schorfheide (2015). In‡ation in the
Great Recession and New Keynesian Models. American Economic Journal:
Macroeconomics 7 (1), 168–96.
Eggertsson, G. B. and M. Woodford (2003). The Zero Interest-rate Bound and
Optimal Monetary Policy. Brookings Panel on Economic Activity.
Farmer, R. E., D. F. Waggoner, and T. Zha (2009). Understanding MarkovSwitching Rational Expectations Models. Journal of Economic Theory 144,
1849–1867.
Fernandez-Villaverde, J., G. Gordon, P. Guerron-Quintana, and J. F. RubioRamirez (2015). Nonlinear adventures at the zero lower bound. Journal of
Economic Dynamics and Control 57, 182 –204.
Fernandez-Villaverde, J., P. Guerron-Quintana, K. Kuester, and J. RubioRamirez (2015). Fiscal Volatility Shocks and Economic Activity. American
Economic Review 105 (11), 3352–84.
Fernandez-Villaverde, J., P. Guerron-Quintana, and J. F. Rubio-Ramirez
(2010). Fortune or Virtue: Time-Variant Volatilities Versus Parameter Drifting in U.S. Data. NBER Working Papers 15928, National Bureau of Economic
Research, Inc.
Fernandez-Villaverde, J., P. Guerron-Quintana, and J. F. Rubio-Ramirez
(2014). Supply-Side Policies and the Zero Lower Bound. IMF Economic
Review 62 (2), 248–260.
Fernandez-Villaverde, J., J. F. Rubio-Ramirez, P. Guerron-Quintana, and
M. Uribe (2011). Risk Matters. The Real E¤ects of Volatility Shocks. American Economic Review 101 (3), 2530–2561.
Gilchrist, S., J. Sim, and E. Zakrajsek (2014). Uncertainty, Financial Frictions,
and Investment Dynamics.
Gust, C., D. Lopez-Salido, and M. Smith (2013). The Empirical Implications
of the Interest-Rate Lower Bound. working paper.
Hall, R. E. (2011). The long slump. American Economic Review 101 (2), 431–69.
Jurado, K., S. C. Ludvigson, and S. Ng (2015). Measuring Uncertainty. American Economic Review 105 (3), 1177–1216.
Justiniano, A. and G. Primiceri (2008). The Time Varying Volatility of Macro-

38

economic Fluctuations. American Economic Review 98 (3), 604–41.
King, R. G. and M. Watson (2012). In‡ation and Unit Labor Cost. Journal of
Money, Credit and Banking 44, 111–149.
Kitsul, Y. and J. Wright (2013). The Economics of Options-implied In‡ation
Probability Density Functions. Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.
Kliem, M., A. Kriwoluzky, and S. Sarferaz (2016). On the Low Frequency Relationship Between Public De…cits and In‡ation. Journal of Applied Econometrics 31 (3), 566–583.
Leeper, E. M. (1991). Equilibria Under Active and Passive Monetary and Fiscal
Policies. Journal of Monetary Economics 27, 129–147.
Longsta¤, F., H. Lustig, and M. Fleckenstein (2013). De‡ation Risk. NBER
Working Papers 19238, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Lubik, T. and F. Schorfheide (2004). Testing for Indeterminacy: An Application
to U.S. Monetary Policy. American Economic Review 94 (1), 190–217.
Mertens, K. R. S. M. and M. O. Ravn (2014). Fiscal Policy in an ExpectationsDriven Liquidity Trap. Review of Economic Studies 81 (4), 1637–1667.
Plosser, C. I. (2012). Fiscal policy and monetary policy: Restoring the boundaries. Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia 2012 Annual Report. Philadelphia, PA. p.11-17.
Primiceri, G. (2005). Time Varying Structural Vector Autoregressions and Monetary Policy. Review of Economic Studies 72 (3), 821–852.
Reis, R. (2016). QE in the future: the central bank’s balance sheet in a …nancial
crisis. Technical report.
Romer, C. (2009). The case for …scal stimulus: The likely e¤ects of the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act. U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, February 27,
2009.
Sargent, T. and N. Wallace (1981). Some Unpleasant Monetarist Arithmetic.
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review Fall, 1–17.
Schmitt-Grohe, S. and M. Uribe (2000). Price level determinacy and monetary policy under a balanced-budget requirement. Journal of Monetary Economics 45 (1), 211–246.
Sims, C. A. (1994). A Simple Model for Study of the Determination of the Price

39

Level and the Interaction of Monetary and Fiscal Policy. Economic Theory 4,
381–399.
Sims, C. A. (2010a). Commentary on Policy at the Zero Lower Bound. Princeton
University, working paper.
Sims, C. A. (2010b). Modeling the In‡uence of Fiscal Policy on In‡ation. Princeton University, working paper.
Sims, C. A. and T. Zha (2006). Were There Regime Switches in US Monetary
Policy? American Economic Review 91 (1), 54–81.
Werning, I. (2012). Managing a Liquidity Trap: Monetary and Fiscal Policy.
MIT working paper.
Woodford, M. (1994). Monetary Policy and Price Level Determinacy in a Cashin-Advance Economy. Economic Theory 4, 345–389.
Woodford, M. (1995). Price Level Determinacy without Control of a Monetary
Aggregate. Carnegie-Rochester Series of Public Policy 43, 1–46.
Woodford, M. (2001). Fiscal Requirements of Price Stability. Journal of Money,
Credit, and Banking 33, 669–728.

40

Online Appendix
A

Markov-switching VAR

In this appendix, we describe the MS-VAR used in Section 2.

A.1

Model setup

The variables of interest are assumed to evolve according to a Markov-switching
VAR with two lags:
1=2

Zt = c t + A t ;1 Zt 1 + A t ;2 Zt 2 +
!t
t
i
h
= c t ; A t ;1 ; A t ;2 ; ! t N (0; I)
t

(8)
(9)

where Zt is a (n 1) vector of data. The unobserved states t and t can take
on a …nite number of values, j = 1; : : : ; m and j = 1; : : : ; m ; and follow
two independent Markov chains. This represents a convenient way to model
heteroskedasticity and to allow for the possibility of changes in the dynamics of
the state variables. The probability of moving from one state to another is given
by P [ t = ij t 1 = j] = hij and P [ t = ij t 1 = j] = hij . Given H = [hij ]
and H = [hij ] and a prior distribution for the initial state, we can compute the
likelihood of the parameters of the model, conditional on the initial observation
Z0 . We impose ‡at priors on all parameters of the models, implying that the
posterior coincides with the likelihood.

A.2

Likelihood and regime probabilities

De…ne the combined regime

t

t

;

t

, the associated transition matrix H

H H ; and vector t
; t with the corresponding set of parameters.
t
For each draw of the parameters t and H; we can then compute the …ltered
probabilities tjt , or smoothed probabilities tjT ; of the regimes conditional on
the model parameters. The …ltered probabilities re‡ect the probability of a
regime conditional on the data up to time t, tjt = p( t jY t ; H; t ), for t =
1

1; :::; T , and are part of the output obtained computing the likelihood function
associated with the parameter draw H; t . The …ltered probabilities can be
obtained using the following recursive algorithm:
tjt 1

=

tjt

10

tjt 1

= H

t+1jt

t

(10)
t

(11)

tjt

p(Zt jZ t 1 ) = 10

tjt 1

(12)

t

where t is a vector whose jth element contains the conditional density p(Zt j t =
i; Z t 1 ; H; t ), the symbol denotes element by element multiplication, and 1
is a vector with all elements equal to 1. To initialize the recursive calculation, we
need an assumption on the distribution of 0 . We assume that the nine regimes
have equal probabilities p( 0 = i) = 1=9 for i = 1:::m: The likelihood for the
entire data sequence Z T is obtained multiplying the one-step-ahead conditional
likelihoods p(Zt jZ t 1 ):
p ZT j

=

QT

t=1

p Zt jZ t

1

The smoothed probabilities re‡ect all the information that can be extracted
from the whole data sample, tjT = p( t jZ T ; H; t ). The …nal term T jT is returned with the …nal step of the …ltering algorithm. Then a recursive algorithm
can be implemented to derive the other probabilities:
tjT

=

H0

tjt

t+1jT

( )

t+1jt

where ( ) denotes element by element division.
Finally, it is possible to obtain the …ltered and smoothed probabilities for
each of the two independent chains by integrating out the other chain. For
example, if we are interested in tjt = p( t jY t ; H; t ) we have:
;i
tjt

= p(

t

= ijY t ; H;

t

)=

Pm

2

j=1

p(

t

= fi; jgjY t ; H;

t

)

Similarly, the smoothed probabilities are obtained as:
;i
tjT

A.3

= p(

t

= ijY T ; H;

t

)=

Pm

j=1

p(

t

= fi; jgjY T ; H;

t

):

Posterior Mode and Gibbs sampling algorithm

We …rst …nd the posterior mode by using a minimization algorithm on the
negative of the posterior. Given that we have ‡at priors, our point estimates
coincide with the maximum likelihood estimates. Once we have found the posterior mode, we compute the most likely regime sequence and then proceed to
characterize uncertainty around the parameter values conditional on this regime
sequence by using a Gibbs sampling algorithm. Alternatively, we could have
imposed some identifying restrictions based on the properties of the regimes at
the posterior mode, but we preferred to take this more agnostic approach. This
makes the interpretation of the results more immediate because the properties
of the regimes can be immediately associated with the periods during which
they were in place.
Both the VAR coe¢ cients and the covariance matrix can switch and the
regimes are assumed to be independent. Draws for the parameters of the model
can be made following the following Gibbs sampling algorithm:
1. Sampling t given t ; t ; t : Given t and ;T ; we can compute the
residuals of the MS-VAR at each point in time. Then, given t ; we can
group all the residuals that pertain to a particular regime. Therefore, t
can be drawn from an inverse Wishart distribution for t = 1:::m .
2. Sampling t given t ; t ; t : When drawing the VAR coe¢ cients, we
need to take into account the heteroskedasticity implied by the switches
in t : This can be done following the following steps for each i = 1:::m :
(a) Based on

;T

; collect all the observation such that

t

= i:

(b) Divide the data that refer to t = j based on ;T : We now have a
series of subsamples for which VAR coe¢ cients and covariance matrices are …xed: t = i; t = 1 ; :::; t = i; t = m : Denote these
3

subsamples with yi; t ; xi; t ; where the yi; t and xi; t denote lefthand-side and right-hand-side variables in the MS-VAR. Notice that
some of these subsamples might be empty.
(c) Apply recursively the formulas for the posterior of VAR coe¢ cients
conditional on a known covariance matrix. Therefore, for j = 1:::m
the following formulas need to be applied recursively:
P T 1 = PL 1 +
BT = BL + (

1

(x0i; xi; t )
t

t

1

x0i;

t

t

)vec(yi; t )

PL 1 = PT 1 ; BL = BT
where the algorithm is initialized using the priors for the VAR coef1
…cients BL = B0 and PL 1 = P0 1 = S0 N0 1
: Notice that this
implies that if there are not any observations for a particular regime,
then the posterior will coincide with the priors. With proper priors,
this is not a problem.
(d) Make a draw for the VAR coe¢ cients vec
with

t

t

N (PT BT ; PT )

= i:

3. Sampling H and H : Given the draws for the state variables ;T and
;T
, the transition probabilities are independent of Yt and the other parameters of the model and have a Dirichlet distribution. For each column
of H and H ; the posterior distribution is given by:
H s (:; i)

D(asii +

s
s
ii ; aij

+

s
ij );

s= ;

where ij and ij denote respectively the numbers of transitions from state
i to state j and from state i to state j .

A.4

Data

We use four observables to estimate the Markov-switching VAR: (i) in‡ation; (ii)
real GDP growth; (iii) federal funds rate; (iv) de…cit-to-debt ratio. In‡ation and
4

=1
uER

t

uT Y
uP E
uV S
t

=2

uER
uT Y
uP E
uV S
t

=3

uER
uT Y
uP E
uV S

uER
1:2377

uT Y

uP E

uV S

(1:1183;1:3693)

0:2235
( 0:3623; 0:0824)

0:0378

( 0:1003;0:1817)

0:4275

0:7015

(0:6319;0:7784)

0:1778
( 0:3119; 0:0366)

0:1983

0:2516

(0:2278;0:2788)

0:2672

0:2688

( 0:5414; 0:3041)

(0:0452;0:3362)

(0:1323;0:3996)

(0:2425;0:2981)

uER
3:7397

uT Y

uP E

uV S

(3:2247;4:3585;)

0:2054
( 0:4038;0:0044)

0:2112
( 0:4120;0:0055)

0:2157

1:3657

(1:1625;1:6117)

0:1114
( 0:3284;0:1069)

0:1558

0:0369

(0:2753;0:3726)

0:1837

0:0279

( 0:4057; 0:0112)

( 0:0649;0:3668)

( 0:0400;0:3989)

(0:6139;0:8324)

uER
4:4369

uT Y

uP E

uV S

(3:1092;6:3281)

0:4984
( 0:8002; 0:0732)

0:3404
( 0:7160;0:1282)

0:9854
( 0:9966; 0:9646)

1:9303

(1:3216;2:7927)

0:2079

( 0:3043;0:6676)

0:5879

(0:216;0:8439)

0:6111

(0:3993;0:9047)

0:241

( 0:2430;0:6507)

3:4718

(2:4454;4:9064)

Table 5: Parameter estimates for the covariance matrix. The three sets of tables contain
means and 90% error bands for the posterior distribution of the parameters of the covariance
matrices. The standard deviations of the shocks are on the main diagonal, whereas the
correlations of the shocks are below the main diagonal.

real output growth are de…ned as year-to-year …rst di¤erences of the logarithm
of the GDP price de‡ator and real GDP, respectively. In‡ation, real GDP, and
the federal funds rate are taken from the FRED II database of the Federal
Reserve Bank of St. Louis. The primary de…cit is constructed from the NIPA
tables (Table 3.2. Federal Government Current Receipts and Expenditures) as
detailed in Appendix C. As a measure of the …scal stance, we consider the
variable de…cits over debt. The government debt series is the market value of
the US government debt available on the Dallas Fed website. The sample period
ranges from 1954:Q4-2014:Q1.

5

A.5

Volatility regimes

Table 5 reports the estimates of the covariance matrix across di¤erent volatility
regimes.

B

Benchmark Model

In what follows, we provide the details for the solution and estimation of the
model.

B.1

System of equations

1. Linearized Euler equation:
1 + Ma 1 ybt =

Ma 1

1

Ma 1
+Ma 1 (b
yt

a
1

h
bt
R

Et et+1

(1

d ) dt

at + Et ybt+1 + 1
get 1 )

g

d dt + E dt d

+ Ma 1

get

where Ma = exp ( ) and d dt follows a Markov-switching process governed
by the transition matrix H d : Please refer to the next subsection for details
about how to handle the discrete shock.
2. New Keynesian Phillips curve:

et =

0 h
@

1

i

1
+1
ybt
MA 1
1
MA
(b
yt 1
1
MA 1

+ Et [et+1 ] + et

1

get

where we have used the rescaled markup et =

3. No arbitrage condition

i
h
e t = Et R
em
R
t;t+1

6

1

1
ge
MA 1 t

at )

1

et

1
A

d
t+1

i

4. Return long term bond
etm 1;t = R
R

Petm

1

5. Government budget constraint:
1em
bt 1

ebm =
t

bm
R
t 1;t

1

+ bm

Petm 1
ybt + ybt

e t + g 1 get + tp
et
et + tr

et

at

1

6. Monetary policy rule
h
1

et =
R

+Z

d
t

Z
h

d
t

ih

et =

;

8. Transfers
et
tr

e

R;Z Rt 1

7. Fiscal rule
p
t

R;

et 1 + 1

et
tr

=

p
t

tr

p
t

;

et
tr

et
R

1

1

+ (1

1

h

R)

R;Z

b;

p
t

;

Z

ebm +
t 1

e t +(1
tr

p
t

et +

log (R) +

e

tr )

y

(b
yt

tr

et
tr

1

+

tr

tr ;t ; tr ;t

Z R;t

ybt )+

11. TFP growth

et 1
gg

+

at =

g g;t ;

a at 1

7

g;t

+

N (0; 1) :

a "a;t

y

(b
yt

tr tr;t ;

N (0; 1)

10. Government purchases (e
gt = ln(gt =g)):
get =

ybt ] +

[b
yt
i

e t + g 1 get +
tr

9. Long term component of transfers
et =
tr

y;

p
t

R R;t

i
ybt ) +

tr;t

i

;t

N (0; 1)

12. Term premium
tpt =
13. The rescaled markup t =
an autoregressive process,

tp tpt 1

+

tp "tp;t

log (@t =@) ; where @t = 1= (1

t

=

t 1

+

t) ;

follows

;t

14. Output target

1

B.2

1
+
Ma 1 1

Model solution

ybt =

1

1
get +
Ma 1
1

Ma 1
yb
Ma 1 t

1

get

1

at

As explained in the main text, the Markov-switching process for the discrete
preference shock d dt is de…ned in a way that its steady state is equal to zero.
In order to solve the model we implement the following steps:
1. Introduce a dummy variable e dt controlling the regime that is in place for
the discrete preference shock. Augment the DSGE state vector with this
dummy variable.
2. Use the aforementioned dummy variable to rewrite all the equations linked
to the discrete preference shock. These are the linearized Euler equation
and the linearized Taylor rule.
3. Solve the model using Farmer et al. (2009). This returns a MS-VAR:
Set = Te ( t ; H; ) Set

in the augmented state vector Set :

1

e ( t ; H; ) Q"t
+R

4. Extract the column corresponding to the dummy variable e dt from the
matrix Te and rede…ne the matrices and the DSGE state vector accordingly.
8

This will return a MS-VAR with a MS constant:
St = c ( t ; H; ) + T ( t ; H; ) St

1

+ R ( t ; H; ) Q"t

where Q is a diagonal matrix that contains the standard deviations of the
structural shocks and St is a vector with all variables of the model.
Unlike other papers that have used the technique described here, our model
allows for non-orthogonality between policymakers’ behavior and a discrete
shock. This allows us to solve a model in which agents take into account that
a large preference shock leads to an immediate change in policy, the zero lower
bound, and, potentially, to further changes. This proposed method is general
and can be applied to other cases in which a shock induces a change in the
structural parameters.

B.3

Matrices used in the counterfactual simulations

We here describe the matrices used in the simulations reported in the paper.
B.3.1

Textbook New Keynesian model: Always monetary-led

In the …rst counterfactual simulation, policymakers always follow the monetaryled regime when out of the zero lower bound. Furthermore, there is only one
zero-lower-bound regime from which agents expect to return to the monetaryled regime. Therefore, the transition matrix used to solve this counterfactual
economy is given by:
H p = 1; H d =

"

phh
1 phh

1

pll
pll

#

; H = H d:

where phh and pll are the estimated parameter values.
B.3.2

Announcements

In the counterfactual economy with announcements, at the zero lower bound
we distinguish two cases, based on the exit strategy:
9

1. Policymakers announce that they will move to the monetary-led regime
once the economy out of the zero lower bound.
2. Policymakers announce that they will immediately move to the …scally-led
regime.
We assume that the probability of the …rst scenario is equal to the estimated
probability of switching to the monetary-led regime in the benchmark model.
In other words, the …rst scenario is more likely than the second scenario and it
has a probability equal to pZM . Furthermore, their probabilities do not depend
on the regime that was in place when the negative preference shock occurred.
We then have a total of four regimes t = f[M; h]; [F; h]; [Z; l]; [F; l]g and the
corresponding transition matrix is given by:
H=

"

phh H p
(1 phh ) H i

pll ) H o
pll H z

#

; Ho =

"

1

"

1

Hp =

"

pM M
1 pM M

1

pF F

#

Hi =

"

pZM
1 pZM

pZM
1 pZM

#

; Hz =

1

pll

Hd =

C

(1

"

pF F

phh
1 phh

pll

#

1

#

;

1

#

;

:

Estimation of the DSGE model

This appendix describes the dataset and provides details for the benchmark
model.

C.1

Dataset

Real GDP, the GDP de‡ator, and the series for …scal variables are obtained from
the Bureau of Economic Analysis. The …scal series are built using NIPA Table
3.2. (Federal Government Current Receipts and Expenditures). Government
10

purchases (G) are computed as the sum of consumption expenditure (L24),
gross government investment (L44), net purchases of non-produced assets (L46),
minus consumption of …xed capital (L47). Transfers are given by the sum of net
current transfer payments (L25-L18), subsidies (L35), and net capital transfers
(L45-L41). Tax revenues are given by the di¤erence between current receipts
(L40) and current transfer receipts (L18). All variables are then expressed as a
fraction of GDP. Government purchases are transformed in a way to obtain the
variable gt de…ned in the model. The series for the federal funds rate is obtained
averaging monthly …gures downloaded from the St. Louis Fed web-site.

C.2

MCMC algorithm and convergence

Draws from the posterior are obtained using a standard Metropolis-Hastings
algorithm initialized around the posterior mode. When working with models
whose posterior distribution is very complicated in shape it is very important
to …nd the posterior mode. In a MS-DSGE model, this search can turn out to
be an extremely time-consuming task, but it is a necessary step to reduce the
risk of the algorithm getting stuck in a local peak. Here are the key steps of the
Metropolis-Hastings algorithm:
Step 1: Draw a new set of parameters from the proposal distribution:
# N n 1; c
Step 2: Compute ( m ; #) = min p (#) =p
posterior evaluated at .
Step 3: Accept the new parameter and set
u U ([0; 1]), otherwise set m = m 1
Step 4: If m

m 1

m

; 1 where p ( ) is the

= # if u <

(

m

; #) where

nsim ; stop. Otherwise, go back to step 1

The matrix corresponds to the inverse of the Hessian computed at the posterior mode . The parameter c is set to obtain an acceptance rate of around
35%. Table 6 reports results based on the Brooks-Gelman-Rubin potential reduction scale factor using within and between variances based on the …ve multiple chains used in the paper. The eight chains consist of 2; 100; 000 draws each
11

Parameter PSRF Parameter PSRF Parameter PSRF Parameter PSRF
1.01
1
1
100 R
1
;M
Z
d
1.05
1.15
1
100 g
1
y;M
tp
1
1.01
100 a
1
1.01
b;M
R;M
1
1.01
100
1
100
1
;M
tr
1.06
1.03
100
1
100 d
1.04
y
;F
m
1.05
1.04
b
1.01
100 tr
1
y;F
1
1.07
g
1
100
1
e
tp
R;F
1.02
1
1.02
100
1
;F
g
1.01
1.01
p
1.02
dl
1.01
FF
a
y
phh
1.09
pll
1.02
pM M
1.01
pZM
1.01
Table 6: The table reports the Gelman-Rubin Potential Scale Reduction Factor (PSRF) for
eight chains of 540,000 draws each (1 every 200 is stored). Values below 1.2 are regarded as
indicative of convergence.

(1 every 3000 draws is saved). The numbers are well below the 1:2 benchmark
value used as an upper bound for convergence.

C.3

Determining the time of the ZLB Regime

For tractability, we …x the sequence of Markov-switching regimes to estimate
the model. To select the date at which the ZLB regime has started, we compute
the posterior modes associated with a number of candidate dates. As shown in
Table 7, the fourth quarter of 2008 (2008:Q4) attains the highest posterior mode
and hence is selected as the date at which the ZLB regime has started (recall
that all models only di¤er in terms of the starting date for the ZLB regime, so
they present the same number of parameters).

D

A Prototypical New Keynesian Model with
a Fiscal Block

The objective of this appendix is to show that the results of Section 4.2 are
robust when one considers models that has less bells and whistles and are more
agnostic about the nature of shocks than the model we estimated in the pa-

12

Starting date of ZLB Regime
2008:Q1
2008:Q2
2008:Q3
2008:Q4
2009:Q1
2009:Q2
2009:Q3

Likelihood Posterior
6,428.5
6,374.2
6,370.0
6,376.0
6,407.4
6,415.1
6,522.4
6,521.1
6,496.5
6,497.7
6,490.0
6,487.9
6,475.8
6,476.6

Table 7: The table shows the value of the posterior and the likelihood at the posterior mode
as the starting date of the ZLB regime changes. The results associated with the highest
posterior mode are in bold.

per. Let us a consider a prototypical New Keynesian DSGE model of the type
studied in Eggertsson and Woodford (2003). This modeling framework is purposely very stylized and follows Eggertsson and Woodford (2003) in considering
unanticipated shocks to the natural rate of interest as the cause of ZLB episodes.
The loglinearized equations of the model are as follows. All the variables
henceforth are expressed in log-deviations from their steady-state values with
the only exception of the debt-to-output ratio bt , which is de…ned in deviation
from its steady-state value. The IS equation reads:
1

xt = Et xt+1

(Rt

Et

t+1

rtn )

(13)

where xt denotes the gap between the actual output and its ‡exible-price level
(henceforth, the output gap), t denotes in‡ation, Rt denotes the nominal interest rate, and rtn stands for the natural rate of interest, which is the real interest
rate that would be realized if prices were perfectly ‡exible.
The New Keynesian Phillips curve is
t

= xt + E t

(14)

t+1

The monetary policy reaction function is:
h
Rt = 1

Z

d
t

ih

R Rt

1 + (1

R)

13

;

p
t

t+

x xt

i

Z dt ln (R)

(15)

where R is the steady-state value of the nominal interest rate Rt . Note that
the monetary authority follows the Taylor rule when Z dt = 0 or set its (net)
nominal rate equal to its zero lower bound when Z dt = 1. It should be noted
that Z dt is a dummy variable assuming value 0 and 1 depending on the realization of an exogenous discrete Markov-switching process dt . As we shall discuss
below, this process determines the natural rate of interest rtn , implying that
ZLB episodes are caused by unanticipated and recurrent, exogenously-driven
falls in the natural rate of interest. Furthermore, when the economy is out of
the ZLB, the value of the policy parameter ; pt , which controls how strongly
the central bank adjusts the nominal interest rate to in‡ation, are a¤ected by
the exogenous discrete Markov-switching process pt .
The natural rate of interest is linked to the (exogenous) dynamics of the
natural output though the IS equation under ‡exible prices:
rtn =

n
Et yt+1

(16)

where ytn stands for the growth rate of natural output, whose value at any
time is assumed to depend on the realization of a discrete Markov-switching
process dt .
The …scal rule that determines the primary surplus t
t

=

b;

p
t

bt

1

+

(17)

x xt

where bt stands for the government debt-to-output ratio. Note that the response
of the primary surplus to the last period’s debt-to-output ratio is given by
p
b; pt whose value depends on the realization of the Markov-switching process t
that also determines the central bank’s response to in‡ation in the Taylor rule.
Hence, the process pt captures the monetary-…scal policy mix out of the zero
lower bound
The government’s budget constraint is driven by
bt =

1

bt

1

+b

1

(Rt

1

14

t

xt

ytn )

t

(18)

There are two exogenous Markov-switching processes: pt and dt . The former
captures monetary and …scal authority’s response to their targets out of the zero
lower bound. More speci…cally we assume that there are two monetary and …scal
policy mix: a monetary-led regime ( pt = M ) and a Fiscally-led regime ( pt = F ).
Under the monetary-led regime the monetary authority responds strongly to
in‡ation ; pt > 1 and the …scal authority promptly adjusts the primary surplus
1
to changes in the debt-to-output ratio b; pt >
1 .16 Under the …scallyled policy regime the monetary authority adjusts the nominal interest rate Rt
less vigorously to in‡ation ; pt 1 and the …scal authority pays less attention
1
to the dynamics of its debt-to-output ratio b; pt
1 . The transition
matrix driving the policy regime out of the zero lower bound pt is given by the
following matrix
"
#
p
1
p
M
M
F
F
Hp =
1 pM M
pF F
The non-Gaussian process dt determines the growth rate of natural output
and hence the natural interest rate through equation (16). The growth rate of
n
n
> yLn ; and these two states
; yLn g ; where yH
natural output ytn 2 f yH
evolve according to the transition matrix:
Hd =

"

phh
1 pll
1 phh
pll

#

When the growth rate of natural output is low, the natural rate is low, and
the policymakers are assumed to engage in the ZLB policy regime, which is
characterized by a nominal interest rate set to zero and no adjustment of primary
surplus to changes in the debt-to-output ratio.
In summary, the joint evolution of policymakers’ behavior and the shock
to the natural rate is captured by the regime obtained combining the two
chains t = pt ; dt . The combined chain can assume three values: t =
f[M; h] ; [F; h] ; Z; lg. The corresponding transition matrix H is obtained by
combining the transition matrix H d , which describes the evolution of the pref16

See Leeper (1991) for the derivation of this cut-o¤ values for the policy parameters de…ning
the monetary-led and the …scally-led policy regimes.

15

Parameters Values
2:00
;M
0:03
b;M
0:80
;F
0:00
b;F
0:00
b;Z
0:03
1:00
0:10
x
0:85
i
0:5
x

Parameters
phh
pll
pM M
pF F
pZM
100
b
ytn
ytn

d
t = h
d
t = l

Values
0:98
0:95
0:99
0:99
0:50
0:5
0:30
0:995
5:30
21:33

Table 8: Parameters used for the prototypical New Keynesian model.

erence shock; the transition matrix H p , which describes policymakers’behavior
out of the zero lower bound, and the parameter pZM that controls the probability of moving to the monetary-led regime once the negative preference shock
is reabsorbed:
"
# 3
2
p
ZM
phh H p
(1 pll )
6
7
H=4
1 pZM
5
(1

phh ) [1; 1]

pll

Table 8 reports the parameter values we will use to study the property of
this stylized model. The parameters , and b denote the steady-state in‡ation
and the steady-state value of the government debt-to-output ratio.
The exogenous drop in the growth rate of natural output is chosen so that
to induce an annualized natural rate of 20% during the ZLB periods. In
the benchmark calibration, we set the probability of moving to the monetaryled policy mix after the ZLB episode equal to pZM = 50% so as to capture
a situation of sizable uncertainty about the policymakers’behaviors when the
economy will exit the ZLB.
Figure 14 shows the dynamics of the output gap, in‡ation, and debt-to-GDP
ratio in the aftermath of a discrete shock to the natural rate. We consider the
benchmark case with parameter values reported in Table 8 and a counterfactual
case in which agents are much more certain that the policy mix out of the ZLB
16

Output Gap

Inflation

Debt-to-GDP
200

15
0

180

Benchmark
Less Policy Uncertainty

10

-0.05

160

-0.1

140

5

-0.15

120
0

-0.2

100
-5

-0.25
-0.3

80
60

-10

-0.35

40
-15
20

40

60

20

40

60

20

40

60

Figure 14: Prototypical New Keynesian model. The …gure reports the impulse responses to a discrete shock to the natural interest rate. In the Benchmark model there is
high policy uncertainty, while in the counterfactual economy agents think that they are more
likely to move to the Monetary led regime.

will be monetary-led (pZM = 85%). Both economies are hit by a negative shock
to the natural rate at time 6.17
It should be observed that larger policy uncertainty causes absence of de‡ation in presence of a negative output gap as the economy hits the ZLB. Furthermore, policy uncertainty about policymakers’future behavior largely mitigates
the output gap. These results are qualitatively in line with the ones obtained
from our estimated model in Section 4.2. The exercise made in this section
makes it clear that the results analyzed in the paper are not driven by the type
of shock we chose to trigger the ZLB episode or by the more articulated nature
of the model used for estimation.

E

Model without the …scal block

In what follows, we provide the details for the model that removes the …scal
block. As explained in the main text, this model is nested in the benchmark
model and it does not feature any uncertainty about the way debt will be
17

Both economies are assumed to be at their respective out-of-ZLB steady-state equilibrium.
However, the starting level of the debt-to-GDP ratio in the counterfactual economy is set to
be equal to that in the benchmark so as to ease the comparison.

17

…nanced. For this reason, debt and non-distortionary taxation become irrelevant
for macroeconomic dynamics.

E.1

System of equations

1. Linearized Euler equation:
1 + Ma 1 ybt =

Ma 1

1

Ma 1

a

h
bt
R

Et et+1

(1

d ) dt

at + Et ybt+1 + 1

g

d dt + E dt d

+ Ma 1

d
t+1

i

get + Ma 1 (b
yt

where Ma = exp ( ) and d dt follows a Markov-switching process governed
by the transition matrix H d : Please refer to the next subsection for details
about how to handle the discrete shock.
2. New Keynesian Phillips curve:
et =

1
+
1
MA 1 1
+ Et [et+1 ] + et

ybt

1
get
MA 1

1

where we have used the rescaled markup et =

3. No arbitrage condition

em = R
R
t 1;t

5. Monetary policy rule
et =
R

h

1

+Z

d
t

Z
h

d
t

ih

R;

e

p
t

R;Z Rt 1

1

et
R

1

1

+ (1
R;Z

18

1

Petm
R)
Z

1

get

1

et

1

h
i
m
e t = Et R
et;t+1
R

4. Return long term bond

MA 1
(b
yt
MA 1

Petm 1

;

p
t

et +

log (R) +

y;

p
t

[b
yt
i

Z R;t

ybt ] +

R R;t

i

at )

1

get 1 )

6. Government purchases (e
gt = ln(gt =g)):

7. TFP growth

get =

et 1
gg

+

at =
8. The rescaled markup t =
an autoregressive process,

g g;t ;

a at 1

g;t

+

N (0; 1) :

a "a;t

log (@t =@) ; where @t = 1= (1

t

=

t 1

+

t) ;

follows

;t

9. Output target

1

E.2

1
+
Ma 1 1

ybt =

1

1
get +
Ma 1
1

Ma 1
yb
Ma 1 t

1

get

1

at

Parameter estimates

Table 9 reports the parameter estimates for the model that excludes the …scal
block. As observables, we use four of the seven series used to estimate the
benchmark model: GDP growth, in‡ation, federal funds rate, and government
expenditure. Note that including the remaining …scal series would be irrelevant
for the dynamics of the macroeconomy because Ricardian equivalence applies
when imposing that …scal policy is always passive.

E.3

Dynamics at the zero lower bound

Figure 15 shows that the model without the …scal block needs to use a combination of shocks in order to explain the absence of de‡ation during the zero
lower bound. The …gure reports the dynamics of in‡ation and output starting
from 2008:Q4 in response to two shocks. The discrete preference shock and a
large negative TFP shock. To ease the comparison with the results reported in
Section 5, we also report the 90% error bands for the impulse response to the
19

;1
y;1
R;1
;2
y;2
R;2

dl
phh
pll
pM M
pF F
pZM
Z

g
a
d

100 R
100 g
100 a
100 d
100
100
100
g

Mean
2:2157
0:3334
0:8641
1:1032
0:2678
0:8361
0:2592
0:9610
0:8958
0:9613
0:9595
0:5009
0:9698
0:0707
0:8601
0:9919
0:1608
0:9358
0:3291
0:2118
0:2775
1:4785
13:8890
0:2274
0:5678
0:4100
1:0758

5%
1:7523
0:1542
0:8170
0:8242
0:1388
0:7811
0:4124
0:9204
0:7792
0:9072
0:9075
0:1478
0:9608
0:0467
0:8147
0:9847
0:0583
0:9083
0:1082
0:1958
0:2568
1:3037
9:8559
0:1965
0:4800
0:3352
1:0604

95%
2:6568
0:5421
0:9118
1:3961
0:4414
0:8874
0:1272
0:9886
0:9711
0:9923
0:9914
0:8451
0:9781
0:1025
0:8996
0:9971
0:2786
0:9599
0:6432
0:2295
0:2997
1:6729
19:2040
0:2715
0:6607
0:4912
1:0942

Type
N
G
B
G
G
B
N
D
D
D
D
D
B
G
B
B
B
B
B
IG
IG
IG
IG
IG
G
G
N

Mean
2:5
0:4
0:5
0:8
0:15
0:5
0:3
0:96
0:83
0:96
0:96
0:50
0:95
0:3
0:5
0:5
0:5
0:5
0:5
0:5
1:00
1:00
10:00
1:00
0:5
0:4
1:06

Std
0:3
0:2
0:2
0:3
0:1
0:2
0:1
0:03
0:10
0:03
0:03
0:22
0:02
0:15
0:2
0:2
0:2
0:2
0:2
0:5
1:00
1:00
2:00
1:00
0:05
0:05
0:04

Table 9: Posterior means, 90% posterior error bands and priors of thel parameters for the
model that exludes the …scal block. For the structural parameters, the su¢ x denotes the
regime. The letters in the column "Type" indicate the prior density function: N, G, B, D,
and IG stand for Normal, Gamma, Beta, Dirichlet, and Inverse Gamma, respectively.

discrete preference shock only. While the discrete preference shock accounts for
the bulk of the decline of in‡ation, the fall in output growth is mostly explained
by the negative preference shock. As explained in the paper, the result shows
that …scal uncertainty plays a key role in explaining the joint dynamics of in‡ation and output. Once the …scal block in removed, a combination of shocks
is necessary to explain the joint dynamics of output and in‡ation.
Figure 16 examines the properties of the traditional New Keynesian model to
match the joint behavior of output growth and in‡ation from a di¤erent angle.
This exercise is based on the estimates for the benchmark model, but removing
20

Figure 15: Macroeconomic dynamics at the zero lower bound without …scal block:
The role of TFP shocks. Response of GDP growth and in‡ation to a discrete negative
preference shock and a contemporaneous negative TFP shock based on a model that excludes
the …scal block. The red dashed line reports actual data, while the shaded areas report the
90% error bands when only the discrete prefence shock occurs.
GDP growth

Inflation

0.5

0.6

0

0.4
0.2

-0.5
Data
Slope/2
Slope/4
Slope/8

-1

0

-1.5

-0.2

-2

-0.4

-2.5

-0.6
-0.8
5

10

15

20

25

5

10

15

20

25

Figure 16: Macroeconomic dynamics at the zero lower bound without …scal block:
The role of nominal rigidities. Response of GDP growth and in‡ation to a large discrete
negative preference shock for di¤erent values of the slope of the Phillips curve, .

the …scally-led regime. We chose the estimated benchmark model as a starting
point because the size of the discrete shock is in fact able to generate a realistic
contraction in real activity. We then ask what slope of the Phillips curve can
deliver a behavior of in‡ation and output growth in line with what observed in
the data. The solid blue line corresponds to the case in which the slope of the
Phillips curve is divided by two, implying that in average the slope is around
:0036. Clearly in this case the model can generate a sizeable recession, but a the
cost of generating de‡ation. Dividing the estimates slope by four, things slightly
improve, but in‡ation is still too low. Finally, with a mean of the slope around
:0009 and ranging from :0006 to :0024 we can obtain a behavior of in‡ation
more in line of the data, at the cost of a smaller recession.
Summarizing, we can highlight three conclusions based on the analysis of
21

a model that excludes the …scal block. First, in order to rationalize the joint
dynamics of in‡ation and output, a very large level of nominal rigidities are
necessary. Second, when using both data before and at the zero lower bound,
this high level of nominal rigidities is rejected by the estimates. Instead, the
model explains the zero lower bound dynamics as a result of two combined
shocks: A discrete preference shock and contemporaneous negative TFP shock.
This is because we do not ask the model to simply match the zero lower bound
events, but also what happened before this event. Finally, the standard New
Keynesian model cannot generate the drop followed by the slight upward of
in‡ation observed in the data. In the model this is caused by the fact that
as more time is spent at the zero lower bound, the …scal burden increases,
generating in‡ationary pressure.

22

