NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

OPTIMAL TAYLOR RULES IN NEW KEYNESIAN MODELS
Christoph E. Boehm
Christopher L. House
Working Paper 20237
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20237
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2014

We thank Kosuke Aoki, Robert Barsky, Olivier Coibion, Laurien Gilbert, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, Miles
Kimball, Glenn Rudebusch and Nitya Pandalai Nayar for helpful suggestions. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Christoph E. Boehm and Christopher L. House. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Optimal Taylor Rules in New Keynesian Models
Christoph E. Boehm and Christopher L. House
NBER Working Paper No. 20237
June 2014
JEL No. E3,E31,E4,E43,E5,E52,E58
ABSTRACT
We analyze the optimal Taylor rule in a standard New Keynesian model. If the central bank can observe
the output gap and the inflation rate without error, then it is typically optimal to respond infinitely
strongly to observed deviations from the central bank’s targets. If it observes inflation and the output
gap with error, the central bank will temper its responses to observed deviations so as not to impart
unnecessary volatility to the economy. If the Taylor rule is expressed in terms of estimated output
and inflation then it is optimal to respond infinitely strongly to estimated deviations from the targets.
Because filtered estimates are based on current and past observations, such Taylor rules appear to have
an interest smoothing component. Under such a Taylor rule, if the central bank is behaving optimally,
the estimates of inflation and the output gap should be perfectly negatively correlated. In the data,
inflation and the output gap are weakly correlated, suggesting that the central bank is systematically
underreacting to its estimates of inflation and the output gap.
Christoph E. Boehm
University of Michigan
Department of Economics
238 Lorch Hall
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
chrisboe@umich.edu
Christopher L. House
University of Michigan
Department of Economics
238 Lorch Hall
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
and NBER
chouse@umich.edu

1. INTRODUCTION
Taylor rules are simple linear relationships between a central bank’s choice of a target interest
rate, observed output (or the “output gap”) and observed inflation (Taylor, 1993). Suitably
parameterized, they are reasonable descriptions of how actual central banks set interest rates.
In addition, monetary policy is often discussed by journalists, researchers and central bankers
themselves in terms that fit comfortably into a Taylor rule framework. For example, whether
the federal funds rate should be increased or decreased is typically discussed in terms of
whether inflation is relatively too high or whether GDP (or employment) is too low. A central
banker who fights inflation aggressively can be modeled as following a Taylor rule with a large
coefficient on inflation. A central banker who reacts more strongly to output would have a
relatively higher coefficient on the output gap, and so forth.
While Taylor rules are useful descriptions of actual policy and common components of many
prominent New Keynesian models, it is well‐known that optimal monetary policy is rarely given
by a Taylor rule. Instead, optimal policy depends in complicated ways on the underlying state
variables and is often history dependent (see Woodford, 1999). By confining attention to
current inflation and the current output gap, a Taylor rule is unnecessarily restrictive.1
Nevertheless, given the underlying model, it is a meaningful question to ask what the optimal
parameterization of a Taylor rule is. Addressing this question is the goal of this paper.
We anticipate that much of what we have to say will not come as a surprise to researchers at
the frontier of New Keynesian economics. Indeed, we suspect that many of our results exist as
folk wisdom among New Keynesian researchers. (If you are Mike Woodford or Jordi Galí, you
can stop reading now). Instead, our intended audience consists of consumers of New Keynesian
economics – researchers who often use macroeconomic models with sticky prices and want to
draw on established results from the New Keynesian literature (we include ourselves in this
group).
In this paper, we consider the nature of the optimal Taylor rule in the basic New Keynesian
model. That is, we assume the monetary authority is committed to using a Taylor rule, and ask
what coefficients maximize the central bank’s objective function. When the output gap and
inflation are observed without error, it is typically best to adopt infinitely aggressive responses
to output and inflation – i.e., the optimal coefficients on inflation and output are arbitrarily
large. If the only shocks to the economy are shocks to the efficient rate of output (“demand
shocks”), then any Taylor rule which responds infinitely strongly to either output or inflation (or
both) will maximize welfare. If the only shocks perturbing the economy are shocks to the New
Keynesian Phillips Curve (“cost‐push shocks”), then there exists a continuum of optimal
coefficients for the Taylor rule. If the output gap and inflation are observed with error, then the
1

See Svensson (2003) for a more general criticism of Taylor rules.

1

Taylor coefficients are finite. As the variance of measurement error grows, the optimal
coefficients fall and the central bank reacts less to measured inflation and the output gap.
We extend our analysis to the case in which the Taylor rule is expressed in terms of estimated
output and estimated inflation. In this extension, the central bank solves a signal extraction
problem to estimate the output gap and inflation and sets the interest rate as a function of
these estimates. Under such a policy rule, the optimal responses to estimated inflation and the
estimated gap are again infinite. Because filtered estimates are typically revised gradually over
time, a central bank that responds to estimates of inflation and output will often appear to be
adhering to a form of interest rate smoothing. Indeed, there are special cases in which a Taylor
rule with interest rate smoothing can duplicate the policy of responding to estimated inflation
and the output gap.
Under an optimal Taylor rule, estimated deviations of output and inflation from their targets
should be strongly negatively correlated. Intuitively, the optimal Taylor rule eliminates the
effects of estimated demand shocks on inflation and the output gap. At the optimum, only
variation due to estimated cost‐push shocks should remain, implying that estimated inflation
and output should move in opposite directions. Actual data on estimates of inflation and the
gap are not strongly correlated, suggesting that the central bank is not reacting to demand
shocks as aggressively as it should.
Our work is related to a large literature on optimal monetary policy and instrument rules. The
contributions of Giannoni and Woodford (2003a, 2003b), Woodford (2003, Ch. 7) and Giannoni
(2010, 2012) are closest to our work. Unlike us, Giannoni and Woodford (2003b) assume that
the central bank has an explicit preference for smooth interest rates. Our paper highlights the
role played by measurement error in tempering the central bank’s optimal reaction to changes
in the measured output gap and inflation. This type of measurement error has been termed
“data uncertainty” by some researchers to distinguish it from other sources of policy
uncertainty (such as parameter and model uncertainty, see Dennis, 2005 and the references
cited therein). Orphanides (2001, 2003) shows that real‐time measures of inflation and the
output gap are sufficiently noisy to justify relatively small Taylor rule coefficients. Rudebusch
(2001), Smets (2002) and Billi (2012) all conclude that measurement error naturally encourages
central banks to adopt less aggressive policy reaction rules.2
Our paper is also closely related to the literature on signal extraction and optimal monetary
policy. Aoki (2003) considers optimal monetary policy with signal extraction in an environment
similar to ours. There are several differences between Aoki’s work and ours. First, unlike our
2

Both Rudebusch (2001) and Smets (2002) numerically analyze optimal policy based on estimated New Keynesian
systems. Billi (2012) numerically analyzes optimal monetary policy at the zero lower bound on nominal interest
rates. Both Billi and Smets assume that the central bank wants to minimize interest rate variation in addition to
variation in output and inflation. See Taylor (1999) for additional work on optimal monetary policy rules.

2

model, Aoki’s does not have shocks to the New Keynesian Phillips Curve and thus the so‐called
“divine coincidence” holds. If the central bank successfully stabilizes prices, it simultaneously
eliminates the output gap. Second, while Aoki discusses optimal policy under discretion, we
restrict attention to the optimal Taylor rule – a form of commitment. Third, when formulating
the signal extraction problem, Aoki assumes that the central bank learns the true values of
output and inflation with a one period lag. In our formulation, these values are never revealed.
Methodologically, we draw heavily on results in Svensson and Woodford (2003, 2004). Although
they do not consider restricted instrument rules such as the Taylor rule, several of their findings
continue to hold in our setting.

2. BASELINE MODEL AND POLICY OBJECTIVE
Our analysis is based on simple variations of the standard New Keynesian framework consisting
of a Phillips Curve and the New Keynesian IS curve. These log‐linear aggregate relationships are
typically derived under the assumption that firms infrequently adjust prices according to the
Calvo (1983) mechanism.3 (See Gali (2008) or Woodford (2003) for standard treatments of this
derivation.)
The Phillips curve relates inflation,
cost‐push shock, ,

, to the output gap,

, expected future inflation, and a
,

(1)

where
0 is the macroeconomic rate of price adjustment. The presence of the cost‐push
shock implies a trade‐off between the stabilization of the output gap and inflation (e.g. Clarida,
Gali, and Gertler, 1999). Woodford (2003, Ch. 6) shows how the cost‐push shock can be
motivated from first principles.
The New Keynesian IS curve is given by
1

.

(2)

Here
is the efficient rate of interest – the interest rate consistent with the level of output
that would prevail under perfect price flexibility in the absence of all other distortions. We
express this rate as the sum of the rate of time preference and a shock which is centered at
zero to simplify the exposition of later results. Below we often (somewhat imprecisely) refer to
3

The standard New Keynesian model abstracts from investment in physical capital and durable goods. While this
assumption is common, it has important consequences for the analysis of the model and for optimal policy. See
Barsky et al. (2003, 2007) and Barsky et al. (2014) for a more detailed discussion of the consequences of this
assumption.

3

as the efficient rate. The remaining terms are , the nominal interest rate, and , the
coefficient of relative risk aversion (equivalently, the inverse of the intertemporal elasticity of
substitution).
The efficient rate shock and the cost‐push shock are assumed to follow the AR(1) processes
,
.

∈ 0,1 ,

(3)

∈ 0,1 .

(4)

We close the model by assuming that the monetary authority commits to a Taylor rule,
.

(TR1)

Importantly, we distinguish between the actual output gap and the output gap observed by the
monetary authority, and similarly between actual inflation and measured inflation. The central
bank can respond only to measured output and inflation, so in (TR1)
and
denote
measured inflation and the measured output gap. Using the analogy in Bernanke (2004),
measurement error creates a “foggy windshield” through which the monetary authority sees
the economy.
Orphanides (2001) suggests that modeling measurement error as additive is a reasonable
approximation of reality. We follow Orphanides and assume that measured inflation and the
measured output gap are
and
, where
and
denote the
respective measurement errors. Both types of measurement error follow AR(1) processes
,

∈ 0,1 ,

(5)

.

∈ 0,1 .

(6)

Unless stated otherwise, all error terms in the efficient rate, the cost‐push shock and the
measurement error processes are assumed to be uncorrelated.
A comprehensive literature has examined equilibrium determinacy in the New Keynesian model
when monetary policy follows a Taylor rule. We will not dwell on this issue further and simply
note that the well‐known condition for a unique equilibrium is
1

1

0

(7)

for the baseline model discussed in Section 4.4 This condition is assumed to hold at all times
unless otherwise stated.
4

The argument in Bullard and Mitra (2002) continues to hold in our setting.

4

We assume that the central bank wishes to minimize an expected discounted sum of weighted
squared inflation and the output gap
(8)

.

1

Here, denotes the relative weight that the central bank places on inflation and ∙ is the
unconditional expectations operator. An objective of this form can be derived as a quadratic
approximation of the representative consumer’s utility function (see Rotemberg and Woodford,
and
to
1997 and Woodford, 2003). The optimal policy problem is then to choose
minimize (8) subject to (1), (2) and (TR1).

3. EQUILIBRIUM IN THE BASELINE MODEL
Our framework is sufficiently simple to solve for the equilibrium analytically. Inflation and the
output gap are linear functions of the four exogenous state variables
, ,
, and
.
Applying the method of undetermined coefficients yields expressions for the behavior of
inflation and the output gap. We characterize the model’s solution in the following lemma.
Proofs of all results are in the appendix.
Lemma 1: Under the assumptions in section 2, the unique competitive equilibrium of the model
is given by the equations
1
Φ

Φ

1
1

Φ

Φ

1

Φ

1
1

1

where Φ
1
of monetary policy.

Φ

1
1

,
(10)

1
1

1
Φ

(9)

Φ
, ∈

, ,

1
,

,

, are constants that are independent

Examining the coefficients in (9) and (10) provides simple intuition about how monetary policy
influences the economy. First, notice that the coefficients on the efficient rate shock ( ) are
positive in both (9) and (10) (all of the denominators in (9) and (10) are positive). Thus, an
increase in the efficient rate (an “aggregate demand” shock) increases inflation and the output
5

gap. Moreover, the Taylor rule coefficients
and
appear only in the denominators of the
coefficients on the efficient rate shock, so strong responses by the central bank dampen
fluctuations caused by shocks to the efficient rate.
Now consider the coefficients on the cost‐push disturbances ( ). Assuming that
is positive
, cost‐push shocks reduce output and raise inflation. Strong reactions to output
and
(i.e., large values of ) imply that the economy can enjoy reduced output gap volatility only at
the expense of higher inflation volatility. Unlike shocks to the efficient rate of interest, cost‐push
shocks clearly entail a trade‐off between inflation and output stabilization.
Finally, measurement error of either type impacts equilibrium inflation and the output gap
negatively. The interpretation of this relationship is natural. For example, a positive innovation
to
makes inflation appear higher than actual inflation. In response, the central bank raises
interest rates causing both output and inflation to fall. Similar reasoning applies to
measurement error in the output gap.
With Lemma 1 in hand, we now turn our attention to the central banks’ optimal choices of
and .

4. OPTIMAL TAYLOR RULES IN THE BASELINE MODEL
The optimal Taylor rule coefficients, ∗ and ∗ , minimize the central bank’s objective (8)
subject to the equilibrium conditions (9) and (10). To build intuition, we begin by considering
four special cases. All of these special cases share the property that both inflation and the
output gap are observed without error.
SPECIAL CASE 1: ONLY SHOCKS TO THE EFFICIENT RATE OF INTEREST. Assume that the only shocks to the
economy are shocks to the efficient rate of interest, . In this case, equations (9) and (10)
simplify to
Φ

1

Φ

1
1

,

.

Clearly, it is optimal for the central bank to respond infinitely strongly to deviations in either
inflation or the output gap (or both). This is the well‐known “divine coincidence” case in which it
is possible for the central bank to kill two birds with one stone by simply eliminating inflation
variability (see e.g., Blanchard and Galí, 2007).
6

SPECIAL CASE 2: ONLY COST‐PUSH SHOCKS. Optimal monetary policy is not so simple when there are
shocks to the Phillips curve. Suppose the only shocks to the economy are cost‐push shocks. The
central bank can no longer eliminate both inflation and output variability and instead must
choose whether to endure large swings in inflation to reduce the variation in output or vice
versa. The best choice will depend on the underlying parameters of the model, particularly the
relative weight that the central bank attaches to inflation variability in its objective (8).
In this case, (9) and (10) collapse to
1
Φ

1

Φ

1

,

.

The optimal Taylor coefficients are given in Proposition 1.
Proposition 1:
(i) If the only shocks to the model are cost‐push shocks, then the optimal policy requires that the
Taylor rule coefficients ∗ and ∗ lie on the affine manifold
∗

(ii) For any

∗

and

∗

1
1

1

∗

(11)

.

satisfying (11), the equilibrium satisfies
1
1

,

1

.

Any combination of coefficients on line (11) is equally desirable. Moreover, the equilibrium
paths for output and inflation do not depend on the exact coefficient values, provided that they
are on the manifold.
To understand the intuition for this result, consider a positive innovation to . By itself, the
cost‐push shock puts upward pressure on inflation and downward pressure on output. The
central bank then faces a dilemma: any interest rate response which closes one of the gaps,
widens the other. If the bank cuts the interest rate to raise output, inflation rises. If the bank
fights inflation instead, it must endure even lower production in the short term.
Suppose the bank decides to raise interest rates. Suppose further that it has chosen a pair of
∗
coefficients
, ∗ which satisfy (11) and imply the desired increase in interest rates.
7

According to Proposition 1, the same interest rate response can be achieved by many different
Taylor rules. If the central bank instead opts for a stronger response to inflation (a higher )
the nominal interest rate will increase a bit more. To re‐establish the prior interest rate change,
implies a lower
the central bank can adopt a stronger response to output. The higher
interest rate because cost‐push shocks lower output whenever they raise inflation. Equation
(11) simply gives all pairs of coefficients that result in the same interest rate.
SPECIAL CASE 3: SHOCKS TO BOTH THE IS‐CURVE AND THE PHILLIPS CURVE. We next combine the previous
two cases and consider (uncorrelated) shocks to both the IS‐Curve ( ) and the Phillips Curve
( ). In Special Case 1, optimal policy required infinitely large Taylor Rule coefficients. In Special
Case 2, optimal policy required coefficients on the upward sloping line (11). Not surprisingly, the
optimal Taylor rule in this third case calls for arbitrarily large coefficients which also satisfy (11).
Equation (11) implies that the optimal ratio of
to
converges to / 1
. This ratio is
higher if the central bank places greater weight on inflation or if the tradeoff between inflation
and output (captured by the parameter ) is more favorable.
This policy will imply the same equilibrium paths as in Proposition 1: all of the disturbances
originating from variation in the efficient rate will be eliminated and only the cost‐push shocks
affect output and inflation. Combining the two equations in Proposition 1 part (ii) yields
1

.

Hence, for the optimal Taylor rule, the observed output gap and inflation are perfectly
negatively correlated.5
SPECIAL CASE 4: CORRELATED SHOCKS IN THE I.I.D. CASE. For Special Case 3 we assumed uncorrelated
cost‐push and demand shocks. Here we briefly consider the optimal Taylor rule coefficients for
transitory but correlated shocks. This case is relevant for later results and also shows that
properties of the optimal Taylor rule can be extended to allow for correlated structural shocks.
and
Proposition 2: Suppose
Taylor rule coefficients satisfying
∗

and

∗

are i.i.d. over time and have covariance

∗

1

,

,

. The

(11’)

→ ∞ are optimal.

5

Note that under the optimal policy, estimation of a New Keynesian Phillips curve will be particularly problematic.
is correlated with the regressors and
but under optimal policy, both
Typically, the structural shock
and are therefore perfectly correlated with the error. The optimal Taylor rule
regressors are functions only of
eliminates all variation other than variation associated with making the bias particularly pronounced.

8

As before, the central bank must respond infinitely strongly to inflation and the output gap.
Additionally, the relationship between ∗ and ∗ barely changes. To see this, notice that (11)
∗
when
is set to zero (the first term on the right hand side of
simplifies to ∗
(11’)). Hence, shock correlation only introduces the term 1
, /
that was
not present in the earlier condition. It is easy to verify that equilibrium outcomes only depend
on the limit of ∗ / ∗ which is independent of the correlation of shocks. As in special cases 2
and 3, the output gap and inflation are perfectly negatively correlated in equilibrium.6

MONETARY POLICY IN THE PRESENCE OF MEASUREMENT ERROR
The simple New Keynesian framework captures many realistic features of monetary policy. The
model embodies a tradeoff between inflation and output and suggests that the central bank has
a particular advantage in minimizing economic instabilities that arise from “demand shocks”
(shocks to the IS‐Curve). Despite these attractive features, the model does not entail any costs
to excessively strong reactions on the part of the central bank. In stark contrast to the modest
empirical estimates of actual Taylor rules (see Judd and Rudebusch, 1998, and more recently
Hofmann and Bogdanova, 2012), optimal Taylor rule coefficients are often infinite.
In this section, we consider the model in which the output gap and inflation are measured with
error. Measurement error is a natural candidate for why central banks do not respond more to
observed changes in GDP and inflation. This concern was emphasized by Friedman (1953) who
pointed out that activist policies might be destabilizing if policy actions were not sufficiently
correlated with the true targets of policy. From observing equations (9) and (10) it is clear that,
and
, greater measurement error reduces the correlation
for any fixed coefficients
between the policy instrument and the targets and thus entails greater unwanted variation in
output and inflation. Indeed, it would seem that if measurement error was sufficiently high, it
would be optimal not to respond to observed variations in inflation and output at all.7
When we allow for arbitrary variation in the efficient rate, the cost‐push shock, and both types
of measurement error, an analytical solution of the optimal policy problem is generally not
feasible and so we instead use numerical methods to characterize the optimal Taylor rule. To
build intuition, however, we first consider another special case.
6

Even though
and
are infinite, the equilibrium interest rate will be finite. This can easily be seen easily in the
i.i.d. case using (TR1), (9), (10) and (11’).
7
This might present a problem for equilibrium determinacy. It is well known that determinacy requires that the
central bank responds sufficiently strongly to inflation and output. If measurement error is large however, the Fed
might be caught between a rock and a hard place. It would be forced to choose between a locally indeterminate
equilibrium on the one hand and destabilization resulting from reactions to erroneous signals on the other.
Accurate measurement and state estimation are therefore at the heart of monetary stabilization policy. We
consider optimal state estimation on the part of the central bank below.

9

Proposition 3: Suppose all shocks are white noise, that is,
0. Then the
minimization of (8) subject to (9) and (10) yields the following optimal Taylor rule coefficients
∗

∗

where

∙

1
1

1

∙

(12)

,

∙

1

,

(13)

∙ denotes the unconditional variance operator.

There are several striking features of the optimal Taylor rule in this setting. First, the optimal
Taylor coefficients in this model are finite. The central bank avoids aggressive reactions to
measured inflation and output because it knows that its actions would cause excessive
fluctuations in actual output and inflation. As measurement error decreases, the Fed can adopt
more and more aggressive reactions to inflation and output. It is also worth noting that only
measurement error in the output gap is necessary for finite Taylor coefficients. Assuming that
0, measurement error in inflation is neither necessary nor sufficient for finite
coefficients.
Second, the optimal choice of ∗ depends neither on , nor on , nor on
. Instead, ∗
depends only on the ratio of the variance of shocks to the efficient rate,
, to the variance
of measurement error in the output gap,
, together with the coefficient of relative risk
aversion, σ. The reader might find the result in (12) somewhat counterintuitive. If risk aversion
is relatively high then the household will strongly dislike output variability and presumably
prefer a stronger output reaction. In contrast, the actual best reaction is decreasing in σ. The
reason for this apparent contradiction is that we chose to specify the IS shocks as shocks to the
efficient rate of interest itself (as is common in the literature). If we instead stated the shocks in
terms of exogenous changes in the efficient growth rate of output, we would have
(the second equality uses the assumption that the autocorrelation of
∆
shocks is zero). In this case, the central bank’s choice of ∗ can be written as
∗

σ

,

which is increasing in σ.
The optimal response to measured inflation (equation (13)) is somewhat more complex. We
start with its more intuitive properties. First, as with ∗ , a larger variance of the efficient rate
implies a stronger response to inflation. Second, greater measurement error in inflation
∗⁄
requires more attenuated responses. Third, one can show that
0 for any choice of
10

model parameters so a stronger preference for price stability always implies stronger reactions
to measured inflation.
The relationship of ∗ with the remaining parameters is less clear. To see how this coefficient
depends on the shock variances consider the following limiting cases. Suppose first that cost‐
push shocks are dominant – that is, consider the behavior of ∗ as
→ ∞. In this case, the
optimal reaction to inflation approaches
∗

∙

σ

,

where we have again used the relationship
. The inflation response is increasing in
the signal‐to‐noise ratio for the output gap, the weight the central bank places on inflation
stability, the slope of the IS curve and the macroeconomic rate of price adjustment. Notice also
that for large
neither ∗ nor ∗ depend on measurement error in inflation.
Alternatively, consider the opposite extreme – suppose there are no cost‐push shocks at all. In
this case,
∗

∙

.

Analogous to equation (12), the ratio of the variance of the efficient rate of output to that of
measured inflation governs the strength of the reaction. In particular, as
approaches zero,
∗
becomes independent of measurement error in the output gap. Finally, a larger
macroeconomic rate of price adjustment, , raises the policy response.
Much of the optimal monetary policy literature assumes a quadratic objective function and
linear constraints. In these settings the globally optimal policy exhibits certainty equivalence.
That is, the presence and nature of additive stochastic disturbances does not affect optimal
policy (see, e.g. Sargent and Ljungqvist, 2004, Ch. 5). However, when optimal policy is restricted
to a Taylor rule of the form (TR1), equations (9) and (10) show that the constraints are no longer
linear in the choice variables. Hence, it is not surprising that certainty equivalence breaks down
in our setting. This result is consistent with earlier findings (see, e.g. Smets, 2002).
QUANTITATIVE ANALYSIS
We now analyze a calibrated version of the model to illustrate how the optimal Taylor rule
changes with plausible variations in the model parameters. The length of one time period is a
quarter. We assume logarithmic utility (σ 1). The discount factor is set to 0.99 and we set

11

the macroeconomic rate of price adjustment to
0.34.8 We choose an autoregressive
parameter of the efficient rate
equal to 0.9. This value is similar to calibrations of trend
stationary productivity shocks used in the real business cycle literature. Existing literature
provides less guidance for the persistence of the cost‐push shocks . Admitting that this choice
is somewhat ad hoc we select a value of 0.5 as in one of the cases considered in Galí (2008, Ch.
5). The variances of the innovations to the efficient rate and the cost‐push shocks are chosen so
that the annual unconditional variances of and equal unity.
Orphanides (2003) provides estimates for the measurement error processes. Based on his
calculations, measurement error in inflation is best approximated by a white noise process with
a quarterly standard deviation of roughly 0.50. In contrast, measurement error in the output
gap is highly persistent with a quarterly autoregressive coefficient of about 0.95 and an
innovation standard deviation of 0.66 (also quarterly). Finally, we assume that the monetary
authority dislikes inflation and the output gap equally so
1. Table 1 summarizes the
baseline calibration.
The optimal policy coefficients, ∗ and ∗ , maximize objective (8) subject to the Phillips curve
(1), the dynamic IS equation (2), and the Taylor rule (TR1). For the numerical solutions, we
additionally impose condition (7) to ensure that the equilibrium is locally determinate. (This
constraint never binds for the parameter values considered below.) For the benchmark
calibration, the central bank’s optimal Taylor rule has coefficients

∗

2.00 and

∗

0.61. 9

We now examine how optimal policy depends on the model parameters. Figure 1 shows the
optimal Taylor Rule coefficients as we vary the persistences of the shock processes in the
neighborhood of the baseline calibration. To isolate the effect of shock persistence on policy,
we adjust the variance of the innovations to ensure that the unconditional variance of the
shocks is unchanged. In Figures 1 to 3, baseline parameter values are indicated by dotted
vertical lines. All other parameters are held fixed at the level of the baseline calibration.
As the persistence of the efficient rate increases, the optimal reactions to inflation and the
output gap both rise. In line with Rudebusch (2001), we interpret this finding as justifying
intervention in the case of more persistent shocks while less intervention is necessary if the
economy automatically and quickly reverts to its efficient allocation. However, this intuition
does not always hold. For instance, the persistence of cost‐push shocks has little influence on
the optimal Taylor rule coefficients. Interestingly, persistent measurement error in inflation
increases the optimal Taylor rule coefficients while persistent measurement error in the output
8

This value of can be derived from a Calvo model with a probability of price rigidity of 2/3 per quarter, together
with our calibrated value of , a Frisch labor supply elasticity of 1.00 and a linear production function.
9
Whenever we report numerical values for the coefficient on the output gap, we annualize it by multiplying the
quarterly value by four.

12

gap reduces the optimal response to the output gap (and leaves the inflation coefficient almost
unchanged).
Figure 2 shows how the optimal Taylor rule depends on the standard deviation of shock
innovations. The upper left panel shows the Taylor rule coefficients as we change the volatility
of the IS shocks. Not surprisingly (and incidentally, consistent with Proposition 3), a larger
standard deviation of the efficient rate shocks raises ∗ and ∗ . The upper right panel considers
changes in the standard deviation of cost‐push shocks. Given our baseline calibration, as the
cost‐push shocks become more volatile the reaction to the output gap increases while the
reaction to inflation falls. Intuitively, as the variance of cost‐push shocks increases, the model
behaves more and more like the special case in which there are only cost‐push shocks. In that
case, the optimal coefficients were restricted to the manifold (11). At the same time, the logic of
Proposition 3 suggests finite Taylor rule coefficients as long as the output gap is observed with
error. A combination of these two arguments seems to imply that as the variance of cost‐push
shocks becomes greater, the coefficients will approach a specific finite point on the line (11).
The bottom panels in Figure 2 show how the optimal Taylor rule depends on measurement
error. Not surprisingly, for both types of measurement error, greater data uncertainty implies
less active policy. It is worth noting that, at least for our baseline calibration, measurement
error in the output gap is much more influential than measurement error in inflation. This is
again consistent with the analytical result in Proposition 3.
Figure 3 depicts the optimal Taylor rule for alternative values of the weight on inflation in the
objective function
and the macroeconomic rate of price adjustment
. The left panel
illustrates the coefficients when we change the weight on inflation. As the preference for price
stability increases (a greater ), the central bank adopts a Taylor rule with a higher reaction
coefficient on inflation and a lower reaction coefficient on the output gap. The panel on the
right shows how the coefficients vary with the macroeconomic rate of price adjustment. While
the relationship is not monotone over the range considered in the figure, for relatively high
values of , the central bank again chooses a stronger reaction to inflation and a weaker
reaction to the output gap.

5. SIGNAL EXTRACTION AND OPTIMAL TAYLOR RULES
To this point, we have assumed that the central bank directly responds to measured inflation
and the measured gap
. Alternatively, we could consider a modified Taylor rule which
stipulates that the central bank sets the interest rate as a function of estimated inflation and the
output gap. Among others, Orphanides (2001) has advocated this specification. Drawing on the
13

results of Svensson and Woodford (2003, 2004), we consider signal extraction and optimal
Taylor rules in this section. 10
In our model, agents in the private sector have full information. Their information set includes
all variables dated or earlier and all model parameters. In contrast, the central bank observes
only measured inflation and the measured output gap. We assume that the central bank uses
the Kalman filter to construct estimates of the true values of the output gap and the inflation
rate. For a generic variable , we let | denote the central bank’s estimate of the variable
given all of the information available at date t.11 Having solved the signal extraction problem,
the central bank sets the interest rate according to the modified Taylor rule
|

|

.

(TR2)

and
are the Taylor rule coefficients which operate on the estimates | and | . We list
this Taylor rule as (TR2) to distinguish it from the more conventional Taylor rule (TR1). The
remaining model equations are unchanged.
OPTIMAL POLICY
We begin by characterizing the central bank’s estimates of inflation and the output gap as a
function of the estimated disturbances. Lemma 2 is analogous to Lemma 1 for the model
without noisy observations.
Lemma 2: The central bank’s estimates of inflation and the output gap satisfy
1
|

|

Φ

1

Φ

1
1

|

|

Φ

Φ

1

|

,

1

|

,

(14)

(15)

where Φ and Φ are defined as in Lemma 1.
The lemma shows that, with a suitable reinterpretation of the shocks, the equilibrium paths of
the filtered variables | and | obey the same equilibrium conditions as the actual underlying
variables and (see equations (9) and (10)).

10

A number of researchers have examined signal extraction problems of central banks. Further references include
Swansson (2000), Aoki (2003), and Smets (2002).
11
Formally, the central bank’s information set is
Θ,
,
:
0 where Θ is a vector of all model
parameters. Then, for any variable , the central bank’s date t estimate is
|
. The observation
|
equations are
and
.

14

We are now interested in finding the coefficients ∗ , ∗ that minimize (8) subject to (1) ‐ (6),
(TR2), and the central bank’s informational constraints. The following proposition presents a
result for the i.i.d. case in which we can obtain a closed‐form solution.
Proposition 4: Suppose all shocks are contemporaneously uncorrelated with each other and i.i.d
over time. Then the coefficients ∗ , ∗ satisfying
∗

and

∗

∗

1

|

,

|

(11’’)

|

→ ∞ are optimal.

Proposition 4 shows that, there is an optimal Taylor rule in terms of filtered output | and
inflation | which embodies the same properties as Proposition 2 (Special Case 4). As in
Special Case 4, the optimal Taylor rule coefficients are again infinitely large and ∗ / ∗
converges to
. Notice the following subtle difference: in Proposition 2, we assumed an
and . In contrast, the correlation between the estimates
exogenous correlation between
and
| in Proposition 4 arises endogenously even though the underlying shocks
| and
are uncorrelated.
The correlation between

|

and

|

comes from the central bank’s effort to infer the true

shocks. For example, suppose the central bank observes positive inflation and a negative output
gap. A negative supply shock (
0) is a natural candidate for such observations. Another
possibility is the occurrence of a positive demand shock together with a negative innovation to
measurement error in the output gap. Because the central bank attaches positive probability to
many potential combinations of shocks, its estimates | and | will typically be correlated. For
the optimal Taylor rule, the induced correlation is immaterial. Equations (14) and (15) with
0 imply that only the limit of ∗ / ∗ affects the central bank’s estimates of inflation
and the output gap.
We next turn to the general case in which all shocks have arbitrary autocorrelation. The
analytical solution of the optimal policy problem is difficult so we use numerical methods to
characterize the optimal Taylor rule.
Figure 4 shows level curves of the central bank’s objective function when all parameters are set
to the values of our baseline calibration summarized in Table 1. As we have seen in the i.i.d.
case (Proposition 4), stronger responses to both expected inflation and the expected output gap
reduce the central bank’s loss function (8). This continues to be the case when there are
persistent innovations. Again, the optimal Taylor rule coefficients are infinitely large.12

12

In all numerical cases we consider, the optimal Taylor rule coefficients approach infinity.

15

As the Taylor rule coefficients approach infinity, (14) and (15) imply that expected inflation and
the expected output gap depend only on the estimated supply shock. In particular, |
|
and . Eliminating | immediately
and |
| for some strictly positive constants
yields
|

|

.

The central bank acts to neutralize the effect of estimated demand shocks on | and | so
that under the optimal Taylor rule, only the effects of cost‐push shocks (i.e., “supply shocks”)
remain. As a consequence, the central bank’s best estimates of current inflation and output are
perfectly negatively correlated.13
DOES THE FEDERAL RESERVE FOLLOW AN OPTIMAL TAYLOR RULE?
If the central bank followed an optimal Taylor rule (TR2) and the model were correct, then
expected inflation and the expected output gap should be perfectly negatively correlated. To
see whether this prediction holds in the data, we examine the Fed’s real time forecasts of
current quarter inflation and the output gap. These forecasts are produced by the Federal
Reserve staff before every meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee and made publically
available with a five year lag by Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia. We take the Fed’s
contemporaneous estimate of Core CPI inflation as the empirical analogue of | .
Figure 5 plots the current‐quarter forecasts of Core CPI inflation and the output gap from
1987Q3 ‐ 2007Q4. In the figure, ‘initial’ refers to the forecast of the output gap produced for the
first quarterly meeting and ‘revised’ refers to the forecast for the second meeting. Panel A
shows the unfiltered series. There is no obvious relationship between the two series in the
figure. The sample correlation between the initial output gap estimate and the estimate of Core
CPI inflation is ‐0.09 (the correlation changes to ‐0.1 if we use the revised estimate). In contrast,
under the optimal Taylor rule, the correlation between the two series should be ‐1.00.
One concern with using the raw series to compute this correlation is that much of the variation
in inflation is due to a steady declining trend since the mid 1980’s. In Panel B, we show HP‐
filtered time series for both the estimated output gap and estimated inflation. (We use the
standard quarterly smoothing parameter of 1600). In this figure, the estimates of inflation and
the output gap have a modest positive correlation. The correlation coefficient is 0.35 for the
initial output gap estimate and 0.29 for the revised estimate.

13

This result technically requires that the Taylor rule coefficients approach infinity at asymptotically the same rate
so that their ratio converges to a strictly positive and finite value at the optimum.

16

In neither case is the correlation close to the prediction of negative one. When interpreted
through the lense of our model it appears that the Fed is underreacting to its own estimates of
inflation and the gap.
SIGNAL EXTRACTION AND INTEREST RATE SMOOTHING
There is a close connection between the Taylor rule given by (TR2) and interest rate smoothing.
Interest rate smoothing can be captured by a policy rule of the form
.

(TR3)

In this specification the central bank sets the interest rate as a function of measured inflation,
measured output, and the lagged interest rate.14 The parameter governs the extent to which
the central bank anchors its current policy with the interest rate from the previous quarter.
Taylor rules with interest rate smoothing are similar to Taylor rules based on filtered output and
inflation. In fact, there are special cases in which the two rules exactly coincide. To see this,
consider the model in the previous section given by equations (1) to (6) and (TR2), in which the
central bank observes
and
and uses the Kalman filter to estimate
the output gap and inflation. Suppose further that there are no cost‐push shocks (
0)
and that the persistence of the measurement error shocks is zero (
0). For this
special case, we have the following result.
Proposition 5: Given the assumptions above, for any Taylor rule (TR2) with coefficients
, there exist coefficients
,
equilibrium paths for all variables.

,

and

such that the policy rule (TR3) generates the same

Proposition 5 states that in the special case where there are no cost‐push shocks and
measurement error is i.i.d., the Taylor rule in which the central bank responds to the estimates
| and
| can be implemented exactly by a Taylor rule with interest rate smoothing of the
form (TR3).15
While exact equivalence between interest rate smoothing and Taylor rules of the form (TR2)
requires strong assumptions, the spirit of Proposition 5 extends to very general settings. As long
as the central bank follows Taylor rule (TR2) and forms its estimates | and | using the
Kalman filter, the interest rate will change gradually because the estimates of the output gap
and inflation change gradually. In such a setting, an econometrician would continue to conclude
that lagged interest rates play an important role in shaping policy. To demonstrate this claim
quantitatively, we again consider the model consisting of equations (1) to (6), the central bank’s
14
15

See, for example, Sack and Wieland (2000), and Rudebusch (2006) for discussions of interest rate smoothing.
Aoki (2003) reaches a similar conclusion in a setting where the central bank optimizes under discretion.

17

informational constraints described above and Taylor rule (TR2). When we estimate the interest
rate smoothing rule (TR3) on data simulated from this model using the benchmark calibration
summarized in Table 1, we obtain a smoothing parameter of about 0.7.

6. NUMERICAL EVALUATION
Here we use a calibrated numerical model to quantitatively compare the policy rules (TR1),
(TR2), and (TR3). All numerical results are based on the calibration discussed in Section 4 and
summarized in Table 1. For each rule, we compute the optimal coefficients and evaluate the
value of the objective function as well as the variance of inflation and output.
Table 2 reports the value of the objective function (equation (8)), as well as the associated
variance of inflation and the output gap for all three policy rules evaluated at their optimal
coefficients. For rules (TR1) and (TR3) the optimal coefficients are shown in the bottom rows of
the table. Not surprisingly, the simple Taylor rule in which the central bank responds to
measured inflation and measured output (equation (TR1)) is inferior to both alternatives. For
our baseline calibration, Taylor rule (TR2) outperforms the interest rate smoothing rule (TR3)
though we note that it is possible to construct cases in which optimal interest rate smoothing
outperforms Taylor rule (TR2).16
Figures 6 and 7 report impulse response functions for the four structural shocks
( , ,
,
). For each case, we consider a Taylor rule which is optimal given the
specification (TR1), (TR2) or (TR3) as indicated. The top panels of Figure 6 show the impulse
response functions of the output gap, inflation, and the interest rate to a shock to the efficient
(a ‘demand’ shock). When the central bank follows the simple Taylor rule (TR1), the
rate
output gap is remarkably close to zero. However, inflation jumps up substantially and only
slowly converges back to its steady state value of zero. The history dependent rules (TR2) and
(TR3) are superior in this regard.
Impulse response functions for the cost‐push shock are shown in the bottom panels of Figure 6.
On impact, the output gap is largest for the simple Taylor rule (TR1). No further striking
differences of the paths of output and inflation are revealed for the different policy rules.
16

Consider a calibration in which all of the structural shocks have no persistence. In this case, the filtered estimates
and
. As a consequence, the optimized value of the
| and
| are functions of only current observations
objective is the same for the simple Taylor rule (TR1) and for the Taylor rule with filtered data (TR2). However,
since a central bank following (TR3) can choose an additional parameter it must be able to weakly improve on the
restricted rules. The interest rate smoothing parameter allows the central bank some ability to commit to future
actions which is often a feature of the globally optimal policy. See, e.g., Clarida, Galí and Gertler (1999), Woodford
(1999) and Rotemburg and Woodford (1999).

18

As in our baseline calibration, Orphanides (2003) estimated that measurement error in the
output gap is highly persistent. The top panels of Figure 7 show that this persistence is reflected
in the dynamic reaction to a noise shock. When the central bank solves a signal extraction
problem and sets the interest rate according to Taylor rule (TR2), it learns gradually that the
shock must have been measurement error. Although the output gap and inflation drop
immediately after the shock, optimal state estimation reveals relatively quickly that the shock is
likely noise and the central bank quickly guides the economy back to steady state. When the
central bank follows rules (TR1) or (TR3) instead, the persistence of the measurement error
shock causes the economy to go through a protracted period of low inflation.
Not surprisingly, signal extraction is particularly important when measurement error is
persistent. Because our baseline calibration features no persistence for measurement error in
inflation, when the economy experiences such a shock, there are only slight differences in
output and inflation across the policies. This is shown in the bottom panels of Figure 7. While
the impact response of the output gap is largest for the simple Taylor rule (TR1), the lack of
history dependence implies a return to the steady state in a single period. Rules (TR2) and (TR3)
show a somewhat slower convergence rate.

6. CONCLUSION
One of the Taylor rule’s most appealing features is its simplicity: the central bank’s behavior is
characterized by two parameters only. In this paper we analyze optimal Taylor rules in standard
New Keynesian models. In the absence of measurement error, activist monetary policy is
costless and the optimal Taylor rule coefficients are often infinite. When inflation and output
are measured with error, the optimal Taylor rule coefficients are finite. If the central bank
instead sets the interest rate as a function of estimated output and inflation then the optimal
coefficients on estimated inflation and the estimated gap are again infinite.
Optimal monetary policy in the model with signal extraction implies a strong negative
correlation between estimated inflation and estimated output. In contrast, data on the Federal
Reserve’s estimates of current inflation and the output gap exhibit either zero correlation or a
modest positive correlation depending on whether or not they are filtered. This suggests that
the Fed is insufficiently aggressive in responding to deviations from its targets.
Signal extraction on the part of the central bank also introduces behavior which mimics history
dependence in monetary policy. Because the central bank’s beliefs about the state of the
economy are updated gradually, the interest rate also changes gradually and observed policy
actions will resemble interest rate smoothing even if the central bank is reacting only to current
estimates of inflation and the output gap.
19

The results in this paper are not meant to be the final word on optimal Taylor rules in New
Keynesian models but rather to provide a simple benchmark for optimal Taylor policy rules in
more realistic and complex economic models. Such models would likely include wage rigidity in
addition to price rigidity and would almost surely include durable consumer and investment
goods. While we anticipate that optimal Taylor rules will differ in more articulated models, we
also suspect that many of the properties we derived for the basic New Keynesian model will
carry over to more realistic environments.

20

REFERENCES
Aoki, Kosuke. 2002. “Optimal commitment policy under noisy information.” CEPR Discussion Paper No.
3370.
Aoki, Kosuke. 2003. "On the optimal monetary policy response to noisy indicators." Journal of Monetary
Economics, Elsevier, vol. 50(3), pages 501‐523, April.
Barsky, Robert, House, Christopher and Kimball, Miles. 2003. “Do Flexible Durable Goods Prices
Undermine Sticky Price Models?” NBER working paper No. 9832, National Bureau of Economic Research,
Inc.
Barsky, Robert, House, Christopher and Kimball, Miles. 2007. “Sticky Price Models and Durable Goods.”
American Economic Review, 97(3), June.
Barsky, Robert, Boehm, Christoph, House, Christopher and Kimball, Miles. 2014. “Optimal Monetary
Policy in Sticky Price Models with Durable Goods.” Working paper, University of Michigan, (in progress).
Bernanke, Ben S., 2004. “The Logic of Monetary Policy.” Speech before the National Economists Club,
Washington, D.C. December 2. http://www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/speeches/2004/20041202/
Billi, Roberto M., 2012. "Output Gaps and Robust Monetary Policy Rules." Working Paper Series 260,
Sveriges Riksbank (Central Bank of Sweden).
Blanchard, Olivier and Galí, Jordi. 2007. "Real Wage Rigidities and the New Keynesian Model." Journal of
Money, Credit and Banking, Blackwell Publishing, vol. 39(s1), pages 35‐65, 02.
Bullard, James, and Mitra, Kaushik. 2002. "Learning about monetary policy rules." Journal of Monetary
Economics, Elsevier, vol. 49(6), pages 1105‐1129, September.
Calvo, Guillermo A., 1983. "Staggered prices in a utility‐maximizing framework." Journal of Monetary
Economics, Elsevier, vol. 12(3), pages 383‐398, September.
Clarida, Richard, Galí, Jordi, and Gertler, Mark. 1999. "The Science of Monetary Policy: A New Keynesian
Perspective." Journal of Economic Literature, American Economic Association, vol. 37(4), pages 1661‐
1707, December.
Dennis, Richard. 2005. "Uncertainty and monetary policy." FRBSF Economic Letter, Federal Reserve Bank
of San Francisco, issue Nov 30.
Friedman, Milton. 1953. “The Eﬀects of Full Employment Policy on Economic Stability: A Formal
Analysis.” in Essays in Positive Economics, Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press, pp117‐32.
Galí, Jordi. 2008. “Monteary Policy, Inflation and the Business Cycle: An Introduction to the New
Keynesian Framework.” Princeton University Press, Princeton NJ.
Giannoni, Marc P., 2010. "Optimal Interest‐Rate Rules in a Forward‐Looking Model, and Inflation
Stabilization versus Price‐Level Stabilization." NBER Working Paper No. 15986, National Bureau of
Economic Research, Inc.
21

Giannoni, Marc P., 2012. "Optimal interest rate rules and inflation stabilization versus price‐level
stabilization." Staff Reports 546, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Giannoni, Marc P., and Woodford, Michael. 2003a. "Optimal Interest‐Rate Rules: I. General Theory."
NBER Working Papers 9419, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Giannoni Marc P., and Woodford, Michael. 2003b. "Optimal Interest‐Rate Rules: II. Applications." NBER
Working Papers 9420, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Hofmann, Boris. and Bogdanova, Bilyana. 2012. "Taylor rules and monetary policy: a global Great
Deviation." BIS Quarterly Review, Bank for International Settlements, September.
Judd, John P., and Rudebusch, Glenn D., 1998. "Taylor's rule and the Fed, 1970‐1997." Economic Review,
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, pages 3‐16.
Ljungqvist, Lars and Sargent, Thomas J., 2004. "Recursive Macroeconomic Theory, 2nd Edition." MIT
Press.
Orphanides, Athanasios. 2001. "Monetary Policy Rules Based on Real‐Time Data." American Economic
Review, American Economic Association, vol. 91(4), pages 964‐985, September.
Orphanides, Athanasios. 2003. "Monetary policy evaluation with noisy information." Journal of Monetary
Economics, Elsevier, vol. 50(3), pages 605‐631, April.
Rotemberg, Julio, and Woodford, Michael. 1999. “Interest Rate Rules in an Estimated Sticky Price
Model.” In J. B. Taylor (ed.), Monetary Policy Rules, University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Rudebusch, Glenn D., 2001. "Is The Fed Too Timid? Monetary Policy in an Uncertain World," The Review
of Economics and Statistics, MIT Press, vol. 83(2), pages 203‐217, May.
Rudebusch, Glenn D., 2006. "Monetary Policy Inertia: Fact or Fiction?" International Journal of Central
Banking, International Journal of Central Banking, vol. 2(4), December.
Sack, Brian and Wieland, Volker. 2000. "Interest‐rate smoothing and optimal monetary policy: a review
of recent empirical evidence." Journal of Economics and Business, Elsevier, vol. 52(1‐2), pages 205‐228.
Smets, Frank. 2002. "Output gap uncertainty: Does it matter for the Taylor rule?" Empirical Economics,
Springer, vol. 27(1), pages 113‐129.
Svensson, Lars E. O., 2003. "What Is Wrong with Taylor Rules? Using Judgment in Monetary Policy
through Targeting Rules." Journal of Economic Literature, American Economic Association, vol. 41(2),
pages 426‐477, June.
Svensson, Lars E. O. and Woodford, Michael. 2003. "Indicator variables for optimal policy." Journal of
Monetary Economics, Elsevier, vol. 50(3), pages 691‐720, April.

22

Svensson, Lars E. O. and Woodford, Michael. 2004. "Indicator variables for optimal policy under
asymmetric information." Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, Elsevier, vol. 28(4), pages 661‐690,
January.
Eric T. Swanson. 2000. "On signal extraction and non‐certainty‐equivalence in optimal monetary policy
rules." Proceedings, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco.
Taylor, John B., 1993. "Discretion versus policy rules in practice." Carnegie‐Rochester Conference Series
on Public Policy, Elsevier, vol. 39(1), pages 195‐214, December.
Taylor, John B. (ed.) . 1999. Monetary Policy Rules, University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Woodford, Michael. 1999. "Optimal Monetary Policy Inertia." NBER Working Papers 7261, National
Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Woodford, Michael. 2003. “Interest and prices.” Princeton University Press, Princeton NJ.

23

Appendix: Proofs of the Propositions
Lemma 1 Under the assumptions in section 2,¡ the unique
equilibrium of the model is character¢ ¡ competitive
¢
ized by equations (9) and (10), where Φj = σ 1 − %j 1 − β%j − κ%j for j = {r, u, my, mπ} are constants
that are independent of monetary policy.
Proof : Consider the system (1), (2) and (TR1) with the exogenous processes (3) to (6). Using (TR1) to
eliminate it in (2) gives the system
(A1)
πt = κyt + βEt [π t+1 ] + ut ,
¡
¢
1
φ (π t + mπt ) + φy (yt + myt ) − rte − Et [π t+1 ] .
(A2)
yt = Et [yt+1 ] −
σ π
We conjecture an equilibrium solution
πt = sπr rte + sπmπ mπt + sπmy myt + sπu ut
yt = syr rte + symπ mπt + symy myt + syu ut
and solve for the eight unknown coeﬃcients sh,j for h = π, y and j = r, u, my, mπ. Substituting the
conjectured relationships into (A1) and (A2) and using (3) to (6) to evaluate the expectations gives
0 = (sπr − κsyr − βsπr %r ) rte + (sπmπ − κsymπ − βsπmπ %mπ ) mπt
+ (sπmy − κsymy − βsπmy %my ) myt + (sπu − κsyu − 1 − βsπu %u ) ut
and
0 =

¤
¤
£
£
(%r − 1) σsyr − φπ sπr + 1 − φy syr + sπr %r rte + (%mπ − 1) σsymπ − φπ sπmπ − φπ − φy symπ + sπmπ %mπ mπt
¤
¤
£
£
+ (%my − 1) σsymy − φπ sπmy − φy − φy symy + sπmy %my myt + (%u − 1) σsyu − φπ sπu − φy syu + sπu %u ut .

Each coeﬃcient in these expressions must be zero. This gives a system of eight equations in eight unknowns.
Solving for these unknowns gives the coeﬃcients in (9) and (10). (By collecting terms for each of the
shocks rte , mπt , myt , and ut one can split the system into four sub-systems, each with two equations and two
unknowns. The four subsystems can then be solved separately.)
Uniqueness follows from the determinacy condition (7).
¥
Proposition 1
(i) If the only shocks to the model are cost-push shocks, then the optimal policy requires that the Taylor rule
coeﬃcients lie on the aﬃne manifold (11).
(ii) For any φ∗π and φ∗y satisfying (11), the equilibrium is
πt =

κ2

1 − β%u

+ α (1 − β%u )

2 ut ,

yt =

ακ
ακ2

+ (1 − β%u )

2 ut .

Proof : Substituting (9) and (10) (and using rte = myt = mπt = 0 ) into (8) gives
Ã µ
¶2 µ
¶2 !
φy + (1 − %u ) σ
%u − φπ
+
V [ut ] α
Φu + φy (1 − β%u ) + κφπ
Φu + φy (1 − β%u ) + κφπ
The first order condition for φπ requires
¢
¡
0 = ακ φy + (1 − %u ) σ + (%u − φπ ) (1 − β%u )

which implies (11). The first order condition for φy requires

2

0 = ακφy (φπ − %u ) + ακσ (1 − %u ) (φπ − %u ) − (%u − φπ ) (1 − β%u ) .
This condition can be satisfied either by setting φπ = %u or by (11). This establishes (i).
To establish (ii), use Φu = (1 − %u ) (1 − β%u ) σ − κ%u to write the equilibrium conditions as
πt =

φy + (1 − %u ) σ
ut ,
(1 − %u ) (1 − β%u ) σ + κ (φπ − %u ) + φy (1 − β%u )
24

(A3)

yt =

%u − φπ
ut .
(1 − %u ) (1 − β%u ) σ + κ (φπ − %u ) + φy (1 − β%u )

¥

Substituting (11) gives (A3). This establishes (ii).

Proposition 2 Suppose rte and ut are i.i.d. over time and have covariance Cov [rte , ut ]. The Taylor rule
coeﬃcients satisfying (11’) and φy → ∞ are optimal.
Proof: When rte and ut are i.i.d. equations (9) and (10) simplify to
πt =

φy + σ
κ
rte +
ut
σ + φy + κφπ
σ + φy + κφπ

yt =

1
φπ
rte −
ut
σ + φy + κφπ
σ + φy + κφπ

Plugging them into objective (8), and simplifying, shows that the optimal φy and φπ minimize
³ ¡
i
´
¡
¢−2 h¡
¢
¢
¢2
¢
¡ ¡
σ + φy + κφπ
1 + ακ2 V [re ] + α φy + σ + (φπ )2 V [u] + 2 ακ φy + σ − φπ Cov [rte , ut ]
First we fix the overall strength of the policy response by setting σ + φy + κφπ = A and minimizing
³ ¡
o
n¡
´
¢
¢
¢2
¢
¡ ¡
2
A−2 1 + ακ2 V [re ] + α φy + σ + (φπ ) V [u] + 2 ακ φy + σ − φπ Cov [rte , ut ]

subject to σ + φy + κφπ = A.
The Lagrangian is
³ ¡
o
n¡
´
¢
¢
¤
¢2
¢
£
¡ ¡
2
L = A−2 1 + ακ2 V [re ] + α φy + σ + (φπ ) V [u] + 2 ακ φy + σ − φπ Cov [rte , ut ] +λ A − σ − φy − κφπ
and the first order conditions w.r.t. φy and φπ , respectively, are

© ¡
¢
ª
A−2 2α φy + σ V [u] + 2ακCov [rte , ut ] = λ
A−2 {2 (φπ ) V [u] − 2Cov [rte , ut ]} = κλ

Combining them yields (11’).
Since the objective is decreasing in A, it is optimal to let φy approach infinity.

¥

Proposition 3 Suppose all shocks are white noise, that is, %r = %u = %my = %mπ = 0. Then the minimization
of (8) subject to (9) and (10) yields the optimal Taylor rule coeﬃcients given by (12) and (13).
Proof : Setting %r = %u = %my = %mπ = 0 in (9) and (10) and substituting into the objective (8) and using
the fact that the shocks are (by assumption) uncorrelated implies that the central bank wants to choose
parameters φy and φπ to minimize
h ¡
´
i
¡
¢−2 ³£ 2
¤
£
¤
£
¤ ¡ ¢2
¢2
σ + φy + κφπ
ακ + 1 V [rtn ] + ακ2 + 1 (φπ )2 V [mπt ] + ακ2 + 1 φy V [myt ] + α φy + σ + (φπ )2 V [ut ]
The first order condition for φy is

¢
©£ 2
¤
¡
¢
ª¡
(A4)
ακ + 1 V [myt ] φy + α φy + σ V [ut ] σ + φy + κφπ
i
£ 2
¢2 h ¡
¤
£ 2
¤
£ 2
¤
¢2
2
2
y ¡
n
π
= ακ + 1 V [rt ] + ακ + 1 V [mt ] (φπ ) + ακ + 1 V [mt ] φy + α φy + σ + (φπ ) V [ut ]

The first order condition w.r.t. φπ is

¢
¤
ª¡
φπ ©£ 2
(A5)
ακ + 1 V [mπt ] + V [ut ] σ + φy + κφπ
κ
h
i
¤
£
¤
£
¤
¡ ¢2
¡
¢2
£
= ακ2 + 1 V [rtn ] + ακ2 + 1 V [mπt ] (φπ )2 + ακ2 + 1 V [myt ] φy + α φy + σ + (φπ )2 V [ut ]

It is immediate to see that this implies
£ 2
¤
ακ + 1 V [myt ] + αV [ut ]
ακσV [ut ]
φπ = κ
φy +
π
2
2
[ακ + 1] V [mt ] + V [ut ]
[ακ + 1] V [mπt ] + V [ut ]
25

(A6)

We can rewrite equation (A5) as
£
¤
£
¤
¡ ¢2
κ ακ2 + 1 V [rtn ] + κ ακ2 + 1 V [myt ] φy
£
¢
¤¡
£
¤
2
= φπ ακ2 + 1 σ + φy + κφπ V [mπt ] − κ ακ2 + 1 V [mπt ] (φπ ) +
h
i
¡
¢
¡
¢2
φπ σ + φy + κφπ V [ut ] − κ α φy + σ + (φπ )2 V [ut ]

Cancelling like terms and simplifying gives
¤
¤
¡ ¢2
κ £ 2
κ £ 2
ακ + 1 V [rtn ] +
ακ + 1 V [myt ] φy
σ + φy
σ + φy
©£
¤
ª
= φπ ακ2 + 1 V [mπt ] + V [ut ] − καφy V [ut ] − κασV [ut ]

Using condition (A6) we have
¡£
¤
¢
¡£
¤
¢
φπ ακ2 + 1 V [mπt ] + V [ut ] − ακσV [ut ] = κ ακ2 + 1 V [myt ] + αV [ut ] φy

Eliminating this term gives

¤
¤
¡ ¢2
κ £ 2
κ £ 2
ακ + 1 V [rtn ] +
ακ + 1 V [myt ] φy
σ + φy
σ + φy
¡£ 2
¤
¢
y
= κ ακ + 1 V [mt ] + αV [ut ] φy − καφy V [ut ] .

Finally, we cancel terms to get (12). To find (13) use condition (A6) and rearrange terms.

¥

Model with signal extraction To solve the model with signal extraction, we closely follow the setup in
Svensson and Woodford (2003, 2004). The proofs of the results use the following notation and calculations.
The model can be written as
¶
µ
¶
¶
µ
µ
Xt+1
Xt
st+1
=A
+ B (it − ρ) +
(A7)
xt
0
ẼEt [xt+1 ]
µ
¶
¢0
¡
0 1
0
0
where Xt = (rte , ut , myt , mπt ) ; st+1 = εrt+1 , εut+1 , εyt+1 , επt+1 ; xt = (yt , π t ) ; and Ẽ =
. Partiσ 1
tion the matrices A and B as follows
µ
¶ µ
¶
µ
¶
A1
A11 A12
B1
A=
=
,B =
A2
A21 A22
B2
and let

⎛

⎛
⎞
%r 0
0
0
0
⎜ 0 %u
⎜ 0
⎟
0
0
⎟,A = ⎜
A11 = ⎜
⎝ 0 0 %my
0 ⎠ 12 ⎝ 0
0 0
0
%mπ
0
¶
µ
µ κ
1
0 −β 0 0
−β
, A22 =
A21 =
−1 0 0 0
σ

The flow objective is
yt2 + απ2t = x0t W xt , W =

µ

⎛ ⎞
⎞
0
0
⎜ 0 ⎟
0 ⎟
⎟,B = ⎜ ⎟
0 ⎠ 1 ⎝ 0 ⎠
0
0
µ ¶
1 ¶
0
β
B2 =
1
0

1 0
0 α

¶

and the observation equations are
µ
¶
µ m ¶
µ
¶
µ
¶
Xt
yt
0 0 1 0
1 0
=D
, with D = (D1 , D2 ) , D1 =
Zt =
and D2 =
πm
xt
0 0 0 1
0 1
t

(A8)

(A9)

Notice that the measurement errors are included in Xt . This allows for arbitrary persistence of both types
of measurement error.
©
ª
m
, πm
The central bank’s information set is ItCB = Θ, yt−j
t−j : j ≥ 0 where Θ is a vector of all model
parameters.
We write the Taylor rule as
(A10)
it − ρ = F xt|t
26

¢
¡
where F = ψ y , ψ π . Notice the diﬀerence to Svensson and Woodford who write the policy as a linear
function of the estimates of the state variables Xt .
Next, we conjecture that
(A11)
xt|t = GXt|t
Then the upper block of (A7) gives
Xt+1 = A11 Xt + st+1
and taking expectations (based on

ItCB )

yields
Xt+1|t = A11 Xt|t .

Taking expectations of the lower block of (A7) gives
Ẽxt+1|t = A21 Xt|t + A22 xt|t + B2 (it − ρ) .
Combining these equations with (A10) and (A11), we arrive at
´
³
xt|t = [A22 ]−1 −A21 + ẼGA11 − B2 F G Xt|t .
Hence, G must satisfy

Next we conjecture that

´
³
G = [A22 ]−1 −A21 + ẼGA11 − B2 F G .
¢
¡
xt = G1 Xt + G − G1 Xt|t

(A12)
(A13)

and rewrite the observation equation (A9) as
Zt

Following Svensson and Woodford,

= D1 Xt + D2 xt
¢
¡
¢
¡
= D1 + D2 G1 Xt + D2 G − G1 Xt|t
Zt = LXt + M Xt|t

where

(A14)

¢
¡
L = D1 + D2 G1

and
The state equation of the Kalman filter is

(A15)

¡
¢
M = D2 G − G1 .
Xt+1 = A11 Xt + st+1

and the observation equation is (A14). Svensson and Woodford (2004) show that the Kalman filter updating
equation takes the form
¢
¡
(A16)
Xt|t = Xt|t−1 + KL Xt − Xt|t−1

(their equation 26 with vt = 0) and that it is possible to write
£
¤
Xt+1|t+1 = (I + KM )−1 (I − KL) A11 Xt|t + KZt+1

(A17)

(their equation 30) where

−1

K = P L0 (LP L0 )

.

(A18)

Furthermore,
P =E

h¡
i
h
¢¡
¢0 i
−1
Xt − Xt|t−1 Xt − Xt|t−1
= A11 P − P L0 (LP L0 ) LP A011 + Σs

where Σs is the covariance matrix of the errors st+1 .
Finally, one needs to find G1 . Again, following Svensson and Woodford (2003, 2004) we obtain
³
´
−1
G1 = [A22 ]
−A21 + ẼGKLA11 + ẼG1 (I − KL) A11 .
27

(A19)

(A20)

Lemma 2 The central bank’s estimates of inflation and the output gap satisfy (14) and (15) where Φr and
Φu are defined as in Lemma 1.
Proof: Take conditional expectations based on the central bank’s information set ItCB of equations (1) to
(4) to obtain
πt = κyt + βπ t+1|t + ut|t
´
1³
e
yt = yt+1|t −
− π t+1|t
it − ρ − rt|t
σ
e
e
= %r rt|t
, and ut+1|t = %u ut|t
rt+1|t
Imposing the Taylor rule (TR2) and repeating steps in the proof of Lemma 1 yields the desired result.
Lemma A1 The welfare objective (8) can be decomposed as follows
"∞
#
h i´ ³ h¡
h¡
³ h i
X ¡
¢
¢2 i
¢2 i´
t
2
2
2
(1 − β) E
β yt + απ t = αE π2t|t + E yt|t
+ αE π t − π t|t
+ E yt − yt|t

¥

t=0

Proof: See Svensson and Woodford (2003, 2004).

¥

i
h¡
h ¡
h¡
¢2 i
¢2 i
¢0
+ E yt − yt|t
= tr P G1 (I − KL) W G1 (I − KL) where I is the
Lemma A2 αE πt − πt|t
identiy matrix .
h¡
h¡
h¡
¢2 i
¢2 i
¢0 ¡
¢i
Proof: Define T = αE π t − π t|t
+ E yt − yt|t
and notice that T = E xt − xt|t W xt − xt|t
where W is defined in (A8) above. Equation (A13) implies that
¢
¡
¢
¡
xt − xt|t = G1 Xt + G − G1 Xt|t − GXt|t = G1 Xt − Xt|t
so we obtain

T =E

h¡
¢0 ¡ ¢0
¡
¢i
Xt − Xt|t G1 W G1 Xt − Xt|t .

Next subtract Xt|t from Xt and use (A16) to get
Xt − Xt|t
Then
T

¢¢
¡
¡
= Xt − Xt|t−1 + KL Xt − Xt|t−1
¢
¡
= (I − KL) Xt − Xt|t−1

h¡
¢0
¢0
¢i
¡
0¡
Xt − Xt|t−1 (I − KL) G1 W G1 (I − KL) Xt − Xt|t−1
h h¡
ii
¢¡
¢0
¡ ¢0
= E tr Xt − Xt|t−1 Xt − Xt|t−1 (I − KL)0 G1 W G1 (I − KL)
h h¡
i
¢¡
¢0 i ¡ 1
¢0
G (I − KL) W G1 (I − KL)
= tr E Xt − Xt|t−1 Xt − Xt|t−1
= E

where tr (·) is the trace operator. Using (A19) yields the desired result.

¥

Lemma A3 Suppose
are hcontemporaneously
uncorrelated with each other and i.i.d over time.
h¡ all shocks
¡
¢2 i
¢2 i
Then the term αE πt − πt|t
+ E yt − yt|t
is independent of the Taylor rule coeﬃcients.
Proof: Given Lemma A2, it is suﬃcient to show that T is independent of the Taylor rule coeﬃcients. If all
shocks are i.i.d. over time then A11 = 04×4 and G1 as defined in (A20) reduces to
G1 = − [A22 ]−1 A21
which is independent of policy. Furthermore, P = Σs (see A19) and because G1 is independent of policy, so
−1
is L (defined in A15). Then K = P L0 (LP L0 ) is independent of policy (equation A18). As a result, T is
independent of policy.
¥
Lemma A4 Suppose all shocks are contemporaneously uncorrelated with each other and i.i.d over time.
e
and ut|t are independent of the Taylor rule coeﬃcients.
Then rt|t
Proof: In the iid case with A11 = 04×4 , equation (A17) reduces to
Xt+1|t+1 = (I + KM )−1 KZt+1
28

Combining this with (A14) gives
¢
¡
Xt|t = (I + KM )−1 KZt = (I + KM )−1 K LXt + M Xt|t .

Rearranging yields

Xt|t = KLXt .
In the proof of Lemma A3 we showed that K and L are independent of policy when shocks are i.i.d. Hence
e
and ut|t are independent of the Taylor rule coeﬃcients.
¥
rt|t
Proposition 4 Suppose
are contemporaneously uncorrelated with each other and i.i.d over time.
ª
© all shocks
Then the coeﬃcients ψ ∗y , ψ ∗π satisfying (11”) and ψ y → ∞ are optimal.
h i
Proof: Lemmas A1 and A3 imply that minimizing objective (8) is equivalent to minimizing αE π2t|t +
h i
2
E yt|t
. Furthermore, equations (14) and (15) simplify to
π t|t =

ψy + σ
κ
re +
ut|t
σ + ψ y + κψ π t|t σ + ψ y + κψ π

yt|t =

1
ψπ
e
rt|t
−
ut|t
σ + ψ y + κψ π
σ + ψ y + κψ π

e
in the i.i.d. case. Lemma A4 shows that rt|t
and ut|t are independent of the Taylor rule coeﬃcients, but
importantly, their covariance need not to be zero. The remainder of the proof is identical to the proof of
Proposition 2.
¥

Proposition 5 Suppose the model is given by equations (1) to (6), (TR2), and the observation equations
y
π
m
CB
to
πm
t = π t + mt and yt = yt + mt . The central bank uses the Kalman filter with information set It
estimate the true state of the economy. Suppose further that V [ut ] = 0 and that %my = %mπ = 0. Then, for
n
o
any Taylor rule (TR2), with coeﬃcients ψ y and ψ π , there exist coeﬃcients φ̃y , φ̃π , ν̃ such that the policy
rule (TR3) generates the same equilibrium paths for all variables.
Proof: Under the assumption that V [ut ] = 0 and %my = %mπ = 0, it is possible to write the model as follows
¶
µ
¶
µ
¶
µ
¶
µ
0 1
A11 A12
B1
yt
e
r
, Ẽ =
, A=
,B =
Xt = rt , st+1 = εt+1 , xt =
σ 1
πt
A21 A22
B2
µ
¶
µ κ 1 ¶
µ ¶
¡
¢
−β β
0
0
A11 = %r , A12 = 0 0 , B1 = 0, A21 =
B2 =
, A22 =
−1
1
σ
0

The observation equations are

Zt =

µ

ytm
πm
t

¶

+ vt = D

∙

Xt
xt

¸

+ vt , D =

µ

0 1 0
0 0 1

¶

0

with vt = (myt , mπt ) . Furthermore, D1 = (0, 0)0 and D2 = I2 Notice that A11 is a scalar. Because vt is
nonzero, the equations (and matrices) associated with the Kalman filter change somewhat (see Svensson and
Woodford 2004) though (A17) continues to hold. Since A11 is a scalar, KL and KM are also scalars.
Using (A10) and (A11), write the interest rate as
¢¡
¢0
¡
it − ρ = ψ y , ψ π yt|t , π t|t = F xt|t = F GXt|t .
Using (A17) and substituting backwards yields
it =

∞
X

−1

F G (I + KM )

j=0

h
ij
−1
KZt−j
(I − KL) A11 (I + KM )

Since KL, and KM are scalars, set ν̃ = (I − KL) A11 (I + KM )−1 . Then write
it =

∞
X

F G (I + KM )−1 ν̃ j KZt−j = F G (I + KM )−1 KZt + ν̃it−1 = φ̃y ytm + φ̃π π m
t + ν̃it−1

j=0

³
´
where φ̃y , φ̃π = F G (I + KM )−1 K.

¥
29

TABLE 1: BASELINE CALIBRATION
Parameter

,

,

,

Value

Description

0.99
1
2/3
1
0.9 ,0.5 ,0 ,0.95
0.22
0.43
0.50
0.66
1

Discount factor
Coefficient of relative risk aversion
Poisson rate of price stickiness
Labor supply elasticity
Persistence of shock processes
Standard deviation (SD) of innovation to efficient rate
SD of innovation to the cost‐push shock
SD of innovation to measurement error in inflation
SD of innovation to measurement error in the gap
Weight on inflation in the policy objective function

TABLE 2: EVALUATION OF POLICY RULES

Criterion (8)

∗
∗
∗

Standard Taylor Rule
(TR1)

Taylor Rule with
signal extraction (TR2)

Interest Rate
Smoothing (TR3)

1.56
1.11
0.45

1.03
0.69
0.34

1.16
0.86
0.30

0.61
2.00
‐

‐
‐
‐

0.27
0.42
1.08

3

3
 y*

2.5

2.5

 *

2

2

1.5

1.5

1

1

0.5

0.5

0
0.6

0.65

0.7

0.75

0.8

0.85

0.9

0
0.3

0.95

3

3

2.5

2.5

2

2

1.5

1.5

1

1

0.5

0.5

0
-0.2

-0.1

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

Autoregressive Root for Inflation Measurement Error

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

Autoregressive Root for Cost-Push Shock

Autoregressive Root for Efficient Rate Shock

0
0.6

0.65

0.7

0.75

0.8

0.85

0.9

0.95

Autoregressive Root for Output Measurement Error

Figure 1: Parametric Variations in Shock Persistence.
Notes: Each panel plots the optimal Taylor rule coefficients for inflation (heavy solid line) and the output gap (heavy
dashed line). The vertical dashed line indicates the parameter value in the baseline calibration. For all cases, as the
autoregressive coefficient changes, the innovation variance is adjusted so as to hold constant the variance of the
overall process. All other parameters are held constant at the baseline level.

3

3
 y*

2.5

2.5

 *

2

2

1.5

1.5

1

1

0.5

0.5

0
0.1

0.15

0.2

0.25

0.3

0.35

0.4

0
0.2

Standard Deviation for Efficient Rate Shock

3

3

2.5

2.5

2

2

1.5

1.5

1

1

0.5

0.5

0
0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

Standard Deviation for Inflation Measurement Error

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

Standard Deviation for Cost-Push Shock

0
0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

Standard Deviation for Output Measurement Error

Figure 2: Parametric Variations in Shock Variance.
Notes: Each panel plots the optimal Taylor rule coefficients for inflation (heavy solid line) and the output gap (heavy
dashed line). The vertical dashed line indicates the parameter value in the baseline calibration. All other
parameters are held constant at the baseline level.

3

3
 y*
 *

2.5

2.5



2

2

1.5

1.5

1

1

0.5

0.5

0

0.5

1

1.5

2

Weight on Inflation in the Objective Function 

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

Macroeconomic Rate of Price Adjustment 

Figure 3: Parametric Variations in Inflation Weight and Rate of Price Adjustment.
Notes: Each panel plots the optimal Taylor rule coefficients for inflation (heavy solid line) and the output gap (heavy
dashed line). The vertical dashed line indicates the parameter value in the baseline calibration. All other
parameters are held constant at the baseline level.

Central bank's loss

1.2

1.1

4

10

1.
04

1.1

1.1

6

8

1.
08

1.
06

1.1

8

1.1

2

9

2

1.
06

1.1

6

1.04

8

5

1.0

1.1

Coefficient on  t|t

7

4
1.06

3

1.06

1.08

1.06

1.1

2

1.08

2

3

4

5

6
Coefficient on yt|t

7

8

Figure 4: Level curves of the central bank’s loss function.
Notes: The figure uses the baseline calibration summarized in Table 1.

9

10

6.0

Panel A: Unfiltered Data

4.0

2.0

0.0

‐2.0
Output Gap (initial)
Output Gap (revised)
Core CPI Inflation

‐4.0

‐6.0
1987

1989

1991

3.0

1993

1995

1997

1999

2001

2003

2005

2007

2001

2003

2005

2007

Panel B: HP‐Filtered Data

2.0

1.0

0.0

‐1.0

‐2.0

‐3.0
1987

1989

1991

1993

1995

1997

1999

Figure 5: Inflation and output gap estimates of the Fed.
Notes: The graphs show the current‐quarter estimates of Core CPI inflation and the output gap. All series
in Panel B are HP‐filtered with a smoothing parameter of 1600. The Federal Open Market Committee
meets twice per quarter and two estimates for the output gap are available. “Initial” refers to the
estimate for the first and “revised” to the estimate for the second meeting.
Source: Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia.

Output Gap

Inflation

Efficient Rate Shock

0.4

Interest rate

0.8
TR1
TR2
TR3

0.3

2

0.6

0.2

0.4

0.1

0.2

0

0

1.5

1

-0.1

0

5

10

15

20

-0.2

0.5

0

5

Output Gap

10

15

20

0

5

Inflation

10

15

20

15

20

Interest rate

1.5

2.5

0
Cost push Shock

0

2
1

-0.2
-0.4

1.5
1

0.5

0.5
-0.6
-0.8

0
0

5

10
Quarter

15

20

0
0

5

10
Quarter

15

20

-0.5

0

5

10
Quarter

Figure 6: Impulse Response Functions.
Notes: All shocks are one standard deviation in size. The unit of the output gap is percentage deviations
from its steady state value of zero. The units of inflation and the interest rate are annualized percentage
points.

Inflation

Interest rate
0.1

0
0

0
-0.2

-0.05

-0.15
TR1
TR2
TR3

-0.2
-0.25

-0.1

-0.4

-0.1

Measurment Error Shock (Inflation)

Measurment Error Shock (Output)

Output Gap
0.05

0

5

10

15

20

-0.6

-0.2

-0.8

-0.3

-1

0

5

Output Gap

10

15

20

-0.4

0

5

Inflation

10

15

20

15

20

Interest rate

0.1

0.2

2.5

0

0

2

-0.2

1.5

-0.4

1

-0.4

-0.6

0.5

-0.5

-0.8

-0.1
-0.2
-0.3

0

5

10
Quarter

15

20

0
0

5

10
Quarter

15

20

-0.5

0

5

10
Quarter

Figure 7: Impulse Response Functions.
Notes: All shocks are one standard deviation in size. The unit of the output gap is percentage deviations
from its steady state value of zero. The units of inflation and the interest rate are annualized percentage
points.

