                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS AND EFFECTIVE EXCHANGE RATES AT
                        THE COUNTRY-SECTOR LEVEL

                                          Nikhil Patel
                                           Zhi Wang
                                         Shang-Jin Wei

                                      Working Paper 20236
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w20236


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                            June 2014, Revised March 2019




We are grateful to George Alessandria, Pol Antras, Michael Devereux, Charles Engel, Enisse
Kharroubi, Giovanni Lombardo, Stephanie Schmitt-Grohe, Hyun Song Shin, Christian Upper,
Martin Uribe and our discussants Martin Berka, Beata Javorcik, Ayako Saiki and Giorgio
Valente, as well as participants in various seminars and conferences for helpful comments and
discussions. The views expressed here are those of the authors and do not necessarily correspond
to those of the institutions they are affiliated with, nor those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2014 by Nikhil Patel, Zhi Wang, and Shang-Jin Wei. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Global Value Chains and Effective Exchange Rates at the Country-Sector Level
Nikhil Patel, Zhi Wang, and Shang-Jin Wei
NBER Working Paper No. 20236
June 2014, Revised March 2019
JEL No. F1,F3

                                          ABSTRACT

The real effective exchange rate (REER) is one of the most cited statistical constructs in open-
economy macroeconomics. We show that the models used to compute these numbers are not rich
enough to allow for the rising importance of global value chains. Moreover, because different
sectors within a country participate in international production sharing at different stages, sector
level variations are also important for determining competitiveness. Incorporating these features,
we develop a framework to compute REER at both the sector and country level and apply it on
inter-country input-output tables to study the properties of the new measures of REER for 35
sectors in 40 countries.

Nikhil Patel                                     Shang-Jin Wei
Bank for International Settlements               Graduate School of Business
nikhil.patel@bis.org                             Columbia University
                                                 Uris Hall 619
Zhi Wang                                         3022 Broadway
Schar School of Policy and Government            New York, NY 10027-6902
George Mason Universty                           and NBER
3351 Fairfax Drive, MS 3B1,                      shangjin.wei@columbia.edu
Alington, VA 22201
zwang36@gmu.edu
1       Introduction

     The Real Effective Exchange Rate (REER) is one of the the most quoted indices in
international economics. It measures competitiveness by quantifying the sensitivity of
demand for output originating from a particular country as a function of changes in world
prices.1 Many institutions including most central banks around the world devote substantial
time, effort and resources into computing and analyzing these REER indices.
     Most of these standard REER measures make a number of simplifying assumptions which
are increasingly becoming questionable in a world characterized by global value chains. For
instance, they assume that every country exports only final goods which are produced without
using imported intermediate goods, and that each country can be characterized by a single
representative sector, implicitly imposing that all sectors within a country are identical in
terms of their interaction with each other and the rest of the world.
     The pitfall associated with these assumptions can be illustrated in the context of a stylized
world with three countries involved in a global value chain–China, Japan and the US. Suppose
Japan manufactures raw materials for the production of a mobile phone and ships it to China
which acts as an assembly point. China in turn exports the finished product to the US, where
it is consumed by US consumers. Not recognizing this global value chain structure, traditional
models would assume that Japan exports final goods to China, and hence a depreciation
of the Japanese currency hurts Chinese competitiveness. In reality however, a decrease in
the price of Japanese components could very well lead to an increase in demand for China’s
output and hence an improvement of its competitiveness, i.e a depreciation of its REER. This
example shows that REER computed using the standard frameworks is not only inaccurate
in terms of magnitude, but may also have the wrong sign. Accounting for such influences is
becoming increasingly more important given the rise in intermediate-goods trade in the last
two decades as shown by Wang et al. (2013).2
     Addressing these issues through the lens of a macroeconomic model designed to capture
global value chains and sectoral heterogeneity within and across countries, the paper makes
four contributions to the literature on REER.
     First, we depart from the single sector framework and allow for multiple sectors within
each country. Sectors differ in the nature and extent of their interaction with each other and
    1
    See Chinn (2006) for a primer on the concept of REER and Rogoff (2005) for an application and discussion.
    2
    For OECD countries Miroudot et al. (2009) find the share of trade in intermediate goods and services to
be 56% and 73% respectively. As emphasized in Baldwin and Lopez-Gonzalez (2012), intermediate goods
trade and vertical specialization have grown many-fold in developing countries starting in the 1980s (see
also Wang et al. (2013)) Also important is the import content of exports, epitomized by the prevalence of
processing trade involving Asian economies, especially China. Koopman et al. (2012) find that the import
content of exports is as high as 90 percent for some sectors in China.


                                                     1
with sectors in the rest of the world, both in terms of sourcing inputs as well as selling their
output. We build on the literature (in particular Bems and Johnson (2017), henceforth BJ)
that has already shown the importance of distinguishing intermediate and final goods trade
in measuring REER, and find that allowing for sectoral heterogeneity provides an even bigger
improvement in the quantification of REER as compared to incorporating imported inputs in
a single sector framework.
    Sectoral heterogeneity affects both components of REER-weights as well as prices, and
partly reflects the fact that sectors that are typically prominent exporters are also simul-
taneously large importers, and hence models which aggregate them with sectors that are
non-traded, overstate the domestic value added content in exports and hence the impact of
changes in foreign prices on competitiveness as measured by the REER.
    Second, acknowledging that value added and gross output (part of which is gross exports)
become delinked in the presence of imported inputs, we develop separate REER measures for
value added (GVC-REER) and gross output (Q-REER). While value added competitiveness
is the primary object of interest, gross output competitiveness may also be useful in certain
contexts. For instance, productivity gains from exports may be linked to gross exports rather
than their value added counterparts, due to positive spillovers from imported inputs and
technology.
    Third, apart from country-level REERs, we also develop REER measures at the sectoral
level. With increasing specialization and trade in intermediate inputs, inter-sectoral linkages
between countries differ substantially from aggregate country level relationships. Wang et al.
(2013)have documented and explored various dimensions of this heterogeneity and have found
that different sectors in a country tend to participate in cross-border production sharing
by different extents and in different ways. They show that some sectors mostly engage in
regional value chains (i.e., buying or selling intermediate inputs with neighboring countries),
whereas others engage in truly global value chains (i.e., sourcing and selling a significant
amount of inputs to countries on different continents). This implies substantial heterogeneity
in changes in competitiveness across sectors to a given change in foreign prices. An aggregate
country level measure is incapable of capturing these. Indeed, we find several instances where
the REERs move in opposite directions for different sectors within a country. This makes
sectoral REERs a useful addition to the information set of policy makers.
    Fourth, we apply the framework to a bilateral context and develop a new measure of
bilateral real exchange rate (GVC-RER) that provides an improvement upon the current
measures by acknowledging the presence of sectoral heterogeneity and trade in inputs.
    We take the framework to the data by parametrizing the model using global input output
tables from the world input-output database (WIOD), and create a database of REER weights


                                               2
and REER indices for 40 countries and 1435 country-sector pairs for the period 1995-2009.
The results highlight the importance of the novel features introduced in the modeling part.
For instance, we find that while allowing for the distinction between intermediate and final
goods flows does lead to differences in REER weights (as shown by BJ), the difference is
much starker once we allow for sectoral heterogeneity as well.
    With regard to the much discussed case of China’s REER, our results reveal two important
findings over the period 1995-2009. Firstly, we find that the exchange rate appreciated more
during this time when viewed in value added terms (GVC-REER) as opposed to gross output
terms ( Q-REER), signaling that a depreciation in countries from which China sourced inputs
lead to an increase in the competitiveness of its exports which was greater than that of its own
domestic factors of production. Secondly, when viewed in a bilateral context against the US,
the appreciation of the Chinese exchange rate from 1995-2009 was much more pronounced (i.e
the case for the exchange rate being “undervalued” during this time is much weaker) under
our GVC-RER scheme that correctly accounts for China’s complex participation in global
value chains, compared to the standard measures which ignore these features.
    On the debate on imbalances within the eurozone, our results based on the bilateral
GVC-RER between Greece and Germany indicate that the fall in competitiveness for Greece
(i.e an appreciation) vis-a-vis Germany from 1995-2009 was much larger when measured
through GVC-RER as opposed to the conventional real exchange rate measure, indicating that
the standard bilateral REER measure underestimated the extent to which lack of inflation in
Germany was hurting competitiveness in Greece.
    Given our objective to model relatively short-term and small-scale movements in competi-
tiveness, we take the nature of GVC and trade patterns across countries and sectors as given
and do not consider the issue of endogenous off-shoring and production sharing decisions.3
    The remainder of the paper is structured as follows: Section 2 presents the model that
is used to derive expressions for different real effective exchange rate measures. Section 3
presents the main empirical results, and section 4 concludes.


Related Literature

   This paper is a contribution to the literature on international trade and price competitive-
ness. As mentioned above, the most prominent and commonly cited REER measures today
do not distinguish between trade in intermediate and final goods and consider all trade flows
   3
     There is a growing literature on organization of global value chains that looks into these questions. See
for instance Antràs and Chor (2013), Antràs (2014), Costinot et al. (2013) and Johnson and Moxnes (2012).
Moreover, due to the complex nature of the model we solve it using log linearization techniques. This further
reinforces the view that our REER indices are best suited for short-term movements resulting from shocks
that are not too large so as to affect organization of Global value chains (GVCs).

                                                      3
to be in the latter category. A few recent papers have recognized this drawback and have
made attempts to address them. BJ allow for trade in intermediates and compute the REER
weighting matrix at the country level. They however do not allow for sectoral heterogeneity
which we find to be a critical feature in determining patterns in competitiveness, and do not
consider REERs at the sector level.4
    Our attempt to incorporate sector level price indices and build sector level exchange
rates has a precedent in the work of Bennett and Zarnic (2009), Sato et al. (2013), Ito and
Shimizu (2015), and Goldberg (2004). However, their work does not incorporate trade in
intermediate goods and uses an IMF-like weighting matrix. In developing measures designed
specifically to measure external (export) competitiveness, Lommatzsch et al. (2016) also
construct REER indices in which they adjust the price index by putting weight on sectors in
accordance with their export shares. However, they do not allow for sectoral heterogeneity
in weights, which in turn also influences the relevant foreign price index used in the REER
computation and hence biases the REER measure as we show in the paper. With regard to
gross output competitiveness, Bayoumi et al. (2013) propose a measure in which they borrow
the weighting matrix from the IMF but adjust the price indices to acknowledge the presence
of imported inputs. As we show however, this only ends up being a partial adjustment as the
original weighting matrix is not adjusted.
    More broadly, the paper is motivated by and is linked to the relatively new but rapidly
expanding literature on global value chains and their implications for macroeconomic variables
(see Hummels et al., 2001, Baldwin and Lopez-Gonzalez, 2012 and Auer et al. (2017)) as well
as the literature on trade statistics and export accounting in the presence of intermediate
goods trade (Koopman et al. (2014) and Wang et al. (2013)).


2       Theoretical Framework


2.1      The Concept of REER as a Measure of Competitiveness

    The real effective exchange rate measures change in competitiveness by quantifying changes
in the demand for goods produced by a country as a function of changes in relative prices.5 If
VJ is the demand for the goods produced (or alternatively, value added) by country J, then
the effective exchange rate of country J is defined as:
    4
      While the model in BJ does allow for different sectors (as in Johnson (2014)) they so not explore the role
of sectoral heterogeneity in computing aggregate REERs and take a single sector version of their model to
the data.
    5
      In this literature the use of the word “competitiveness” is appropriate only in the context of price
competitiveness, and does not necessarily extend to the notion of competitiveness measured in terms of
profits, market shares, ease of doing business, etc.

                                                       4
                               4REERJ = 4VJ = GJ ({4p}ni=1 )                                         (2.1)

where {4p}ni=1 is a vector of price changes in all countries including the home country. Note
that by assumption no other variables except the prices explicitly enter the function G(.).
Hence, the REER is a partial equilibrium construct where the primitive shocks that lead to
the observed price changes are not modeled. The demand side of the economy is also assumed
to be exogenous, and the aggregate final demand is assumed to be constant (although demand
is allowed to switch between different goods in response to changes in prices).
    The function GJ (.) is homogenous of degree zero, so that if all prices (including the
home price) double, then the relative demands remain unchanged, and since by construction
aggregate demand is held fixed, the absolute demand for each good also remains unaffected.
Examples of the function G(.) include the commonly used trade weighted exchange rates
defined for countries which take the of the form
                         n
                         X                      n
                                                X                               n
                                                                                X
           4REERJ =            wJ,i (4pi ) =              wJ,i (4pi − 4pJ ) =         wJ,i (4piJ )   (2.2)
                         i=1                   i=i;i6=j                         i=1

    where, wJ,i is the weight assigned by country J to country i, and 4piJ is the bilateral
exchange rate between countries J and i, and the second equality uses the homogeneity of
degree zero for GJ (.).
    Such models of REER measurement do not assume balanced trade or any restrictions on
the trade balance. In our empirical framework, trade balances are allowed to be non-zero
in the steady state and are calibrated to their observed counterparts in the data. This is in
line with the partial equilibrium setup common in the literature in which the demand side is
exogenous.


2.2    The Model

    Consider a world economy comprising n countries. There are m sectors within each
country. Each country-sector is called a “production entity” and there are a total number nm
of these production entities in the world economy. Each entity uses a production function
with its own value added and a composite intermediate input which can contain intermediate
inputs from all mn entities including itself. The output of each entity can be used either as a
final good (consumed in any of the n countries) or as an input by another entity. Hence there
are a total of nm producers and nm + n consumers (nm entities plus n final goods consumers)
in the economy. Both the production function and final goods consumption aggregators are
nested CES (constant elasticity of substitution) aggregators which are described in detail

                                                     5
next.

Production

       The production function for entity (c, l) is given by the expression:6

                                                                             3σ3
                                        3      σ 3 −1          3      σ 3 −1  σ −1
                        Qcl = (wlvc )1/σ (Vlc ) σ3 + (wlXc )1/σ (Xlc ) σ3                                                     (2.3)

   Here, Vlc is the value added by the entity, Xlc is an aggregate bundle of intermediate
inputs, and σ 3 is the elasticity of substitution between the two inputs. Xlc is in turn a CES
aggregate, combining inputs from each entity (i, s), denoted by Xslic , in a three stage nested
CES aggregate with elasticities of substitution σ 2 , σ 1h and σ 1 as follows:
   The intermediate input Xlc is and aggregate of m sectoral components,

                                              "                                             #     σ2
                                                   m                                            σ 2 −1
                                                   X                   2           σ 2 −1
                                    Xlc =                  c 1/σ
                                                         (wsl )  (X csl )            σ2                                       (2.4)
                                                   s=1

   each of which is in turn a combination of the sector s input from the domestic sector and
an aggregate sector s input form foreign sectors. The elasticity of substitution between these
two inputs is σs1h . 7
                                                                                                                       1h
                                                                                                                      σs
                                                     1h −1
                                                     σs                                                    1h −1
                                                                                                          σs
                                                                                                                    σ1h
                                                                                                                      s  −1
                                1/σs1h                                         1/σs1h
                  Xslc = (wsl
                           cc
                              )           (Xslcc )    σs1h
                                                              + (w(f )csl )                 (X(f )csl )    σs1h
                                                                                                                              (2.5)

   For the sector s foreign input bundle, inputs from all foreign countries from that sector
are aggregated to form sectoral intermediate inputs {X(f )csl }m
                                                               s=1 . In other words, X(f )sl is
                                                                                          c

the aggregate sector s foreign intermediate input used in production by country c sector l

                                                                                        σs1
                                    "    n
                                                                                   #    1 −1
                                                                            1 −1
                                                                           σs          σs
                                                               1
                                         X
                       X(f )csl =                    ic 1/σs
                                                   (wsl )    (X ic
                                                                sl )
                                                                            σs1
                                                                                                 , s = 1, 2, ..m              (2.6)
                                        i=1,i6=c

Here Xslic denotes inputs from country i sector s used in production by country c sector l,
the w0 s are aggregation weights and σ 1 is the (constant) elasticity of substitution between
different foreign varieties of the sector s output in the production function of entity (c, l)
   6
     Notation: We use superscripts to denote countries and subscripts to denote sectors. When 2 scripts are
present, the first one denotes the source country and the second denotes the destination country. For example,
  ic
Xsl  denotes output produced by (source) country i sector s that is used by (destination) country c sector l.
   7
     With this two step framework we are allowing for a distinction between “macro” (σ 1h ) and “micro” (σ 1 )
elasticities for each sector, which is a feature of the data documented in the literature–see Feenstra et al.
(2014).


                                                                   6
Preferences

    A country specific final good is obtained by aggregating goods from all nm production
entities in two stages.

                                                                                                        θs1 (c)
                                        "    n
                                                                                                   #    1 (c)−1
                                                                                       1 (c)−1
                                                                                      θs               θs
                                                                     1
                                             X
                         Fsc (f ) =                    (κic
                                                         s)
                                                            1/θs (c)
                                                                     (F ic
                                                                        s)
                                                                                       θ1s (c)                                          (2.7)
                                            i=1,i6=c

                                                                                                                             1h (c)
                                                                                                                            θs
                                               1 (c)−1
                                               θs                                                             1h (c)−1
                                                                                                             θs
                                                                                                                          θ1h
                                                                                                                            s  (c)−1
                            1h (c)                                                  1h (c)
            Fs c = (κcc
                     s )
                         1/θs
                                     (Fscc )    θs1 (c)
                                                          + (κ(f )cs )1/θs                   (F (f )cs )      θs1h (c)
                                                                                                                                        (2.8)

                                        "                                                    #     θ 2 (c)
                                            m                                                    θ 2 (c)−1
                                                                                 θ 2 (c)−1
                                                               2 (c)
                                            X
                            Fc =                   (κcs )1/θ           (F cs )     θ 2 (c)                                              (2.9)
                                            s=1


Market clearing:

   Gross output from an entity is absorbed either as an intermediate input or a final good
(we do not allow for inventory accumulation or any inter-temporal effects). Thus the following
market clearing condition holds ∀(c, l)
                                                   n
                                                   X                     m X
                                                                         X n
                                       Qcl     =          Flci   +                     Xljck                                           (2.10)
                                                    i=1                  j=1 k=1



2.3    Computation of Effective Exchange Rate Weighting Matrices

    In order to define the exchange rates we take prices and final demands in all countries
as given and compute the demand for value added and gross output of different entities as
functions of changes in the price of value added, which we take as exogenously given.

Demand for value added as a function of price of value added: (GVC-REER)

   The appendix shows that the demand for value added can be written as
                                                                
                         vec V̂lc = WV vec (p̂(V )cl ) + WF V vec F̂ c                                                                 (2.11)

              
   Here vec V̂lc          is the vector of changes in value added stacked across all countries
                    nmX1
and sectors, and WV and WF are  nm by nm matrices derived in the appendix. Assuming the
change in final demand vec F̂ to be zero, the nm by nm matrix premultiplying vec (p̂(V )cl )
                              c




                                                                 7
can be interpreted as a matrix of weights for the real effective exchange rate, as it measures
how the demand for value added originating in a country-sector changes when price of value
added changes in any other entity.

Interpretation in the case with uniform elasticity:

   Appendix C shows that under the uniform elasticity assumption the weight assignment
by country sector (h, l) to country-sector (c, s) where (h, l) 6= (c, s) can be written as follows:

                                 n
                                       "                            #
                                 X         p(V )hl Vlhk p(V )cs Vsck
                          hc
                         wls =                                         , (h, l) 6= (c, s)                 (2.12)
                                 k=1
                                             p(V )hl Vlh (P K F k )
where we use lower case w to denote uniform elasticity weights. The weight assigned by
country sector (h, l) to country-sector (c, s) where (h, l) 6= (c, s) is a weighted sum of the value
added created by country-sector (c, s) and absorbed by each of the countries k(= 1, .., n),
where the weights are given by the value added created by (h, l) that is absorbed in the same
country k. This captures both mutual and third country competition, because the weight is
high if both p(V )hl Vlhk and p(V )cs Vsck are high, which happens when both (h, l) and (c, s)
                                          

have a high share of value added exports to country k.

Relaxing the Uniform Elasticity Assumption

    In this paper, we focus primarily on the uniform elasticity case in order to focus on our
main contribution, which is to highlight the role of sectoral heterogeneity in computing REER
indices. Here we provide a brief flavor of the results when the uniform elasticity assumption
is relaxed, and further results, with examples are developed in the appendix.

Proposition 2.1. Suppose all production and consumption elasticities are uniform and equal
to σ and θ respectively.8 Then starting at the uniform elasticity equilibrium, the effect of a
change in elasticity on the weight assigned by entity (h, l) to entity (c, s) is given by:

                                Pn         Pn        Pm      hc1 cc1     c1 c1 c2
           hc
         ∂wls         vlh vsc                           k=1 blk bsk (p(Q)k Fk     )
                 hc
              = wls −              c1 =1     c2 =1
                                                          h h
                                                                                    , (h, l)   6= (c, s)   (2.13)
          ∂θ                                         p(V )l Vl

      Proof(sketch): See appendix C.

   Here b is used to denote elements of the global Leontief inverse matrix and p(Q) is used
to denote price of gross output.(2.13) shows that an increase in elasticity of substitution
  8
      This is equivalent to assumption (A2) in section 2.4


                                                            8
of consumption holding everything else constant (including the production elasticity) has
two opposing effects on the weight assigned by home entity (h, l) to the foreign entity (c, s).
The two terms correspond to the expenditure switching and complementarity effect. In
particular, the first effect (expenditure switching) is positive and is given by the uniform
elasticity weight wlshc
                        , which is always positive in the uniform elasticity case. In addition,
there is the countervailing complementarity effect which comes from the second term on the
right hand side. This term is high when the products bhc      lk bsk are high for various entities
                                                                1 cc1


indexed by (c1 , k), which in turn happens if the outputs of the two entities are used together
in production (i, e entities such as (c1, k) which use the output of (c, s) as an input, also uses
the output of (h, l) as an input).
    Intuitively, when the price of (c, s) decreases, its quantity demanded increases. This effect
is greater the greater is the elasticity of substitution between goods (θ). Moreover, an increase
in demand for (c, s) will end up increasing the output of (h, l) if it is highly complementary
with (c, s).

Gross Output Competitiveness

    We also derive the demand for aggregate output as a function of the price of value added
(this is analogous to the “goods” REER measure proposed in Bayoumi et al. (2013) (See
appendix for steps of proof).
                                                                     
                         vec       Q̂cl                  ˆ
                                              = WQ vec p(V )l + WF Q vec F̂ c
                                                            c
                                                                                           (2.14)

   Here WQ is an nm by nm      weighting
                                          matrix derived in appendix B. Again putting the
change in final demand vec F̂ c to be zero, the nm by nm matrix premultiplying vec (p̂vc       l )
can be interpreted as a matrix of weights for the real effective exchange rate with regard to
gross competitiveness, i.e it measures how the demand for output of a country-sector changes
with changes in prices of other country-sectors. This is in contrast to the first measure defined
above, which looks at changes in demand for value added. (As is shown in 2.2, the two are
the same in the special case where gross output is the same as value added)


2.4    Building Country-level REER From Ground Up:

Value added weights at the country level

    This section provides a method to aggregate the country-sector level weights derived
above and defines country level weights analogous to the ones commonly discussed in the
literature. We show that the aggregated weights so derived in general do not correspond to

                                                          9
any of the ones proposed in the literature except in knife-edge cases. This is attributable to
the fact that our measure exploits inter-sectoral linkages between countries to provide a more
comprehensive measure of competitiveness than what can be obtained by using just country
level data.
    To derive the expression for country-level value added weights, we start with the following
decomposition of the nominal GDP of country c into its different sectoral components:
                                                      m
                                                      X
                                              c
                                        p(V ) V = c
                                                             p(V )cl Vlc                            (2.15)
                                                       l=1

   Here, p(V )cl denotes the price index of value added for sector l in country c, and Vlc is the
corresponding real value added.
   log linearizing this equation we get:
                                          m 
                                              p(V )cl Vlc h
                                         X                                 i
                                 c
                           p̂(V ) + V̂ =c
                                                           p̂(V )c
                                                                 l + V̂ l
                                                                          c
                                                                                                    (2.16)
                                         l=1
                                              p(V )c V c

    Stacking the n equations in (2.16) we can write the system in matrix notation as:


                                               h                                       i
        vec (p̂(V )c )nX1 + vec V̂ c         = RV vec (p̂(V )cl )nmX1 + vec V̂lc                    (2.17)
                                       nX1                                          nmX1


where                                                                        
                                                                    0      0
                                                           S1V 0m .. 0m
                                                       0
                                                       0m S2V
                                                                              
                                                                           :
                                                                                                     (2.18)
                                                                              
                                (RV )nXnm =           :
                                                                              
                                                                      ..  :  
                                                                              
                                                              0     0
                                                            0m 0m .. SnV
                                                                
                      p(V )i V i p(V )i V i             )im Vm i
    and SiV 1Xm = p(V )1i V 1i , p(V )2i V 2i , .., p(V            and 0m is an m by 1 matrix of zeros. By
             
                                                     p(V )i V i
definition the change in the GDP deflator is the weighted sum of change in its components
and hence (2.17) reduces to
                                              h           i
                                vec V̂ c  = RV vec V̂lc                                             (2.19)
                                      nX1                nmX1
                                            
    using (2.11) in (2.19) and imposing vec F̂ c = 0 as before we get:
                                         
                                     vec V̂lc = RV WV vec (p̂(V )cl )                               (2.20)




                                                      10
Defining the two measures of country level value added exchange rates:

  When sector level price indices are available, (2.20) defines the change in the country level
GVC-REER, i.e

                           4log(GV C − REER) = WV (C)vec (p̂(V )cl )                                (2.21)

where the n by nm matrix WV (C) = RV WV is the weighting matrix which can be interpreted
as follows: the weight assigned by country i to country j sector l is itself a weighted sum of
the weights assigned by each sector of country i to (j, l), with the weights being proportional
to the country i sector’s share of value added as a fraction of total value added by country i
                                               m 
                                                   p(V )i V i
                                               X              
                                   WV ij
                                      l    =              s s
                                                                  (WV )ij
                                                                       sl                           (2.22)
                                               s=1
                                                     p(V )i V i

   If sector level prices are not available, then we need a further approximation. In particular,
we need to assume a mapping between sector level prices and GDP deflator, i.e between p̂vc
and {p̂vc
       l }l=1 . We make the relatively uninformed assumption that all sectoral level prices
          M

change in the same proportion as the aggregate GDP deflator, i.e we make the following
assumption9 .
   Assumption (AP):



                                           p(Vˆ )j = p̂(V )jl ∀l∀j                                  (2.23)



   Using this assumption we can define our second measure of country level value added
exchange rate, GVC-REER(GDPdef) as follows:

                    4log(GV C − REER(GDP def )) = WV (CG)vec (p̂(V )c )                             (2.24)

where WV (CG) = RV WV Rg is an n by n matrix of weights and Rg = In ⊗ 1m


Link to other measures in the literature:

   Our second measure of country level exchange rates which uses only the GDP deflator
(GVC-REER(GDPdef)) has an n by n weighting matrix as all other measures in the literature
and we can hence make a comparison with them.
   9
    For example, in a world with price rigidity and producer currency pricing, this assumption is satisfied
automatically in the presence of shocks to the nominal exchange rate.

                                                     11
   Given the country-sector level weights (WV ), the country level weights (WV (CG)) have
an intuitive interpretation. The weight assigned by country i to country j is a weighted
sum of the weights assigned by each sector of country i to each sector of country j, with the
weights being proportional to the home sector’s share of value added as a fraction of total
home value added.

                                                m               m
                                                                                              !
                                                    p(V )i V i
                                                X               X
                       WV (GDP def )ij =                            s s
                                                                                    (WV )ij
                                                                                         sk       (2.25)
                                                s=1
                                                         p(V )i V i           k=1

    These country level weights defined here are different from others proposed in the literature
in several respects. The closest to our measure is the one by BJ who also take into account
the input-output linkages in their measure and define weights in terms of value added, but
do not exploit sector level linkages across countries. Because of the greater information used
in our measure, it is in general different from their VAREER and IOREER, even under the
assumption of all elasticities being the same. The following proposition shows that even
under the uniform elasticity assumption, GVC-REER and VAREER differ from each other
except in special cases.
    The country level weights (WV (GDP def )) defined above reduce to VAREER (and
IOREER) weights defined in BJ if either of the two conditions below are satisfied.

   1. (A2) and the following condition
                                     n
                                     X                  m
                                                        X           n X
                                                                    X m
                                vi         bic F cj =         vsi             bic  cj
                                                                               ls Fs ∀i, j        (2.26)
                                     c=1                l=1         c=1 s=1


                   p(V )i V i
     where vli = p(Q)li Qli is the value added share for entity (i, l) and b denotes a generic
                      l l
     element of the global inter-country Leontief inverse matrix.

   2. (A2) and (A3) , i.e no trade in intermediates

The proof is given in appendix D. The first part of the proposition shows that outside
of the knife-edge case in which the above condition is satisfied, the GVC-REER(GDPdef)
weights which exploit inter-sectoral linkages between countries will dominate the VAREER
measure. Intuitively, condition (2.26) is satisfied if different sectors within a country are
“symmetric” with regard to their input-output linkages with the rest of the world, for in
that case aggregation across sectors within a country will be a closer approximation to the
behavior of each individual sector. The next section will provide an example to illustrate the
role played by the condition in aggregating weights at the country level.
    The second part of the proposition shows that differences between GVC-REER and

                                                        12
VAREER vanish when there is no trade in intermediates. This shows that if there is no
trade in intermediates, then aggregating trade flows across sectors within a country does
not lead to any loss of information as far as computation of real effective exchange rate is
concerned. Intuitively, if all production by all entities involves only own value added and
no intermediates, then there is no asymmetry between sectors within a country and hence
aggregation does not lead to any loss of relevant information.
   To summarize, both sector level prices (the more accurate and our preferred measure)
and country level prices (as in the literature) can be used to compute REER indices using
the sector level weighting matrices discussed above, yielding the following two expressions for
country level GVC-REERs.

                           4log(GV C − REER) = WV (C)vec (p̂(V )cl )                             (2.27)


                   4log(GV C − REER(GDP def )) = WV (CG)vec (p̂(V )c )                           (2.28)

    Where WV (C) and WV (CG) are weighting matrices of dimension nby nm and n by
nrespectively. The two measures of Q-REER (for gross output competitiveness are defined
analogously).10 In general, weighting matrices using sector level information (WVcs ) as well as
REER indices incorporating sector level price variations provide a more accurate measure
of competitiveness compared to the measures which use only country level aggregate trade
flows and price indices.11 This is illustrated in the example that follows.


Gross output exchange rate at country level

   Following a similar procedure to the one used for GVC-REER, we can define weights and
exchange rates for gross output at the country level:

                              4log(QREER) = WQ (C)vec (p̂(V )cl )                                (2.29)


                       4log(QREER(GDP def )) = WQ (CG)vec (p̂(V )c )                             (2.30)

    Similar to GVC-REER, our benchmark measure of gross output competitiveness (equation
2.29) differs from its counterparts such as the conventional IMF and BIS REERs along three
dimensions:
  10
    The detailed derivations are provided in appendix
  11
    Appendix D discusses the set of restrictive conditions under which the two approaches give identical
expressions



                                                  13
   1. different weighting matrix

   2. use of value added prices as opposed to CPI or gross output prices

   3. use of sector level prices instead of aggregate country level prices.


Relationship to other REER Weighting Matrices in the Literature

   We now link the two REER measures proposed in the previous section and some common
REER measures in the literature with particular emphasis on whether and under what
conditions the different measures in the literature can be recovered from the more general
measures proposed here.


Assumptions:

    (A1)m = 1. i.e, each country has only one sector
    (A2) uniform elasticity:σ1 = σ2 = σ3 = θ1 = θ2 =1
    (A3) No intermediates in production and only final goods are traded.

Proposition 2.2.

   1. Under (A1) :
      GVC-REER =IOREER (BJ)

   2. Under (A1) and (A2) :
      GVC-REER=IOREER=VAREER (BJ)

   3. Under (A1), (A2), (A3):
      GVC-REER=Q-REER=IOREER=VAREER=Goods-REER ( Bayoumi et al. (2013) )
      =IMF-REER ( Bayoumi et al. (2005) ) 12

proof: see appendix.
    The main conclusion from these results is that the GVC-REER measure does not reduce
to the common measures currently in use, such as those of the Federal Reserve (Loretan,
2005), BIS (Klau et al., 2008) or IMF (Bayoumi et al., 2005), as well as the more sophisticated
ones, outside of very strong assumptions.
   12
      As mentioned before, note that the IMF uses the CPI to compute REER, but in this section we will use
IMF-REER to denote total effective exchange rates computed with IMF weights but using the GDP deflator,
to make the measure comparable with other measures proposed here and in BJ



                                                   14
2.5     Illustrative Example: A three country global value chain

    This section presents a numerical example to illustrate the new REER measures proposed
in this paper, and provides a comparison with the existing ones in the literature.13 Consider a
world economy comprising three countries (J, C and U ) and two sectors within each country
indexed by subscript i ∈ {1, 2}. The input-output linkages are given in table 1. The example
mimics a stylized global value chain of the following form:

                                          J1 → C2 → (C, U )                                        (2.31)

    Sector J1 in country J exports raw materials to sector C2 in country C, which combines
them with its own value added input to produce final goods which are then subsequently
consumed in C and exported to U . The rest of the sectors only use their own value added input
and sell domestically. Next, we illustrate how sectoral heterogeneity affects the measurement
of REER along two dimensions-the REER weights themselves and their interaction with
sectoral price changes.

Sectoral heterogeneity and GVC-REER weights

    The key advantage in our REER weighting scheme compared to the literature is that the
framework is flexible enough to incorporate information from input output tables like Table
1a that are at the country-sector level, whereas the other REER schemes in the literature
work with input-output linkages at the country level (analogous to table 1b).
    To see the consequences of the loss of information on sectoral heterogeneity that this
aggregation entails, table 2 shows the weight assigned by country U to country C and J under
different REER weighting schemes. Consider first a comparison between GVC-REER and the
VAREER measure of BJ. Both recognize that part of the trade between J and C comprises
of intermediate goods, and hence assign a lower value to WU C than the IMF weight. However,
GVC-REER has a lower value of WU C compared to VAREER. This is attributable to the
fact that unlike VAREER, the GVC-REER recognizes that the sector in C which actually
competes with U is C2 , and C2 has a lower value added share than C1 . Hence, the VAREER
weight, which essentially treats U as competing with C as a whole (which is an average of
C1 and C2 ) puts a higher weight on C as it overestimates the value added originating in C
that is competing with U in U 0 s final goods market. Similarly, GVC-REER assigns a higher
  13
     Appendix E provides a general solution for the type of three country global value chain considered in
this example


                                                   15
                           Table 1 – Input output table for example 2.5
                                          (a) Sector level input-output table
                                 J                 C              U          JFinal       CFinal          Ufinal     total output
                            J1       J2       C1       C2    U1        U2
                      J1    0        0        0         2    0         0           1             0              0         3
            J
                      J2    0        0        0         0    0         0           1             0              0         1
                      C1    0        0        0         0    0         0           0             2              0         2
            C
                      C2    0        0        0         0    0         0           0             1             2.5       3.5
                      U1    0        0        0         0    0         0           0             0              2         2
            U
                      U2    0        0        0         0    0         0           0             0              1         1
            VA              3        1        2        1.5   2         1
       total output         3        1        2        3.5   2         1

                                      (b) Country level input output table
                                          J    C       U      J final       C final    U final       Total output

                            J             0    2        0         2           0          0                4

                            C             0    0        0         0.5        2.5        2.5              5.5

                            U             0    0        0         0           0          3                3

                       Value added        4    3.5      3

                      Total output        4    5.5      3




value to WU J compared to VAREER, recognizing the importance of J in determining the
competitiveness of U through the input it supplies to C2 . The benchmark IMF measure not
only fails to recognize this sectoral heterogeneity, but also implicitly assumes that all trade is
in final goods, and hence no part of production carried out in J is consumed in U . This is
evident from a value of zero assigned to WU J under IMF framework.
    Note that since neither sector in U uses intermediate inputs and consequently there is no
distinction between value added and gross output, and Q-REER and GVC-REER weights
coincide. This equivalence breaks down only when a country imports intermediate inputs, as
is the case with C in this example. In this case WCJ is higher in GVC-REER (WCJ =0.56)
than it is under the Q-REER (WCJ =-1.33). In fact, in the latter case WCJ is actually negative,
implying that a fall in J’s prices leads to an increase in the demand for C’s output (although
not of its value added) as it embodies the output of J1 which becomes more competitive with
the fall in its price.

Sectoral heterogeneity and REER indices

  The second dimension of sectoral heterogeneity which leads to an improvement in our
REER measure compared to others in the literature is the flexibility to incorporate hetero-


                                                                  16
 Table 2 – REER weight assigned by U to J and C under different weighting schemes for
 example 2.5

                         GVC-REER VAREER (BJ) IMF Q-REER
                   WU J      0.57           0.36         0      0.57
                   WU C      0.43           0.63         1      0.43
Notes: GVC-REER and Q-REER are measures proposed in this paper. “VAREER (BJ)”
stands for the value added exchange rate measure proposed in BJ and “IMF” stands for the
IMF REER measure based on Bayoumi et al. (2005).

geneity in sectoral prices. As an example, consider the implications for the REER of U
when the price of C1 increases, and all other prices remain unchanged (i.e pˆc1 = 1, pˆc2 = 0,
pˆJ1 = pˆJ2 = pˆU1 = pˆU2 = 0). Since the value added share of C1 and C2 in C are 0.57 and
0.43 respectively, the computed change in aggregate price index in C is given by pˆc = 0.57.
Given a value of WU C = 0.43, a measure like VAREER which uses aggregate (country level)
price indices and weights would compute the change in REER for U that is different from
GV C − REER, which recognizes that the entire weight of WU C is concentrated on C2 , and
since pˆc2 = 0, the GV C −ˆREERU = 0 as well. In particular:


                        d U = WU C pˆc = 0.57 ∗ 0.43 = 0.25
                     V AREER
                 GV C −dREERU = WU C1 pˆc1 + WU C2 pˆc2 = 0 ∗ 1 + 0.43 ∗ 0 = 0

   Since the only price change concerns the sector in C which is entirely domestically oriented,
competitiveness of U should not be affected, as rightly concluded by the GVC-REER measure.
Indeed, as evident in Table 3 which shows the full sector level GVC-REER weighting matrix,
the weight assigned by both sectors on U on C1 is zero.1415
   On the other hand, the aggregation implicit in VAREER and all other measures in the
  14
      The diagonal entries in Table 1 are negative, indicating that an increase in “own” price has a negative
impact on demand for value added, as opposed to all other prices which have a positive impact on the demand
for value added from the particular country-sector.
   15
      Note that the diagonal entries are negative (and normalized to one), indicating that an increase in
its own price has a negative impact on the demand for value added for the respective country-sector. A
correspondence between the numbers reported in Table 2 and      Table 3 can be seen using an application of
                                                                            pV
                                                                             u   i VUi
equation 2.25 (lower case is used to denote value added shares      vUi =   PU VU


WU J (GDP def )       vU1 (WU1 J1 + WU1 J2 ) + vU2 (WU2 J 1 + WU2 J 2 )  ( 2 )0.41 + ( 13 )0.32          WU J    0.57
                  =                                                     = 32                    ' 1.33 '      =
WU C (GDP def )      vU1 (WU1 C1 + WU1 C2 ) + vU2 (WU2 C 1 + WU2 C 2 )   ( 3 )0.31 + ( 13 )0.24          WU C    0.43
                                                                                                            (2.32)
   Where the last ratio corresponds to values in Table 2. Note that since we follow the practice of normalization
of weights (such that own weights are equal to -1), the correspondence only obtains in ratios and not in levels.



                                                       17
                  Table 3 – Country-Sector level weighting matrix for 2.5

                                         J                   C                 U
                                   J1         J2       C1        C2     U1         U2
                             J1    -1        0.25     0.19       0.18   0.26       0.13
                         J
                             J2    1          -1        0         0       0         0
                             C1   0.57         0       -1        0.43     0         0
                        C
                             C2   0.29         0      0.23        -1    0.32       0.16
                             U1   0.41         0        0        0.31    -1        0.29
                        U
                             U2   0.32         0        0        0.24   0.44        -1


literature limits their flexibility in properly deciphering such distinctions.


2.6    Sticky prices, dollar invoicing and GVC-REER
    Like all previous attempts to quantify competitiveness via REER, the model used in
this paper assumes perfect competition, and does not allow for market power and market
segmentation, or for markups to vary in a meaningful way across destinations. In particular,
each producer can set only one price which is common to both the domestic and each of the
international markets that the product is sold in (when measured in a common currency).
Under these assumptions, in section 2.4 we derived an expression for the GVC-corrected
REER as follows:

                         4log(GV C − REER) = WV (C)vec (p̂(V )c )                         (2.33)

   In vector notation, this can be written as

                                               X
                              REER
                               d C=                   wc,i (p̂(v)i − p̂(v)c )             (2.34)
                                               i6=c

    Here, p̂(v)i and p̂(v)c denote the changes in prices of value added in countries i and
c respectively, measured in a common currency. If for example all prices are sticky in a
particular currency (say the dollar), then p̂(v)i = p̂(v)c = 0, and therefore REER
                                                                                 ˆ c = 0. Note
that this possibility is not ruled out by the theoretical framework. On the other hand, if price
stickiness differs across markets, then a single measure of price for each country (p̂(v)c ) will
not be sufficient to capture price dynamics and movements in competitiveness. This would be
the case for instance in a world in which the invoicing currency is different for domestic sales
and exports, and prices are sticky in the currency of invoicing, as argued by Goldberg and
Tille (2008) and Casas et al. (2016). We next discuss how a generalization of our framework
can in principle be used to accommodate various forms of market segmentation including


                                                      18
                             Table 4 – Country level input output table

                                       J    C   U      J final   C final   U final   Total output

                             J         0    X   0        X         0           0          X

                             C         0    0   0        X         X           X          X

                             U         0    0   0        0         0           X          X

                         Value added   X    X   X

                        Total output   X    X   X




dollar invoicing of exports. We do this in the context of a stylized three country model.

Market segmentation and competitiveness in a stylized three country world16

   Consider a three country, one sector world economy illustrated in Table 4 (this is a
one-sector version of the economy considered in section 2.5). “X” denotes all cells with non
zero entries in the input output table.



       The production functions for three countries are given by:

                                                          C                C
                                           QC = (V C )ω (X J,C )1−ω                                    (2.35)


                                                    QU = V U                                           (2.36)


                                                     QJ = V J                                          (2.37)

       Final goods consumption aggregators for the three countries are as follows:

                                                             J             J
                                           F J = (F J,J )η (F C,J )1−η                                 (2.38)


                                                    F C = F C,C                                        (2.39)


                                                             U              U
                                           F U = (F U,U )η (F C,U )1−η                                 (2.40)
  16
    See de Soyres et al. (2018) for a similar exercise on the characterization of price movements on exports in
a bilateral setting.




                                                        19
   As shown in appendix F, the expression for GVC-REER for country C in this economy
can be written as follows17


                                                                             P C,U F C,U
                                                                                          
                           C              V   C,C        J,C         U
                                                                                                   p̂U,U − p̂C,U       (2.41)
                                                                                                                  
       REERC = V̂
 GV C −d                     = −(1 − ω )(p̂   − p̂ ) + η
                                                                             P (Q)C QC
                             C,J C,J 
                              P F
                          J
                                                                                                                       (2.42)
                                         J,J
                                         p̂ − p̂C,J
                                                    
                       +η         C  C
                             P (Q) Q

    Note that instead of a total of three prices (one for each country, as in the benchmark
equation 2.34), we now have six different prices appearing in this expression. With perfect
competition and no market segmentation, p̂C,C = p̂C,U = p̂C,J and p̂J,C = p̂J,J , which reduces
equation 2.41 to the generalized form 2.34. If on the other hand prices differ across markets,
then equation 2.34 cannot be simplified further, and information on all export prices at the
bilateral level (separately for intermediate and final goods exports) as well as domestic prices
are needed to compute the GVC-REER. Even if we impose the dominant currency paradigm
and assume that all international prices in a particular currency (say the US dollar), then the
expression can be simplified (as p̂C,U = p̂C,J ), but still requires more information on prices
than in our benchmark model.
    To illustrate the impact of different pricing assumptions, consider an adverse supply shock
which raises costs of production in country C. This has the following (negative) impact on
competitiveness C


                                                                                  P C,U F C,U
                                                                                               
                                      C             V          C,C       U
                                                                                                      C,U 
                     REERC = V̂
               GV C −d                 = −(1 − ω )(p̂ ) − η                                           p̂
                                                                                  P (Q)C QC
                                       C,J C,J 
                                    J   P F        C,J 
                                 −η                p̂
                                       P (Q)C QC

       Case 1: Perfect competition (PC)(p̂C,C = p̂C,U = p̂C,J > 0)


                                                                                 P C,U F C,U
                                                                                               
                                     C              V      C,C           U
                                                                                                                       (2.43)
                                                                                                      C,C 
         GV C − REER(P
                 d     C)C = V̂        = −(1 − ω )(p̂ ) − η                                           p̂
                                                                                 P (Q)C QC
                                       C,J C,J 
                                        P F
                                    J
                                                                                                                       (2.44)
                                                   C,C 
                                 −η         C  C
                                                   p̂
                                       P (Q) Q

       Case 2: Dollar pricing (DP) (p̂C,C > 0, p̂C,U = p̂C,J = 0)
  17
   This expression is derived under the assumption that in steady state, prices in domestic and foreign
markets are equal, despite market segmentation.


                                                    20
                         GV C − REER(DP
                                 d          )C = V̂ C = −(1 − ω V )(p̂C,C )               (2.45)
              C,U C,U                       C,J C,J
                                                        
    Since η U PP (Q)FC QC p̂C,C > 0 and η J PP (Q)FC QC p̂C,C > 0, equations 2.43 and 2.45
                                                            

reveal that the impact of the shock on competitiveness of C will be muted in the case of
dollar pricing, as expected, since the higher costs are not passed on to the price of exports.
    While a complete extension on either the modeling or empirical remains beyond the
scope or the present treatise (not least because it requires sectoral pricing data at a level of
granularity that is not commonly available), this illustrative exercise nevertheless serves to
highlight the caveats of interpreting high frequency movements in REERs computed using
perfect competition frameworks like ours, and shows that they are more useful for inferring
movements in competitiveness at longer horizons of at least a year or more, which is the
typical duration of price stickiness (Bils and Klenow (2004))


3     Empirical Results

   Our main source of data is the World Input-Output Database (WIOD), which provides a
time series of input-output tables covering 40 countries and 35 sectors from 1995-200918 A
detailed description of this database can be found in Timmer and Erumban (2012).
   In order to focus on the role of sectoral heterogeneity, in this section we focus exclusively
on the case with uniform elasticities. Appendix G provides a detailed discussion for the
heterogenous elasticity case, including the estimation of elasticities and their incorporation in
GVC-REERs.


3.1     REER Weights

    Table 5 summarizes the different REER weighting matrices that are generated by our
framework. In addition to the country level weights which have been studied in the literature,
our framework also provides weights at various levels of disaggregation. Each of these could
be of interest depending on the question at hand, and provide information which cannot be
captured in the aggregated country level weights. For instance, if a price shock (whether
through tariffs, productivity or the nominal exchange rate) has a heterogenous impact across
different sectors in the country of origin, then the country by country-sector weighting matrix
(row (2)) would provide a more accurate estimate of the impact on a foreign country as
  18
     In this section we report the results using the 2013 release of WIOD, which covers the period 1995-2011
(with price data only available till 2009). The dataset and corresponding figures and tables using the 2016
release, which covers 2000-2014, are available upon request.



                                                    21
                            Table 5 – Summary of REER weights


                                                                 Dimension

                       (1)       Country by country              n by n by T
                       (2)   Country by country-sector          n by nm by T
                       (3)   Country-sector by country          nm by n by T
                       (4) Country-sector by country-sector    nm by nm by T

Note: n= number of countries, m = number of sectors, T = number of time periods in the
sample.

     Table 6 – Ranking of Countries According to REER Weight Assigned by Japan


                 Rank       GVC-REER          Goods-REER              IMF

                   1          ’ROW’              ’ROW’               ’ROW’
                   2      ’United States’        ’China’             ’China’
                   3          ’China’        ’United States’     ’United States’
                   4        ’Germany’            ’Korea’             ’Korea’
                   5          ’Korea’           ’Taiwan’            ’Taiwan’

Notes: “ROW” stands for the rest of the world region in WIOD. “IMF” and “Goods-REER”
correspond to weighting schemes proposed in Bayoumi et al. (2005) and Bayoumi et al. (2013)
respectively.

opposed to the country by country weighting matrix (row (1)).
    As an example to illustrate the difference in REER weights in our measure compared
to others in the literature, Table 6 shows the ranking of 5 largest competitor countries for
Japan in the year 2007 based on the different country-level REER schemes discussed above.
The GVC-REER scheme, which acknowledges the prominence of supply chain trade between
China and Japan, assigns a lower weight to China, recognizing that the final destination of
exports from Japan to China is not always China itself, whereas the standard IMF weighting
scheme which fails to make this distinction assigns a higher weight to China than the US,
due to the high volume of gross trade between China and Japan.
    With the prominence of global value chains and the accompanying divergence between
gross and value added exports that has been documented in the literature, our analysis
allows us to see how the relationship between gross output and value added competitiveness
has evolved over time. Figure 3.1 plots the cross-sectional correlation between value added
(GVC-REER) and gross output (Q-REER) REER weights for the 17 years in the sample


                                                22
      Figure 3.1 – Correlation between Value added and Gross Output REER Weights
                         1
                                                           Sector level
                                                           Country level

                       0.9



                       0.8



                       0.7



                       0.6
                        1995          2000          2005           2010


(1995-2011), showing a marked downward trend for both country and sectoral level weights.


3.2    Sectoral REERs
    Next we combine the weights with price indices the sector level to compute REER indices.
We find that sectoral GVC-REERs exhibit a substantial dispersion across countries (Figure
3.3). In the case of the US for instance, the heterogeneity in competitiveness between sectors
is evident in the divergence between the electrical and optical equipment sector which has
made large gains in competitiveness (as evidenced by the large decline/depreciation in REER),
whereas the construction sector has moved in the opposite direction and lost competitiveness
significantly. Similarly “Real estate” and “social and personal services”, two large Chinese
sectors, show opposite trends.
    To further quantify the extent of divergence in competitiveness across sectors within a
country, table 7 lists countries with the highest and lowest dispersion across sectoral GVC-
REERs, as measured by the average standard deviation of cross-sectional REER movements
across sectors within a country in a year. The numbers show that the cross-sectional dispersion
is substantial, even for the country with the lowest dispersion. In particular, on average, a
standard deviation of the yearly changes in GVC-REER between different sectors is between
20% (Czech Republic) and 2% (Malta).
    Looking across countries at the evolution of competitiveness across different sector classes
between 1995 and 2009, we find that Manufacturing (“secondary”) sectors have experienced
the sharpest fall in competitiveness both in value added and gross output terms, which




                                              23
Figure 3.2 – Comparison of three REER indices for select countries
                   China                                           China
                                                 OTHER COMMUNITY, SOCIAL AND PERSONAL SERVICES
 0.5                                             Real estate activities
                                       0.5      Aggregate

 0.4
                                       0.4
 0.3
                                       0.3
 0.2
                                       0.2
 0.1

  0                                    0.1

                                         0
  1995      2000             2005   2009 1995              2000              2005         2009
                   Ireland                                         Ireland
 0.6                                    0.6

 0.4                                    0.4

 0.2                                    0.2

  0                                        0

-0.2                                   -0.2

-0.4                                   -0.4
                                                   AGRICULTURE, HUNTING, FORESTRY AND FISHING
-0.6                                   -0.6        CONSTRUCTION
                                                   Aggregate
-0.8                                    -0.8
  1995      2000            2005    2009 1995               2000            2005           2009
              United States                                   United States

  1                                        1


 0.5                                    0.5


  0                                        0
                                                             ELECTRICAL AND OPTICAL EQUIPMENT
                                                            MINING AND QUARRYING
-0.5                                   -0.5                 Aggregate



 -1                                        -1


  1995      2000             2005   2009 1995               2000             2005          2009




                                      24
        Table 7 – Countries with highest and lowest divergence of REERs across sectors

                                      High Dispersion          Low Dispersion

                                   Czech Republic     0.19      Malta     0.02
                                   Slovak Republic    0.15      China     0.03
                                        Russia        0.13     Ireland    0.04
                                       Bulgaria       0.12     Taiwan     0.04
                                       Sweden         0.11      Spain     0.05
Notes: This table shows 5 countries with the highest and lowest dispersion of REER
movements across sectors. The dispersion is computed as the average standard deviation
of REER movements within a country (i.e an average of 14 observations on the standard
deviation for each time period).

 Table 8 – Median Change in competitiveness from 1995-2009 across different sector
 groups
                         (a)                                               (b)
            GVC-REER (value added)                             Q-REER (Gross output)
             Primary Secondary Tertiary                        Primary Secondary Tertiary

  EME           -0.05          0.07        -0.10        EME       -0.06           0.06   -0.08
   AE            0.07          0.10        -0.09         AE        0.14           0.12   -0.10


Notes: The numbers represent simple medians of the cumulative change in the effective
exchange rate from 1995 to 2009. “EME” and “AE” denotes emerging markets and advanced
economies respectively. Full list of countries, sectors and respective classifications is available
in Appendix I.

services (“tertiary)” sectors have gained competitiveness 19 . The primary sector has lost
competitiveness in advanced economies, but has gained moderately in EMEs.
    Our paper is the first to use a framework for computing REERs at the sectoral level
that takes into account both input output linkages and sectoral heterogeneity in both REER
weights and prices. These turn out to be significant departures in practice. As an illustration,
Figure 3.3 shows a comparison between the GVC-REER and Q-REER measures proposed in
this paper with two measures of sectoral REERs used by Goldberg (2004), for the electrical
and optical equipment sector, a sector which is heavily involved in global value chains. For the
US, the price of electrical and optical equipment has seen a sharp secular decline through the
sample period, and this rightfully dominates the overall trend in GVC-REER and Q-REER
which incorporate the sectoral price, unlike the measures of Goldberg (2004) which work with
  19
       Complete classification of countries and sectors is given in Appendix I.



                                                        25
country level prices. For China as well, the two sets of REERs show fairly different patterns.
The main takeaway from such illustrations is that the additional information incorporated in
the GVC-REER and Q-REER computational framework leads to significant differences when
taken to the data.


3.3    Aggregate Country level REERs

    Figure 3.4 illustrates a comparison between three different REER indices. The GVC-REER
is our proposed measure of REER which incorporates input-output linkages as well as sectoral
heterogeneity (in both REER weights as well as price indices). The VAREER corresponds to
the value-added REER measure proposed in BJ which accounts for input-output linkages but
not sectoral heterogeneity. IMF-REER is a measure which uses the IMF weighting scheme
that ignores both input-output linkages as well as sectoral heterogeneity.20
    As is evident in the figure differences between the measures are particularly pronounced for
certain countries in certain time periods. It is also pertinent to note that the the IMR-REER
and VAREER tend to have a higher comovement with one another compared to that with
the GVC-REER, an observation which also confirmed later in their ability to explain the
behavior of exports (section 3.6). This suggests that accounting for sectoral heterogeneity is
even more important than merely accounting for the presence of input-output linkages at the
aggregate country level as is done by BJ.
    Our framework allows us to study the competitiveness of value added separately from that
of gross output. Figure 3.5 shows a comparison of value added competitiveness (GVC-REER)
and gross output competitiveness (Q-REER) for select countries. It is interesting to see that
for China, the GVC-REER has appreciated in a much more secular manner compared to the
more volatile Q-REER and shows a higher overall appreciation. This reflects the fact that
even as Chinese labor has become more expensive over these years, the fall in imported input
costs has been responsible for cushioning the impact of this rise in labor costs on output and
gross output and exports. This patten also shows how ignoring value added components and
looking at gross output competitiveness can lead to a false inference of the Chinese currency
being undervalued.
 20
    To make the comparison more transparent, we use the GDP deflator in constructing the IMF-REER,
instead of CPI or unit labor cost which are the other commonly used alternatives.




                                               26
      Figure 3.3 – Comparison of sectoral REERs indices for the electronics sector
                                     China                                       Japan
                                                             0
            0.1

           0.05

              0                                          -0.5
          -0.05

           -0.1
                                                            -1
          -0.15
                    GVC-REER                                     GVC-REER
           -0.2     Q-REER                                       Q-REER
                    TW-REER(Goldberg(2004))              -1.5    TW-REER(Goldberg(2004))
          -0.25
                    EW-REER(Goldberg(2004))                      EW-REER(Goldberg(2004))

             1995            2000            2005    2009 1995            2000             2005   2009
                            Korea, Republic of                                   Taiwan
             0                                              0


           -0.5
                                                        -0.5


            -1
                                                            -1

           -1.5     GVC-REER                                     GVC-REER
                    Q-REER                                       Q-REER
                    TW-REER(Goldberg(2004))                      TW-REER(Goldberg(2004))
                                                        -1.5
                    EW-REER(Goldberg(2004))                      EW-REER(Goldberg(2004))
            -2
            1995             2000             2005   2009 1995            2000            2005    2009
                                    Ireland                                 United States
           0.1                                              0

             0                                          -0.2

           -0.1                                         -0.4

                                                        -0.6
           -0.2
                                                        -0.8
           -0.3
                                                            -1
                    GVC-REER                                     GVC-REER
           -0.4     Q-REER                                       Q-REER
                                                        -1.2
                    TW-REER(Goldberg(2004))                      TW-REER(Goldberg(2004))
           -0.5     EW-REER(Goldberg(2004))                      EW-REER(Goldberg(2004))
                                                        -1.4
             1995            2000             2005   2009 1995            2000             2005   2009

Notes: GVC-REER and Q-REER are measures proposed in this paper. TW-REER and
EW-REER are trade and export weighted REERs respectively, computed at the sector level
using the framework proposed by Goldberg (2004).




                                                       27
           Figure 3.4 – Comparison of three REER indices for select countries
                                 China                                          Germany
                                                                0
                     GVC-REER
                     IMF-REER
            0.4      VAREER                               -0.05

                                                              -0.1
            0.3

                                                          -0.15
                                                                        GVC-REER
            0.2
                                                                        IMF-REER
                                                              -0.2      VAREER

            0.1
                                                          -0.25

             0
             1995        2000              2005        2009     1995        2000            2005        2009
                                 Spain                                             France
                     GVC-REER                                    0
             0.2     IMF-REER
                     VAREER
           0.15
                                                              -0.05
             0.1

           0.05                                                                              GVC-REER
                                                               -0.1
                                                                                             IMF-REER
                                                                                             VAREER
              0

           -0.05                                              -0.15


              1995        2000             2005        2009      1995        2000           2005        2009
                                 Ireland                                      United States
                                                                                            GVC-REER
           0.25                                               0.15                          IMF-REER
                                                                                            VAREER

             0.2
                                                               0.1
           0.15

                                                              0.05
             0.1

           0.05                             GVC-REER            0
                                            IMF-REER
                                            VAREER
              0
              1995        2000             2005        2009     1995        2000            2005        2009

Comparison of three REER indices for select countries.The GVC-REER is our proposed
measure of REER which incorporates input-output linkages as well as sectoral heterogeneity
(in both REER weights as well as price indices). The VAREER corresponds to the value-
added REER measure proposed in Bems and Johnson (2017) which accounts for input-output
linkages but not sectoral heterogeneity. IMF-REER is a measure which uses the IMF weighting
scheme that ignores both input-output linkages as well as sectoral heterogeneity.




                                                          28
       Figure 3.5 – Comparison of GVC-REER and Q-REER for select countries
                                China                                     Germany
                                                          0
                    GVC-REER
                    Q-REER
           0.4      IMF-REER                        -0.05

           0.3                                          -0.1


           0.2                                      -0.15


           0.1                                          -0.2
                                                                  GVC-REER
                                                    -0.25         Q-REER
            0                                                     IMF-REER

            1995        2000              2005   2009     1995        2000            2005        2009
                                Spain                                        France
                    GVC-REER                               0
            0.2     Q-REER
                    IMF-REER
          0.15
                                                        -0.05
            0.1

          0.05                                                                         GVC-REER
                                                         -0.1                          Q-REER
                                                                                       IMF-REER
             0

          -0.05                                         -0.15


             1995        2000             2005   2009      1995        2000           2005        2009
                                Ireland                                 United States
                    GVC-REER                            0.15                          GVC-REER
          0.25      Q-REER                                                            Q-REER
                    IMF-REER                                                          IMF-REER
            0.2
                                                         0.1
          0.15

            0.1                                         0.05

          0.05
                                                          0
             0

             1995        2000             2005   2009     1995        2000            2005        2009

Comparison of GVC-REER and Q-REER for select countries. GVC-REER measures value
added competitiveness, whereas Q-REER measures competitiveness of gross output produced
by the country.




                                                    29
Examining the difference between GVC-REER and VAREER: The role of sec-
toral heterogeneity

    As shown in the preceding sections, the GVC-REER measures improve upon VAREER
by incorporating sectoral heterogeneity, which enters the former in two forms (i) REER
weights, and (ii) price indices. A first indication of the degree to which sectoral heterogeneity
is important is provided in the dispersion of sectoral REERs within countries (Left panels in
figure 3.2 and Table 7).
    To further investigate the nature and source of differences between the two measures,
we decompose the difference into a term that captures the contribution of weights, and the
remaining term which captures the contribution of differences in prices using the following
framework.



            REER_GAPit = V AREERit − (GV C − REERit )
                         Xn                    n X
                                               X m
                              i,j,V AREER j         i,j,GV C−REER
                       =    Wt           p̂t −     Ws,t           pˆs,t j
                                  j=n                             j=1 s=1
                                  Xn                                         
                              =           Wti,j,V AREER      −   Wti,j,GV C       p̂jt
                                  j=1
                                  |                     {z                          }
                                                   T erm1
                                                      Xn Xm
                                  + Wti,j,GV C p̂jt −                i,j,GV C−REER
                                                                    Ws,t           pˆs,t j
                                                        j=1 s=1
                                      |                          {z                      }
                                                             T erm2


    Here, Wti,j,V AREER is the VAREER weighting matrix, Ws,t       i,j,GV C−REER
                                                                                 is the n by nm
GVC-REER weighing matrix, and Wt           i,j,GV C
                                                    is the n by n GVC-REER weighting matrix
designed to measure the departure of weights from VAREER. p̂jt is the ndimensional vector of
changes in the GDP deflator and pˆs,t j is the nm dimensional vector of sectoral price changes.
    Table 9 shows a decomposition of the cumulative difference (between 1995 and 2009)
between the VAREER and GVC-REER for select countries. For Brazil for instance, the
table shows that the difference between the VAREER and GVC-REER between 1995 and
2009 is 4.99%, implying that the Brazilian real effective exchange rate appreciated more by
4.99% according to VAREER as opposed to GVC-REER. Of this difference of , -7.53% is
attributable to differences in weighs between the two measures, and the remainder (+2.54%)
is attributable to differences in prices, implying that allowing for only sectoral heterogeneity
in computing weights would have led to a larger gap pf 7.53%.
    Table 9 highlights the higher contribution of REER weights in explaining the gap between

                                                 30
        Table 9 – Decomposing the difference between GVC-REER and VAREER

                                                                        Country                                     REER GAP (%)                                                                            Contributions (share in %)
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Weights        Prices
                                                                ’Brazil’                                                              -4.99                                                                   -7.53         2.54
                                                                ’China’                                                              -29.44                                                                  -29.98          0.54
                                                              ’Germany’                                                               14.1                                                                    13.28         0.82
                                                                 ’India’                                                              -4.92                                                                   -6.82          1.9
                                                              ’Romania’                                                              -36.24                                                                  -39.11         2.87
                                                            ’United States’                                                           -1.66                                                                   -1.64         -0.02
                                                                median                                                                -5.44                                                                    -7.3          0.82


REER GAP denotes the cumulative (from 1995-2009) difference between VAREER and
GVC-REER in percentage points.

 Figure 3.6 – Comparison of VAREER and GVC-REER weights for China and Ireland
          Average of GVC-REER and VAREER weights




                                                                                                                                                           Average of GVC-REER and VAREER weights
                                                                                                   China                                                                                                                          Ireland
                                                   0.25                                                                                                                                              0.2                                      United States

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 United Kingdom
                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.18
                                                                                                                                           United States
                                                    0.2                                 ROW                                                                                                         0.16


                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ROW

                                                   0.15                                            Japan                                                                                            0.12


                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.1      Germany


                                                    0.1                                                                                                                                             0.08


                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.06     France
                                                                                                                  Germany
                                                                   Korea, Republic of                                                                                                                                                                                Italy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Japan
                                                   0.05                                                                                                                                             0.04
                                                          Taiwan                                                    United Kingdom                                                                                                                     China Spain
                                                                                                          France Australia                                                                                                            Netherlands
                                                                                                              Italy   Canada                                                                                                       Belgium                                        Canada
                                                                                                             Netherlands Russia                                                                     0.02
                                                                                                          India Spain
                                                                                                                Indonesia                                                                                                                    Sweden
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Korea, Republic        Australia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          of Russia
                                                                                                             Brazil
                                                                                                   Mexico Sweden
                                                                                                           Belgium                                                                                                                               Denmark
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Austria
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Taiwan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Poland
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      India      Mexico
                                                                                                           Turkey
                                                                                                            Austria
                                                                                                        Denmark
                                                                                                         Finland
                                                                                                           Poland
                                                                                                         Ireland                                                                                                                                   Czech Brazil
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Turkey
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Portugal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Finland  Indonesia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Republic
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Greece
                                                                                                         Czech
                                                                                                           Greece
                                                                                                        Hungary
                                                                                                          Romania
                                                                                                          Slovenia
                                                                                                          BulgariaRepublic
                                                                                                           Portugal
                                                                                                         Luxembourg
                                                                                                          Slovak
                                                                                                          Lithuania
                                                                                                         Estonia
                                                                                                          Cyprus
                                                                                                         Malta
                                                                                                          Latvia   Republic                                                                                                                       Hungary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Luxembourg
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Romania
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Slovak
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Slovenia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    BulgariaRepublic
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Lithuania
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Latvia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Cyprus
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Estonia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Malta
                                                     0                                                                                                                                                0
                                                      -8           -6          -4             -2         0           2           4     6      8                                                        -5       -4      -3   -2        -1           0            1           2          3
                                                                                                                                             -3                                                                                                                                     -3
                                                   Difference between GVC-REER and VAREER weights
                                                                                           10
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Difference between GVC-REER and VAREER weights
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            10




VAREER and GVC-REER. Figure 3.6 investigates this further for two countries. It shows
that the differences between weights that incorporate sectoral heterogeneity (GVC-REER),
and those that don’t (VAREER) are higher, precisely for those trade partners for which the
magnitude of the weights (measured in this case as the average between VAREER and GVC-
REER weights) is higher. Put differently, sectoral heterogeneity matters more in accounting
for the role played by large trade competitors, for which inter-sectoral linkages are likely
to be more complex and hence misrepresented by an aggregate country-level measure. As
evident in figure 3.6, these trade partners that are responsible for generating large differences
between GVC-REER and VAREER are the US, Japan, Korea and Taiwan in the case of
China, and France, Germany and Canada in the case of Ireland.
    As an example, real estate and personal and social services are large sectors in the Chinese
economy, but are mostly domestic. Hence, their large appreciation (Right panel in Figure
3.2) is captured in the VAREER, but appropriately down weighted in the GVC-REER.

                                                                                                                                                    31
 Table 10 – Stability of GVC_REER weights over time: Correlation between time varying
 and fixed weight GVC-REERs

        Level of aggregation   Country level GVC-REER         Sector level GVC-REER

            Correlations
               mean                       0.995                        0.994
             maximum                      0.998                        1.00
             minimum                0.95 (Indonesia)                   0.77

        No. Of observations                 41                         1435

Notes: This table summarizes correlations between GVC-REERs computed using time varying
and fixed weights. For GVC-REER with time varying weights, weights are allowed to change
in every time period and are calibrated using current year input-output tables. For the
fixed weight GVC-REER, weights for the year 2005 are applied to all years in the sample
(1995-2009)


3.4    Stability of GVC-REER weights across time
    The preceding section showed the importance of accounting for sectoral heterogeneity in
computing REER weights. Sectoral input-output data required to compute our benchmark
GVC-REER indices is often only available at low frequency (annual or less) and with significant
lags. This potentially challenges the usefulness of the GVC-REER framework developed in
this paper to compute and update REERs in a timely manner. In order to check the stability
of GVC-REER weights over time, we recompute them using fixed weights (calibrated to the
year 2005). Table 10 shows that these GVC-REER indices computed with fixed weights
exhibit a high degree of correlation with the original ones with time-varying weights, both at
the country and sector level. This indicates that time variation weights is minimal and is
not a significant source of variation in the GVC-REER measures, and hence using lagged
input-output data to compute the GVC-REER weights is unlikely to be a major source of
bias in the measurement of REER.


3.5    Bilateral Real Exchange Rates

    The bilateral real exchange rate (RER) between countries h and f is typically defined as
follows:

                                  RERhf = p̂(V )f − p̂(V )h                               (3.1)



                                              32
where p̂f and p̂h are changes in aggregate (country wide) price indices measured in a common
currency.
    Based on the the insights gained from the previous sections we argue that to measure
competitiveness of one country against another in a bilateral context, a modified version of
the GVC framework proposed in this paper provides an improvement over the standard RER
measures computed using an aggregate price index (such as those in Chinn, 2006) like the
GDP deflator. The key insight is the same as before, that ignoring trade in intermediates
and/or sectoral heterogeneity can lead to incorrect inferences regarding movements in price
competitiveness. For instance, an overall increase in GDP deflator in country A relative
to country B could indicate a depreciation or an increase in competitiveness for A, even if
the sectors in B which compete more intensively with A experience an increase in relative
prices.21
    We define our bilateral RER measure, the “GVC-RER” as follows

                                               m
                                                           "   m                      m
                                                                                                           #
                                               X               X                      X
                       GV C − RERhf =                vih              hh
                                                                     wij p̂(V )hj +          hf
                                                                                            wij p̂(V )fj       (3.2)
                                               i=1             j=1                    j=1

                      p(V )h
                           i Vi
                               h
       Here,vih =   Pm
                         p(V  )hV h   is the share of sector i in country h’s total value added, so that
                     j=1       j j

      vih = 1.22 The ws are weights that are analogous to the GVC-REER weights.
Pm
  i=1
    Figure 3.7 shows the comparison of the two RER measures for select country pairs. The left
panel shows that while China’s real exchange rate vis-a vis the US depreciated substantially
between 1998 and 2004 when measured using the standard RER measure, GVC-RER measure
displays a more secular appreciation through the sample period.23 The right panel shows
that the loss in competitiveness for Greece (i.e an appreciation) vis a vis Germany is much
larger when measured through GVC-RER as opposed to the conventional real exchange rate
measure, indicating that the standard bilateral REER measure is underestimating the extent
to which lack of inflation in Germany has hurt competitiveness in Greece.
  21
     Appendix H provides a numerical example to illustrate this point
  22
     Bilateral gross output effective exchange rates (Q-RER) can be defined analogously.
  23
     Electrical and optical equipment (WIOD sector 14), a sector which has seen a substantial decline in
price in the US through the sample period, provides a useful illustration of this divergence (See also Figure
3.3)While the standard RER measure gives a small weight to this sector in line with its value added share in
the US economy, the GVC-RER measure gives a much higher weight, recognizing the importance of this
sector as far as competitiveness with China is concerned.




                                                               33
   Figure 3.7 – Comparison of GVC-RER and standard RER bilateral exchange rates
                            China-United States                              Greece-Germany
            0.5
                    GVC-RER                                        GVC-RER
                    Standard RER                           0.4     Standard RER

            0.4                                        0.35

                                                           0.3
            0.3                                        0.25

                                                           0.2
            0.2
                                                       0.15

                                                           0.1
            0.1
                                                       0.05

             0                                              0
             1995             2000           2005   2009    1995             2000         2005   2009

Notes: All indices are in logs and normalized to zero at the start of the sample period so the
reading on the value on the y axis can be read as the percentage deviation from the start of
the sample. In this figure the IMF convention is adopted so that an increase corresponds to an
appreciation. GVC-REER uses weights computed under the uniform elasticity assumption. In
computing these indices, the weights are normalized so that the sum of the home country and
foreign country weights are equal in magnitude, as is the case with the standard RER measure.
Unlike in the GVC-REER effective exchange rate computation, here the normalization of
weights cannot be avoided, since otherwise the GVC-RER measure would be dominated by
home prices because home sectors (especially the own sector) on average carry much higher
GVC-REER weights.


3.6    Exchange rates and exports
    The responsiveness of exports and imports to changes in the exchange rate is one of the
most intensely researched areas in international economics (see Ahmed et al. (2015) and IMF
(2015) for recent explorations and an overview of the literature). This section is designed to
illustrate the contribution of the new REER measures constructed in shedding more light on
this question.
    We estimate the following model:

                        4Yi,t = β4Exratei,t−1 + controlsi,t + αi + δt + i,t                            (3.3)

    where Yi,t denotes value added exports and trade balance (normalized by lagged GDP).
We compare elasticities of the left hand side variable with respect to different measures
of the exchange rate (Exratei,t ). The two measures proposed int his paper (GVC-REER
and Q-REER) are compared with the VAREER measure of Bems and Johnson (2017), an
Armington-CES REER computed in the spirit of Bems and Johnson (2017), and the BIS
REER measure. In the benchmark regressions, we use one variable in the controlsi,t vector,
namely the bilateral nominal exchange rate against the US dollar. This choice is motivated
by the fact that we are interested in measuring the competitiveness, or “trade” channel of

                                                      34
exchange rates. As shown by Kearns and Patel (2016) and Hofmann et al. (2016)exchange
rates also affect production and exports through a “financial” channel. To control for the
financial channel, we include the bilateral US dollar.24 . We used the lagged value of the
exchange rate to further reduce endogeneity and reverse causality concerns.
    Tables 11 and 12 summarize the results. The GVC-REER measure proposed in this
paper has the highest elasticity for both value added exports and the trade balance. As
shown in panel (b), these results are robust to including additional controls in the regression
equation. In particular, following Swarnali et al. (2017) and Kearns and Patel (2016), we
include additional controls such as the growth rate of foreign demand (computed as an
export-share weighted sum of of the GDP of different trading partners), domestic policy rate,
GDP deflator, a country specific commodity price index, and the producer price index). 25
    To summarize, The GVC-REER measure substantially improves the explanatory power of
exchange rates for exports and the trade balance, underlining the importance of computing
the REER using a framework that is conceptually in line with the goal of measuring com-
petitiveness. Indeed, as shown by Swarnali et al. (2017), both upstream and downstream
linkages are important to quantify the correct impact of the exchange rate, and our measure
accomplishes this.


4        Conclusion

    With the rising prominence of global value chains in international trade, standard models
typically used in the literature to measure price competitiveness via the real effective exchange
rate (REER) are increasingly becoming obsolete. In this paper, we provide a framework
for computing the REER which allows for the complex patterns of international trade
(including imported inputs and global value chains) and sectoral heterogeneity in terms of
how different sectors in a country differ in sourcing their inputs as well as selling their output
to different entities. In doing so, the paper makes four contributions to the literature on
REER measurement.
    Firstly, we allow for sectoral heterogeneity within countries. We show that while allowing
for intermediate inputs (i.e a distinction between value added and gross trade flows), as has
already been done in the literature (most notably Bems and Johnson (2017)), does provide
an improvement over classical REER measures, a major further improvement comes from
allowing for sectoral heterogeneity. Sectoral heterogeneity affects both components of REER-
    24
     The results are robust to replacing the dollar exchange rate with a debt-weighted exchange rate as in
Kearns and Patel (2016)
  25
     As before, all country level controls are in first differences, and lagged one period to limit endogeneity
concerns.


                                                      35
                Table 11 – Responsiveness of exports to exchange rate

                 Dependent Variable: value added exports(% change)
                          (1)           (2)         (3)         (4)           (5)
    VARIABLES        GVC-REER Q-REER            VAREER IMF-REER            BIS-REER
                              (a) Benchmark regressions
   REER Measure       -2.97***       -1.30*     -1.24**     -1.17**         -1.00*
  USD Exchange rate    1.12***         0.76*      1.11**     1.06**           0.94*
      Constant          -0.059*      -0.10***     -0.056      -0.062         -0.070

    Observations          386          386          386          386          386
     R-squared           0.531        0.509        0.522        0.519        0.512
    Number of id           30           30          30            30           30

                               (b) With additional controls
  REER Measure          -3.31**        -1.13         -1.48      -1.12       -1.15**
    USD ex rate          1.38**         0.78*          1.58       1.26      1.36***
  Commodity price          0.15          0.15         0.12        0.12        0.042
   GDP deflator           -0.80*       -1.73**        -0.54      -0.96        -1.21
    Policy rate        -0.0070*** -0.0070*** -0.0063***       -0.0065***   -0.0064**
        PPI                0.92          1.32          0.98       1.05         1.34
  Foreign demand         0.066*         0.068*       0.076*     0.077*      0.081**
     Constant            -0.14**       -0.14**      -0.14**     -0.14**      -0.13**

    Observations          334          334          334          334          334
     R-squared           0.641        0.628        0.628        0.626        0.633
    Number of id           27           27          27            27           27

Notes: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. GVC-REER, Q-REER are measures proposed in
this paper. VAREER corresponds to the measure proposed in Bems and Johnson (2017)
(under uniform elasticity), IMF-REER is a measure which uses IMF weights and country
level price indices, BIS-REER is the measure published by BIS.




                                         36
              Table 12 – Responsiveness of trade balance to exchange rate

   Dependent Variable: Change in Trade Balance
                            (1)         (2)      (3)             (4)           (5)
   VARIABLES           GVC-REER Q-REER VAREER                 IMF-REER      BIS-REER
   (b) Benchmark Regressions
   REER Measure          -2.81***     -1.18*   -0.90*           -0.92**      -0.56***
   USD Exchange rate       0.12        -0.24   -0.054            -0.052       -0.28*
   Constant              0.050**      0.0093   0.035              0.035        0.015

   Observations              416          416        416          416          446
   R-squared                0.207        0.171      0.171        0.173        0.151
   Number of id               30           30         30          30            30

                              (b) With additional controls
   REER Measure           -2.50***     -0.98**       -0.29        -0.19       -0.41
   USD ex rate              0.46        0.067       -0.096        -0.18       0.031
   Commodity price         -0.013      -0.0082     -0.0087       -0.011      -0.031
   GDP deflator             0.40        -0.24        -0.40        -0.51       -0.37
   Policy rate            0.011***    0.011*** 0.011***        0.011***     0.011***
   PPI                      0.32         0.62        0.62         0.64         0.68
   Foreign demand         -0.031**    -0.031**     -0.026*      -0.026*      -0.023
   Constant                0.065*       0.059        0.065        0.066      0.068*

   Observations              361         361       361          361           361
   R-squared                0.238       0.226     0.215        0.215         0.218
   Number of id               27          27        27           27            27
Notes: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses ***
p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. GVC-REER, Q-REER are measures proposed in this paper.
VAREER corresponds to the measure proposed in Bems and Johnson (2017) (under uniform
elasticity), IMF-REER is a measure which uses IMF weights and country level price indices,
BIS-REER is the measure published by BIS.




                                           37
weights as well as prices. Secondly, we separately quantify and develop REER measures for
value added and gross output. Thirdly, apart from country-level REERs, we develop REER
measures at the sectoral level. This allows us to study behaviors in competitiveness across
sectors within a country, as well as across countries a finer level of disaggregation. Fourthly,
we apply the framework to a bilateral context and develop a new measure of bilateral real
exchange rate (GVC-RER) that provides an improvement upon the current measures by
acknowledging the presence of sectoral heterogeneity and trade in inputs.
    To illustrate the importance of these improvements made on the modeling front, we
parametrize the model using global input output data from the world input output database
(WIOD). We create a database of REER weights and indices for 40 countries and 1435
country-sector pairs for the period 1995-2009. The results highlight that the role of sectoral
heterogeneity in both REER weights as well as indices is quantitatively important in measuring
competitiveness through the REER.
    This is the first paper to develop REER measures incorporating both input output linkages
and sectoral heterogeneity, and leaves several avenues for further development and exploration.
In order to focus on the role of sectoral heterogeneity, we have largely abstracted from the
issue of heterogeneity in the elasticity of substitution across product categories (intermediate
vs final goods) as well as across countries, especially in the empirical part. The model indeed
allows for these features, and in the appendix we discuss estimation of these elasticities which
can further improve the measures of REER.
    The paper constructs a new and novel database of sectoral REERs which can be used
to study competitiveness of sectors and how they have evolved over time. It can be used
to address many questions, including understanding the sources and implications of the
dispersion in competitiveness within countries and within sectors across countries. Following
the literature to clearly illustrate our marginal contributions, we have also restricted the
analysis to a partial equilibrium, and an essentially static framework. Extending this
analysis to general equilibrium and understanding the role played by sectoral heterogeneity
in determining competitiveness in a dynamic setting remains a promising avenue for future
exploration.


Bibliography
Ahmed, S., Appendino, M., and Ruta, M. (2015). Depreciations without exports?

Antràs, P. (2014). Global production: A contracting perspective.



                                              38
Antràs, P. and Chor, D. (2013). Organizing the global value chain. Econometrica, 81(6):2127–
 2204.

Auer, R. A., Levchenko, A. A., and Sauré, P. (2017). International inflation spillovers through
 input linkages. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Baldwin, R. and Lopez-Gonzalez, J. (2012). Supply-chain trade: A portrait of global patterns
  and several testable hypotheses. HEI manuscript.

Bayoumi, M. T., Saito, M., and Turunen, M. J. (2013). Measuring Competitiveness: Trade
 in Goods or Tasks? Number 13-100. International Monetary Fund.

Bayoumi, T., Lee, J., and Jayanthi, S. (2005). New rates from new weights.

Bems, R. and Johnson, R. C. (2012). Value-added exchange rates. Technical report, National
  Bureau of Economic Research.

Bems, R. and Johnson, R. C. (2017). Demand for value added and value-added exchange
  rates. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 9(4):45–90.

Bennett, H. Z. and Zarnic, Z. (2009). International competitiveness of the Mediterranean
  quartet: A heterogeneous-product approach. IMF Staff Papers, 56(4):919–957.

Bils, M. and Klenow, P. J. (2004). Some evidence on the importance of sticky prices. Journal
  of political economy, 112(5):947–985.

Broda, C. and Weinstein, D. E. (2006). Globalization and the gains from variety. The
 Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121(2):541–585.

Casas, C., Díez, F. J., Gopinath, G., and Gourinchas, P.-O. (2016). Dominant currency
  paradigm. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Chinn, M. D. (2006). A primer on real effective exchange rates: determinants, overvaluation,
  trade flows and competitive devaluation. Open Economies Review, 17(1):115–143.

Costinot, A., Vogel, J., and Wang, S. (2013). An elementary theory of global supply chains.
 The Review of Economic Studies, 80(1):109–144.

de Soyres, F., Frohm, E., Gunnella, V., and Pavlova, E. (2018). Bought, sold, and bought
  again: The impact of complex value chains on export elasticities.

Feenstra, R. C. (1994). New product varieties and the measurement of international prices.
  The American Economic Review, pages 157–177.

                                              39
Feenstra, R. C., Luck, P. A., Obstfeld, M., and Russ, K. N. (2014). In search of the armington
  elasticity. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Goldberg, L. S. (2004). Industry-specific exchange rates for the United States. Federal Reserve
 Bank of New York Economic Policy Review, 10(1).

Goldberg, L. S. and Tille, C. (2008). Vehicle currency use in international trade. Journal of
 International Economics, 76(2):177–192.

Hofmann, B., Shim, I., and Shin, H. (2016). Sovereign yields and the risk-taking channel of
  currency appreciation. BIS Working Papers No 538.

Hummels, D., Ishii, J., and Yi, K.-M. (2001). The nature and growth of vertical specialization
 in world trade. Journal of international Economics, 54(1):75–96.

Imbs, J. and Mejean, I. (2015). Elasticity optimism. American Economic Journal: Macroeco-
  nomics, 7(3):43–83.

IMF (2015). World economic outlook (october 2015). Chapter 3.

Ito, K. and Shimizu, J. (2015). Industry-level competitiveness, productivity and effective
  exchange rates in east asia. Asian Economic Journal, 29(2):181–214.

Johnson, R. C. (2014). Trade in intermediate inputs and business cycle comovement. American
  Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 6(4):39–83.

Johnson, R. C. and Moxnes, A. (2012). Technology, trade costs, and the pattern of trade
  with multi-stage production.

Justiniano, A. and Preston, B. (2010). Can structural small open-economy models account
  for the influence of foreign disturbances? Journal of International Economics, 81(1):61–74.

Kearns, J. and Patel, N. (2016). Does the financial channel of exchange rates offset the trade
  channel? BIS Quarterly Review, December 2016.

Klau, M. et al. (2008). The new BIS effective exchange rate indices. BIS Quarterly Review.

Koopman, R., Wang, Z., and Wei, S.-J. (2012). Estimating domestic content in exports when
  processing trade is pervasive. Journal of Development Economics, 99(1):178–189.

Koopman, R., Wang, Z., and Wei, S.-J. (2014). Tracing value-added and double counting in
 gross exports. The American Economic Review, pages 459–494.


                                              40
Lommatzsch, K., Silgoner, M. A., and Ramskogler, P. (2016). Trade in value added: do we
  need new measures of competitiveness?

Loretan, M. (2005). Indexes of the foreign exchange value of the dollar. Fed. Res. Bull., 91:1.

Miroudot, S., Lanz, R., and Ragoussis, A. (2009). Trade in intermediate goods and services.
 Technical report, OECD Publishing.

Rogoff, K. (2005). Rethinking exchange rate competitiveness. The Global Competitiveness
 Report, 2006:99–105.

Sato, K., Shimizu, J., Shrestha, N., and Zhang, S. (2013). Industry-specific real effective
  exchange rates and export price competitiveness: The cases of japan, china, and korea.
  Asian Economic Policy Review, 8(2):298–321.

Soderbery, A. (2015). Estimating import supply and demand elasticities: Analysis and
  implications. Journal of International Economics.

Swarnali, A., Maximiliano, A., and Ruta, M. (2017). Global value chains and the exchange
  rate elasticity of exports. The BE Journal of Macroeconomics, 17(1).

Thorbecke, W. (2011). Investigating the effect of exchange rate changes on China’s processed
  exports. Journal of the Japanese and International Economies, 25(2):33–46.

Timmer, M. and Erumban, A. (2012). The world input-output database (WIOD): Contents,
  sources and methods. WIOD Background document available at www. wiod. org.

Wang, Z., Wei, S.-J., and Zhu, K. (2013). Quantifying international production sharing at
 the bilateral and sector levels. National Bureau of Economic Research (No. w19677).




                                              41
Appendix


A        Solution of the general model <For online publication>


A.1       First order conditions

A.1.1      first order conditions for production:


                                                                 −σ3 (c,l)
                                                         p(V )cl
                                                         
                                 Vl   c
                                          =       wlvc         c
                                                                             Qcl                             (A.1)
                                                         p(Q)l
                                                                   −σ3 (c,l)
                                                          p(X)cl
                                                       
                                 Xlc =             Xc
                                                  wl                           Qcl                           (A.2)
                                                          p(Q)cl
                                                                  −σ2 (c,l)
                                                        p(X)csl
                                                      
                                 Xslc =            c
                                                  wsl                         X cl                           (A.3)
                                                         p(X)cl
                                                                      !−σs1 (c,l)
                                                                 i
                                                          p(Q)
                               Xslic =             ic
                                                  wsl            s
                                                               (f ) c
                                                                                  X(f )csl                   (A.4)
                                                        p(X)sl
                                                                      !−σs1h (c,l)
                                                                 c
                                                           p(Q)
                               Xslcc =             cc
                                                  wsl            s
                                                               (f )c
                                                                                   X csl                     (A.5)
                                                         p(X)sl
                                                                           ! 1h
                                                                      (f )c −σs (c,l)
                                                             p(X)sl
                            Xslc (f ) =                c
                                                  w(f )sl              c
                                                                                       X csl                 (A.6)
                                                              p(X)sl

      Here qlc and qsl
                    c
                       are price indices corresponding to Xlc and Xslc respectively and are given
by:


                                              "                                         #       1
                                                  m                                         1−σ 2 (c,l)
                                                                              2 (c,l)
                                                  X
                           p(X)cl =                       c
                                                        (wsl )(p(X)csl )1−σ                                  (A.7)
                                                  s=1
                                              "                                             #      1
                                                   n                                               1 (c,l)
                                                                                                1−σs
                                                                                 1
                              (f )c
                                                   X
                        p(X)sl            =                    ic
                                                             (wsl )(p(Q)is )1−σs (c,l)                       (A.8)
                                                  i=1,i6=c

                        h                  1h                          1h
                                                                              i 1h1
                                                                (f )c
               p(X)csl = (wsl
                           cc
                              )(p(Q)cs )1−σ (c,l) + (wlXc )(p(X)sl )1−σ (c,l)                                (A.9)
                                                                               1−σ (c,l)




      and price of gross output is given by:



                                                               42
                        h                    3                           3
                                                                                i 31
                                                                                                                       (A.10)
                                                                                 1−σ (c,l)
                p(Q)cl = (wlvc )(p(V )cl )1−σ (c,l) + (wlXc )(p(X)cl )1−σ (c,l)

where p(V )cl is the price of value added(i.e price of factor of production) of country c sector l

A.1.2    First order conditions for final consumption:


                                                                            −θ1s (c)
                                                                p(Q)is
                                                            
                                    Fsic = κic
                                            s                                              F (f )cs                    (A.11)
                                                                P (f )cs
                                                              −θ1hs (c)
                                                       p(Q)cs
                                                            
                                    Fscc      =     κcc
                                                     s                   F cs                                          (A.12)
                                                        Psc
                                                                  −θ1hs (c)
                                                         P (f )cs
                                                       
                                 F (f )cs            c
                                              = κ(f )s                        F cs                                     (A.13)
                                                            Psc

                                                                      −θ2 (c)
                                                                Psc
                                                            
                                            Fsc   =   κcs                          Fc                                  (A.14)
                                                                Pc
   Here Psc and P c are price indices for sector s good and aggregate good consumed by
country c, respectively and are given by


                            "                                               #      1
                                 n                                                 1 (c)
                                                                                1−θs
                                                                1−θs1 (c)
                                 X
               Psc (f ) =                  (κic      i
                                             s )(p(Q)s )                                                               (A.15)
                                i=1,i6=c
                            h                                                                          i      1
                                          c 1−θs1h (c)                                         1h             1h (c)
                  Psc   =       (κcc
                                  s )(p(Q)s )                     +    (κ(f )cl )(P (f )cs )1−θs (c)       1−θs
                                                                                                                       (A.16)


                                              "                                    #      1
                                                  m                                    1−θ 2 (c)
                                                                        1−θ2 (c)
                                                  X
                                    Pc =                (κcs )(P cs )                                                  (A.17)
                                                  s=1

     Let [A]nmXnm be the input-output coefficient matrix at the country-sector level, i.e the
(i, j)th block which has dimension mXm is given by
                                                                                               
                                                          aij
                                                            11 aij
                                                                 12 .. aij
                                                                         1m
                                                          aij    ij      ij
                                                                                               
                                                               a    .. a
                                 [A]ij                      21   22      2m
                                                                                                                       (A.18)
                                                                                               
                                    mXm       =                                                
                                               
                                                          :    :   :    :                      
                                                                                                
                                                           ij   ij      ij
                                                          am1 am2 .. amm

where aij
       sl denotes the output of (i, s) used in the production of one unit of (j, l), i.e


                                                                43
                                                                  p(Q)is Xslij
                                                        aij
                                                         sl =                                                                       (A.19)
                                                                  p(Q)jl Qjl

    Let [B]nmXnm be the corresponding total requirement matrix given by

                                              [B]nmXnm = (Inm − [A])−1                                                              (A.20)



    Also, define the matrix [DQ ]nmxnm to be a diagonal matrix with the (cl)th diagonal entry
given by pc1Qc
            l   l




Log Linearization:

A note on notation:

    • for any variable Ycdab , vec Ycdab denotes a vector with all components of Ycdab stacked
                                        

      together

    • The stacking order is as follows: d, c, b, d. i, e first the home sector index changes,
      followed by foreign sector, followed by home country and finally foreign country

         – vec Ycdb , vec Ycab etc are defined accordingly.
                             


    • Examples in a 2 by 2 case (m = n = 2)
                                                                                                                                                       0
         – vec Ycdab = (Y1111 , Y1211 , Y2111 , Y2211 , Y1112 , Y1212 , Y2112 , Y2212 , Y1121 , Y1221 , Y2121 , Y2221 , Y1122 , Y1222 , Y2122 , Y2222 )
                                                                               0
         – vec Ycdb = (Y111 , Y121 , Y211 , Y221 , Y112 , Y122 , Y212 , Y222 )

This appendix contains the log linearized first order and market clearing conditions and
organizes them in stacked matrix notation which will be useful in deriving the results that
follow. A variable with a “ˆ” denotes log deviation from steady state.
    Log linearizing and stacking components of production function and price indices:(to
simplify notation further, we omit the parenthesis for gross output prices, i.e the parenthesis
containing “Q” is omitted)
                                                                                                 σs1 (c,l)
                                                                                    1 (c,l)−1  1
                                                                                    σs          σs (c,l)−1
          Raw expression         X(f )csl =      n          ic 1/σs1 (c,l)
                                                                           (X ic
                                               P                                       1 (c,l)
                                                 i=1,i6=c (wsl )               sl )
                                                                                     σs


                                               c
                                                                                         
                                           ˆ                              pis Xsl
                                                                               ic
     Log linearized expression
                                                    Pn
                                         X(f )sl = i=1,i6=c P (X)(f )c X(f )c X̂slic
                                                                                                   sl      sl




                                                                   44
      Stacked vector:
                                                  
                             vec(X̂(f )csl )             = W1XXH vec(X̂slic )                                                        (A.21)
                                                           | {z }
                                                           nm2 Xn2 m2




                                                                                                                                        1h
                                                                                                                                     σs (c,l)
                                                                  1h (c,l)−1                                            1h (c,l)−1
                                                                 σs                                                    σs              σ 1h (c,l)−1
    Raw expression                c
                                 Xsl =
                                          c 1/σ1h (c,l)
                                         (w )
                                          sl
                                                s        (X cc
                                                           sl  )  σs1h (c,l)
                                                                                  +   (w(f )c
                                                                                            sl )
                                                                                                   1h (c,l)
                                                                                                1/σs
                                                                                                            (X(f )c
                                                                                                                  sl )  σs1h (c,l)    s
                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                     

                                                                            Pn                     ic
                                                                                              pis Xsl
                                                                                                             
Log linearized expression                                       X̂slc   =        i=1              c
                                                                                            p(X)sl Xsl c         X̂slic
       Stacked Vector:
                                            
                                 vec(X̂ csl ) = W1XX vec(X̂slic )                                                                    (A.22)
                                                | {z }
                                                         nm2 Xn2 m2




                                                                                                              σ 2 (c,l)
                                                                                          σ 2 (c,l)−1
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                            σ 2 (c,l)−1
    Raw expression
                                                 Pm              1/σ 2 (c,l)
                                 Xlc =                   c
                                                   s=1 (wsl )                  (X csl )     σ 2 (c,l)


                                                            Pm  p(X)qslc Xslc 
Log linearized expression                         X̂lc =        s=1         p(X)cl Xlc
                                                                                              X̂slc
       Stacked vector:

                         vec(X̂lc ) = (W2XX )nmXnm2 vec(X̂slc )                                                                      (A.23)




                                                  hP                                             i          1
                                                                          i 1−σs1 (c,l) 1−σs1 (c,l)
    Raw expression               q(f )csl     =          n          ic
                                                         i=1,i6=c (wsl )(ps )
                                                                         i ic 
                                                                            ps Xsl
Log linearized expression                      c
                                                         = ni=1,i6=c p(X)              pˆis
                                                           P
                                             q̂sl (f )                         c Xc
                                                                               sl sl
       Stacked vector:

                              c
                        vec(q̂sl (f )) = (W1XP H )nm2 Xnm vec(p̂is )                                                                 (A.24)




                                                          45
                                            h                                                                      i        1
                                                                                                                       1−σ 1h (c,l)
     Raw expression                c              cc            1h                            1h
                                  qsl   =       (wsl )(pc s )1−σ (c,l)
                                                                    + (wlXc )(p(X)(f )csl )1−σ (c,l)
                                                                  c  Pn  pis Xslic  ˆi
Log linearized expression                                     ˆ
                                                            p(X)   =                     ps
                                                                sl     i=1 p(X)csl Xsl
                                                                                    c

       Stacked vector:

                                 ˆ c ) = (W1XP ) 2
                           vec(p(X)                          i
                                                                                                                        (A.25)
                                   sl           nm Xnm vec(p̂s )




                                                  hP                                     i       1
                                                                                             1−σ 2 (c,l)
     Raw expression               p(X)cl     =       m        c          c 1−σ 2 (c,l)
                                                        s=1 (wsl )(p(X)sl )
                                                          P  p(X)csl Xslc  c
Log linearized expression                          q̂lc = m  s=1    p(X)cl Xlc
                                                                               qˆsl
       Stacked vector:

                                                            ˆ c)
                           vec(q̂lc ) = (W2Xp )nmXnm2 vec(p(X)                                                          (A.26)
                                                              sl




                                     hP                               i 1
                                                          i 1−θs1 (c) 1−θs1 (c)
     Raw expression       Psc (f ) =     n
                                                 (κ
                                         i=1,i6=c s
                                                    ic
                                                       )(p  )
                                                      s i ic 
Log linearized expression         ˆ )c =
                               P (f
                                         P  n              ps Fs         i
                                     s      i=1,i6=c P (f )cs F (f )cs p̂s
       Stacked vector:
                          
                      vec Pˆsc               = (W1F P H )nmXnm vec pis                                                  (A.27)
                                                                                
                                  nmX1                                              nmX1




                                            h                                                              i      1
                                                                                                                  1h (c)
     Raw expression                                    cc 1−θs1h (c)                             1h            1−θs
                                  Psc   =       (κcc
                                                  s )(ps )            +  (κ(f )cl )(P (f )cs )1−θs (c)
                                                                      Pn  pis Fsic 
Log linearized expression                                    Pˆsc =      i=1   Psc Fsc
                                                                                          p̂is
       Stacked vector:
                                 
                       vec Pˆsc              = (W1F P )nmXnm vec pis                                                    (A.28)
                                                                               
                                      nmX1                                         nmX1




                                                       46
                                                              hP                             i      1
                                                                                                 1−θ 2 (c)
               Raw expression                   P =     c        m        c     c 1−θ2 (c)
                                                                    s=1 (κs )(P s )
                                                                       Pm  Psc Fsc 
     Log linearized expression                                P̂ c =     s=1    P cF c
                                                                                         P̂sc
            Stacked vector:
                                                                                                 
                                    vec P̂      c
                                                              = (W2F P )nXnm V ec            P̂sc              (A.29)
                                                        nX1                                             nmX1




   Final goods consumption first order conditions:


                                                                   ˆ )s c ) + F (f
                                        Fˆsic = −θs1 (c)(p̂is − P (f             ˆ )s c                        (A.30)
                                                                    c         c
                                        Fˆscc = −θs1h (c)(p̂cs − P̂s ) + F̂s                                   (A.31)
                                        ˆ )c = −θ1h (c)(P̂ (f )c − P̂s c ) + F̂s c
                                     F (f                                                                      (A.32)
                                            s                   s              s

                                         Fˆsc = −θ2 (c)(P̂sc − P̂ c ) + F̂ c                                   (A.33)

   We can combine these 4 conditions to write:


              ic                                         ˆ c
                     = −θs1 (c)p̂is + θs1 (c) − θs1h (c) P (f )s + θs1h (c) − θ2 (c) P̂sc + θ2 (c)P̂ c + F̂ c
                                                                                    
        F̂s
              cc
                     = −θs1h (c)p̂cs + θs1h (c) − θ2 (c) P̂sc + θ2 (c)P̂ c + F̂ c
                                                         
        F̂s

   We can now stack the above n2 m equations to write a single matrix equation as follows:


             
vec Fˆsic                   = JF (i 6= c) (Y1 )n2 mXnm vec(θs1 (c))nmX1     (Y2 )n2 mXnm vec(p̂is )nmX1
                                                                                                     
                   n2 mX1
                            − −JF (i = c) (Y1 )n2 mXnm vec(θs1h (c))nmX1       (Y2 )n2 mXnm vec(p̂is )nmX1
                                                                                                          
                                                                                     h                         i
                            + JF (i 6= c) Y1 vec(θs1 (c))nmX1 − vec(θs1h (c))nmX1         Y1 vec(P̂ (f )cs )nmX1
                                          

                                                                                                          
                            + Y1 vec(θs1h (c))nmX1 − (Y3 )n2 mXn vec(θ2 (c))nmX1        Y1 vec(P̂ cs )nmX1
                                        2
                                                    h                i
                                                        Y3 vec(P̂ )nX1 + Y3 F̂ c
                                                                  c
                              
                            + Y3 vec(θ (c))nmX1

where Y1 = 1n ⊗ Inm , Y2 = In ⊗ 1n ⊗ Im , Y3 = 1n ⊗ In ⊗ 1m , is the element by element
multiplication operator for two vectors and JF (x) is an n2 m by 1 vector with ones in all
indices that satisfy the condition x and zero elsewhere.

                                                                        47
   Combining this with (A.29) and (A.28),
                                 
                             vec Fˆsic              = ZF vec(p̂is )nmX1 + Y3 F̂ c            (A.34)
                                           n2 mX1

where



        (ZF )n2 mXnm = JF (i 6= c) (Y1 )n2 mXnm vec(θs1 (c))nmX1                              (A.35)
                                                                
                                                                     [(Y2 )n2 mXnm ]
                     − −JF (i = c) (Y1 )n2 mXnm vec(θs1h (c))nmX1
                                                                  
                                                                        [(Y2 )n2 mXnm ]
                     + JF (i 6= c) Y1 vec(θs1 (c))nmX1 − vec(θs1h (c))nmX1
                                                                             
                                                                                   [Y1 WF H ]
                     + Y1 vec(θs1h (c))nmX1 − (Y3 )n2 mXn vec(θ2 (c))nmX1
                                                                            
                                                                                 (Y1 W1F P )
                     + Y3 vec(θ2 (c))nmX1
                                           
                                               [Y3 W2F P W1F P ]

Log linearizing Production first order conditions:


                                                            −σ3 (c,l)
                                                      pvc
                                                      
                                  Vl   c
                                           =   wlvc     l
                                                                       Qcl                   (A.36)
                                                       pcl
                                                     c −σ3 (c,l)
                                                       ql
                                  Xlc =         Xc
                                               wl         c
                                                                       Qcl                   (A.37)
                                                       pl
                                                    c −σ2 (c,l)
                                                     qsl
                                  Xslc =        c
                                               wsl     c
                                                                      X cl                   (A.38)
                                                      ql
                                                    i −σs1 (c,l)
                                                         ps
                                 Xslic =        ic
                                               wsl                         X(f )csl          (A.39)
                                                     q(f )csl
                                                    c −σs1h (c,l)
                                                      ps
                                 Xslcc =        cc
                                               wsl     c
                                                                       X csl                 (A.40)
                                                      qsl
                                                                     −σs1h (c,l)
                                                            q(f )csl
                                                       
                              Xslc (f ) =           c
                                               w(f )sl         c
                                                                                  X csl      (A.41)
                                                              qsl



                                                                ˆ (f )c + X̂(f )c
                         Xˆslic = −σs1 (c, l)p̂is + σs1 (c, l)p(X) sl            sl
                                                                      c
                         Xˆslcc = −σs (c, l)p̂s + σs (c, l)p(X)
                                     1h          c      1h       ˆ            c
                                                                      sl + X̂ sl
                                                ˆ (f )c + σ 1h (c, l)p(X)
                      Xslcˆ(f ) = −σs1h (c, l)p(X)                     ˆ c + X̂ c
                                                    sl      s            sl     sl
                                                                       c
                           Xˆsl = −σ (c, l)p(X)
                             c       2         ˆ  c      2h         ˆ       c
                                                  sl + σ (c, l)p(X)l + X̂ l




                                                          48
                                                            ˆ                                ˆ c
        X̂slic = −σs1 (c, l)p̂is + σs1 (c, l) − σs1h (c, l) p(X)   + σs1h (c, l) − σ 2 (c, l) p(X) sl
                  2               3
                                         ˆ c          3       c      c
               + σ (c, l) − σ (c, l) p(X)l + σ (c, l)p̂l + Q̂l
                                                              ˆ c
        X̂slcc = −σs1h (c, l)p̂cs + σs1h (c, l) − σ 2 (c, l) p(X)  sl
                  2               3
                                         c      3         c     c
               + σ (c, l) − σ (c, l) q̂l + σ (c, l)p̂l + Q̂l

   These n2 m2 equations can be stacked to write


    
vec X̂slic           = −JX (i 6= c) C1 vec σs1 (c, l) nm2 X1         C3 vec(p̂is )nmX1
                                                                                   
             n2 m2
                     − JX (i = c) C1 vec σs1h (c, l) nm2 X1         C3 vec(p̂is )nmX1
                                                                                  
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                           (f )c
                                             1
                                                                        1h
                     + JX (i 6= c) C1 vec σs (c, l) nm2 X1 − vec σs (c, l) nm2 X1
                                                                                                      ˆ
                                                                                                    C1 p(X)sl
                                   2
                                                          3
                                                                          h          ˆ  c
                                                                                             i
                     + C2 vec σ (c, l) nmX1 − vec σ (c, l) nmX1                    C2 p(X)l
                                                                                h        ˆ c
                                                                                                 i
                     + C1 vec σs1h (c, l) nm2 X1 − C2 vec σ 2 (c, l) nmX1
                                                                    
                                                                                     C1 p(X)  sl

                     + C2 vec σ 3 (c, l) nmX1        C2 vec(p̂is )nmX1 + C2 Q̂cl
                                                                   


where C1 = 1n ⊗ Inm2 , C2 = 1n ⊗ In ⊗ 1m ⊗ Im , C3 = In ⊗ 1n ⊗ Im ⊗ 1m . JX (y) is an n2 m by
1 vector with ones in all indices that satisfy the condition y and zero elsewhere.
   Combining this with (A.22) - (A.26) we get:
                                                                                  c
                                vec X̂slic           = ZX vec(p̂is )nmX1 + C2 Q̂l                       (A.42)
                                             n2 m2

where



        ZX = −JX (i 6= c) C1 vec σs1 (c, l) nm2 X1                                       (A.43)
                                                 
                                                      [C3 ]
           − JX (i = c) C1 vec σs1h (c, l) nm2 X1
                                                
                                                     [C3 ]
           + JX (i 6= c) C1 vec σs1 (c, l) nm2 X1 − vec σs1h (c, l) nm2 X1
                                                                        
                                                                               [C1 WXH ]
           + C2 vec σ 2 (c, l) nmX1 − vec σ 3 (c, l) nmX1
                                                          
                                                                  [C2 W2XP W1XP ]
           + C1 vec σs1h (c, l) nm2 X1 − C2 vec σ 2 (c, l) nmX1
                                                             
                                                                    [C1 W1XP ]
           + C2 vec σ 3 (c, l) nmX1
                                  
                                         [C2 ]

   Next, linearizing the production function we have:


                                                          49
                                                                                           
              vec Q̂cl = (Dv )nmXnm vec V̂lc                                    + (DX )nmXnm vec X̂lc                   (A.44)
                                                                        nmX1


                                                                             ˆ c
                                                                                 
                                    vec pˆcl = Dv vec (p̂(V )cl ) + DX vec p(X)                                         (A.45)
                                            
                                                                                l

    (here Dv and DX are nmXnm diagonal matrices denoting the shares of value added and
intermediate inputs in the production of different goods , i.e the lcth diagonal entry of Dv
   p(V )c V c                   p(X)c X c
is p(Q)lc Qlc and that of DX is p(Q)lc Qcl . We can use (A.25) and (A.26) in (A.45)to obtain the
        l l                          l l
following expression linking price of gross output and price of value added:
                                                                             
                             vec pˆcl = (I − DX W2XP W1XP )−1 DV vec p(Vˆ )cl                                           (A.46)
                                     

    The market clearing conditions (2.10) can be linearized as:
                                                      n X
                                                        m                      n
                                                          Xjlih                  Fjih
                                                                                           Fˆjih
                                                      X                        X
                                           Q̂ij   =             i
                                                                  X̂jlih   +                                            (A.47)
                                                      h=1 l=1
                                                              Q j              h=1
                                                                                     Qij

   As before, these can be written in stacked form by creating matrices SX and SF from the
above equations to yield:

                                                            ˆf c
                                                                                  
                vec          Q̂cl                                                   fc
                                        = (SF )nmXn2 m vec Fs + (SX )nmXn2 m2 vec X̂sl                                  (A.48)


B     Derivations of the expressions for GVC-REER and Q-REER((2.11) and

      (2.14))

    From (A.48) and (A.42) we get
                                                                                                                 
            vec       Q̂cl       [Inm − SX C2 ] = (SX ZX +             SF ZF ) vec (p̂cl )     + SF Y3 vec F̂   c
                                                                                                                         (B.1)

    Using (A.46) in (B.1)and rearranging we get:


                                                                                
  vec Q̂cl                                                                    ˆ )(B.2)
           = [Inm − SX C2 ]−1 (SX ZX + SF ZF ) (I − DX W2XP W1XP )−1 DV vec p(V  i
                                                                                 l
                                          
             + [Inm − SX C2 ]−1 SF Y3 vec F̂ i

   This is equation (2.14) in the main text.                                         
   Next, starting from the linearized production function vec Q̂cl = Dv vec V̂lc +DX vec X̂lc
we first use (A.23) and (A.22) to get:

                                                                  50
                                                                  
                            vec Q̂cl = Dv vec V̂lc + DX W2XX W1XX vec X̂slic                                            (B.3)

    substituting (A.42) in (B.3) and rearranging we get:


                                             
      vec Q̂cl [I − DX W2XX W1XX C2 ] = Dv vec V̂lc + DX W2XX W1XX ZX vec (p̂cl )                                       (B.4)

   It can be shown that W2XX W1XX C2 = I and hence [I − DX W2XX W1XX Z4 Z6 ] = Dv so
that the above expression simplifies to:


                                                                              
  vec Q̂cl = vec V̂lc + DV−1 DX W2XX W1XX ZX (I − DX W2XP W1XP )−1 DV vec p(Vˆ )cl
                                                                              (B.5)
   eliminating vec Q̂l from (B.2) and (B.5) we get:
                     c


                       n                                                       o
              c                          −1                     −1                                   −1          vc 
       vec V̂l       =     (Inm − SX C2 )   (SF ZF + SX ZX ) − Dv DX W2XX W1XX ZX (I − DX W2XP W1XP )   DV vec p̂l       (B.6)
                                                         
                                        −1              c
                     +   (I − SX Z4 Z6 )   SF Y3 vec F̂




    It is easy to show the following identities:

                                            (Inm − SX C2 )−1 = DQ
                                                                −1
                                                                   BDQ                                                  (B.7)


                                            (I − DX W2XP W1XP )−1 = B 0                                                 (B.8)

    Substituting (B.7) and (B.8) in (B.6) we get (2.11) in the main text, with:

                                                                                                                        (B.9)
                         −1
                             BDQ (SF ZF + SX ZX ) − DV−1 DX W2XX W1XX ZX B 0 DV
                                                                        
                    WV = DQ


C      Proofs of Propositions


C.1      Sketch of Proof of Proposition 2.1

   In this appendix we sketch the proof of proposition 1. Since the underlying intuition is
preserved in the case with m = 1, we will sketch the proof for this simplified case.
   The expression for the weighting matrix is given by:

                                                                                                                        (C.1)
                        −1
                    w = DQ  BDQ (SF ZF + SX ZX ) − Dv−1 DX W2XX W1XX ZX B 0 DV

                                                              51
   As shown in proposition (2.2), under the uniform elasticity assumption and m = 1, the
GVC-REER weighting matrix reduces to VAREER weighting matrix defined in Bems and
Johnson (2012), which according to equation (18) in that paper is given by

                                         −1
                               w = −I + DQ  BDQ SF M2 B 0 Dv                               (C.2)

   define the matrices
   Z1 = Z4 = 1n ⊗ In ≡ M2
   Z2 = Z5 = In ⊗ 1n ≡ M1
   Under the uniform elasticity assumption, from (A.43) and (A.35) we have:



                                  ZX = σ(M2 − M1 )                                         (C.3)
                                   ZF = θ(M2 WF P − M1 )                                   (C.4)

   Taking the partial derivative of (C.1) wrt θ

                           ∂w
                               = DQ−1
                                      BDQ SF (M2 WF P − M1 )B 0 DV                      (C.5)
                           ∂θ
   using (C.2) in (C.5) , the following relationship holds for the off diagonal elements of w

                        ∂wij
                                                                                           (C.6)
                                      −1
                             = wij − DQ   BDQ SF M1 B 0 DV ij , i 6= j
                                                           
                         ∂θ
   Simplifying the last term in the above expression gives (2.13) in the main text.


C.2     Proof of Proposition (2.2):

Part 1.

   the GVC-REER weighting matrix under (A2) is given by:



    WV = (I − SX Z4 Z6 )−1 − Dv−1 DX W2XX W1XX ZX (I − DX W2Xp W1Xp )−1 DV                 (C.7)
        


where
   ZX = σ1 (Z4 W1XP − Z5 ) + σ2 (Z4 Z6 W2XP W1XP − Z4 W1XP ) + σ3 (Z4 Z6 − Z4 Z6 W2XP W1XP )
   with
   Z1 = 1n ⊗Inm , Z2 = In ⊗(1n ⊗Im ), Z3 = In ⊗1m , (Z4 )n2 m2 Xnm2 = 1n ⊗Inm2 , (Z5 )n2 m2 Xnm =
In ⊗ 1n ⊗ Im ⊗ 1m and Z6 = (In ⊗ 1m ) ⊗ Im


                                               52
       for m = 1, the different matrices in the above equation simplify as:
       Z1 = Z4 = 1n ⊗ In ≡ M2 26
       Z2 = Z5 = In ⊗ 1n ≡ M1
       Z3 = Z6 = In

       W2F P = W2XX = W2XP = In
                                                                                           pi Xij
       DX W1Xp = Ω0 , where Ω is the country level input output matrix with Ωij =          p j Qj




ZX = σ1 (Z4 W1XP − Z5 ) + σ2 (Z4 Z6 W2XP W1XP − Z4 W1XP ) + σ3 (Z4 Z6 − Z4 Z6 W2XP W1XP )
        = σ1 (M2 W1XP − M1 ) + σ2 (M2 W1XP − M2 W1XP ) + σ3 (M2 − M2 W1XP )
        = σ1 (M2 W1XP − M1 ) + σ3 (M2 − M2 W1XP )                                                    (C.8)




                   ZF = θ1 (Z1 W1F P − Z2 ) + θ2 (Z1 Z3 W2F P W1F P − Z1 W1F P )
                        = θ1 (M2 WF P − M1 )

       Substituting all these in the expression for ZV clp we get



       WV    = −θ1 (I − SX M2 )−1 SF (M1 − M2 WF P )(I − Ω0 )−1 DV
             + (I − SX M2 )−1 SX [σ1 (M2 W1XP − M1 ) + σ3 (M2 − M2 W1XP )] (I − Ω0 )−1 DV
             − DV−1 DX WX [σ1 (M2 W1XP − M1 ) + σ3 (M2 − M2 W1XP )] (I − Ω0 )−1 DV

       This is the same as equation (33) in section 5 of BJ IOREER-BJ.
       Part 2 and 3 follow directly from BJ.

Part 4:

       The IMF manufacturing weights are given by (Bayoumi et al. (2005))

                                                            ik jk
                                                   P
                                                        kw s
                                       ij
                                     Wimf m   =P                                                    (C.9)
                                                   k   wik (1 − sik )
  26
     In this section the matrices M1 and M2 are as defined in BJ and are different from the ones defined
earlier in this paper.



                                                  53
                     jk                                ik
where sjk = Psales   lk and w
                              ik
                                 = Psales  in (sales
                                                     ij
                                                        denotes gross sales from country i to country
              l sales               n sales
j)
   Substituting the expressions for sjk and wik in W ij and simplifying we get:

                                                  1      X  salesik   salesjk 
                            ij
                          Wimf m           =                                                 (C.10)
                                               Tiimf m
                                                            P        in
                                                                        P         lk
                                                         k   n sales      l sales

where
                                                 X  salesik   salesik 
                                  Tiimf m    =1−    P        in
                                                                P         lk
                                                                                             (C.11)
                                                 k   n sales      l sales

   From parts 1-3 we know that under (A1), (A2) TEER and VAREER-BJ are equivalent
and given by equation (24) in BJ which is reproduced below.

                                                      1 X piv V ik
                                                                    jv jk 
                                                                      p V
                                           ij
                                          WBJ   = BJ         iv  i
                                                                                             (C.12)
                                                    Ti  k
                                                            P V       P kF k
              P  iv                   ik
                                            iv ik 
   with TiBJ = k pP ivVV i  p V
                            P kF k
   Under the assumption of no intermediates (A3)we have:

   • piv = pi , Qi = V i , V ik = F ik

   • salesik = piv V ik = pi V ik

   •         salesin =                piv V in = piv V i
       P                  P
         n                        n


   •         saleslk =            plv V lk = P k F k
       P                  P
         l                    l


Substituting these in (C.10) and (C.11)
     ij           ij
   Wimf m = WBJ
   Finally, using αc = αT = 0 we have
     ij        ij
   Wimf  = WBJ
   The equivalence of IMF-REER to GOOD-SREER and IRER follows in a straightforward
manner from the respective papers (Bayoumi et al. (2013) and Thorbecke (2011))


Interpretation in the case of uniform elasticity

    Under the assumption that all elasticities (both in production and consumption) are the
same, we can interpret the country-sector level weights purely in terms of value added trade
flows. Suppose the common elasticity is η . Without loss of generality we can assume η to be
unity since it factors out. Then the weighting matrix W can be written as above:



                                                              54
                                           WV = −Inm + M1 M2                                                      (C.13)

     The matrix M1 is an nm by n matrix with each row corresponding to a unique production
entity. Along this row, the n columns give the value added created by the production entity
that is finally absorbed by each country. As an example, the entry corresponding to row
(i, l) and column j gives the value added created by production entity (i, l) that is eventually
absorbed in country j as a fraction of total value added created by the production entity
(i, l). Entries in this matrix can thus be interpreted as export shares in value added terms.
The corresponding mathematical expression is27
                                                        Pn Pm
                                                  vli                  ic     c cj
                                                                 s=1 bls (p(Q)s Fs )
                               M1 ((i, l), j) =          c=1
                                                                                                                  (C.14)
                                                                p(V )il Vli
              pvi
               l Vl
                   i
where vli =     i i
              pl Ql
                       . For later, it is convenient to write this expression compactly as:

                                                                p(V )il Vlij
                                         M1 ((i, l), j) =                                                         (C.15)
                                                                p(V )il Vli
where pvi
        l Vl is the value added created by production entity (i, l) that is finally absorbed in
            ij

country j.
    Matrix M2 is an n by nm matrix with each column corresponding to a unique production
entity and each row containing the value added created by the entity corresponding to the
column that is absorbed in each country, as a fraction of the total final demand in that
country. As an example, the entry corresponding to column (i, l) and row j gives the value
added created by production entity (i, l) that is ultimately absorbed in country j as a fraction
of total final demand of country j. The corresponding mathematical expression is :
                                                        Pn Pm
                                                  vli                  ic      c cj
                                                                  s=1 bls (p(Q)s Fs )
                               M2 (j, (i, l)) =          c=1
                                                                                                                  (C.16)
                                                                   P jF j
   As above, it turns out to be more convenient to rewrite the above expression in short-hand
notation as follows:

                                                    p(V )il Vlij
                                   M2 (j, (i, l)) =                               (C.17)
                                                      P jF j
   Using the generic terms from (C.15) and (C.17)we can write the weight assignment by
country sector (h, l) to country-sector (c, s) where (h, l) 6= (c, s) as follows:
                                              Pn        Pm     ic    c cj
                                                         s=1 bls p(Q)s Fs                                         p(V )il Vli
  27
     The raw expression of the matrix M1 is       c=1
                                                         p(Q)il Qil
                                                                          .   Multiplying and dividing by vli =   p(Q)il Qil
yields the expression below.



                                                          55
                                   n
                                            "                             #
                                   X             p(V )hl Vlhk p(V )cs Vsck
                            hc
                           wls =                                             , (h, l) 6= (c, s)     (C.18)
                                   k=1
                                                   p(V )hl Vlh (P K F k )
where we use lower case w to denote uniform elasticity weights. In particular, the weight
assigned by country sector (h, l) to country-sector (c, s) where (h, l) 6= (c, s) is a weighted
sum of the value added created by country-sector (c, s) and absorbed by each of the countries
k(= 1, .., n), where the weights are given by the value added created by (h, l) that is absorbed
in the same country k. This captures both mutual and third country competition, because
the weight is high if both p(V )hl Vlhk and p(V )cs Vsck are high, which happens when both
                                                        

(h, l) and (c, s) have a high share of value added exports to country k.

                                                                                                     (C.19)


D        Equivalence of GVC-REER weighting matrices with
         BJ

Condition 7.1

                                           n
                                           X                    m
                                                                X           n X
                                                                            X m
                                   v   i         ic
                                                 b F   cj
                                                            =         vsi             bic  cj
                                                                                       ls Fs ∀i, j   (D.1)
                                           c=1                  l=1         c=1 s=1

              p(V )i V i
where vli = p(Q)li Qli is the value added share for entity (i, l) and b denotes a generic element of
                 l l
the global inter-country Leontief inverse matrix.

Proposition D.1.

  The country level weights (WV (GDP def )) defined above reduces to VAREER (and
IOREER) weights defined in BJ if either of the two conditions below are satisfied.

    1. (A2), (A3) and condition 5. 1

    2. (A3), (A4) and θ1 = θ1h = θ2

Proof:


Part 1

   We start with the following expression for GVC-REER weights at the country-sector level
(C.7).

                                                                      56
   under the uniform elasticity assumption:



                                     ZX = −Z5 + Z4 Z6                                                        (D.2)
                                      ZF = −Z2 + Z1 Z3 W2F P W1F P                                           (D.3)

   Here, without loss of generality we can assume that the elasticity is 1.


                                                             −1
                                        (I − SX Z4 Z6 )−1 = DQ  BDQ ≡ λ                                      (D.4)
                               (I − DX W2XP W1XP )−1 = B 0                                                   (D.5)

   Substituting (D.2), (D.3), (D.4) and (D.5) in (C.7)

                     h                                            i
                                              −1                     0
          WV     =    (λ(SF ZF + SX ZX ) − DV DX W2XX W1XX ZX B DV
                                                 h                                                   i
                                            0                                       −1                 0
                 =   λSF Z1 Z3 W2F P W1F P B Dv + λSX Z4 Z6 − λ (SF Z2 + SX Z5 ) − DV DX W2XX W1XX ZX B DV    (D.6)




   Using the identities SF Z2 + SX Z5 = I and DV − DX W2XX W1XX ZX = (I − A)0 = B 0−1 ,
we can show that the second term in (D.6) is the identity matrix, so that (D.6) reduces to:



                            WV       = −Inm + λSF Z1 Z3 W2F P W1F P [Blc ]0 Dv                               (D.7)
                                     = −Inm + M1m M2m

where

                                       M1m = λSF Z1 Z3
                                       M2m = W2F P W1F P [Blc ]0 Dv

   Next, the country level weights (which correspond to VAREER in BJ) are given by:


          n                    −1                                   o             −1 1
  WV1 =            1
                     Z41 Z61 SF1 ZF1 + SX
                                        1  1
                                               − (Dv1 )−1 DX
                                                           1       1        1
                                             
              I − SX                      ZX                 W1XX ZX   I − DX W1Xp    DV
                                                                                      (D.8)
(where the superscript 1 on the matrices on the RHS of (D.8) indicates that the matrix
corresponds to the case where m = 1)
   Following steps similar to those used to derive (D.7) we can get an analogous expression:


                                                         57
                           WV1
                                                         1
                                 = −In + λ1 SF1 Z11 Z31 W1F     c 0
                                                            P [B ] Dv                   (D.9)
                                 = −In + M1 M2

where

                                     M1 = λ1 SF1 Z11 Z31                               (D.10)
                                           1      c 0 1
                                     M2 = W1F P [B ] Dv


    The 2 country level weights are equal iff



                                    RV WV Rg = WV (CG)                                 (D.11)



‘
    Since RV Rg = In , a necessary and sufficient condition for (D.11) to hold is :

                                  (RV M1m )(M2m Rg ) = M1 M2                           (D.12)


                                             n X
                                               m X
                                                 m
                                                                               !
                                                                          cj
                                             X                  vsi bic
                                                                     sl F l
                           (RV M1m )ij =
                                             c=1 l=1 s=1
                                                                  pvi V i
                                              n X m X m
                                                                               !
                                             X                 vsj bjc
                                                                    sl Fl
                                                                         ci
                           (M2m Rg )ij =
                                             c=1 l=1 s=1
                                                                 P iF i
                                              n  i ic      cj
                                                               
                                             X       vb F
                                 (M1 )ij =
                                             c=1
                                                      pvi V i
                                             n  j jc ci 
                                             X  v b F
                                 (M2 )ij =
                                             c=1
                                                      P iF i
              vi i 
   here vsi = ppsi QVis .
                 s s
   From these expressions it is clear that the condition (D.12) is satisfied for all values if
and only if




                                                58
                                      n
                                      X                 m
                                                        X           n X
                                                                    X m
                              v   i         ic cj
                                            b f     =         vsi             bic  cj
                                                                               ls Fs ∀i, j   (D.13)
                                      c=1               l=1         c=1 s=1

    or stacking these conditions in matrix notation:



      diag[v c ]nXn [B c ]nXn [F C ]nXn = (MV )nXnm diag[vlc ]nmXnm [Blc ]nmXnm [Flc ]nmXn   (D.14)


Part 2:

  Under (A3), (A4) and θ1 = θ2 (=1(wlog)) we have,
  diag[v c ]nXn = [B c ]nXn = In ,
  diag[vlc ]nmXnm = [Blc ]nmXnm = Inm
  (MV )nXnm [Flc ]nmXn = [F C ]nXn
  With these simplifications condition (D.14) is automatically satisfied and hence GVC-
REER(CG) is equivalent to VAREER.




E     A Stylized Three Country Global Value Chain

    We start with a simplified 3 country, 2 sector model capturing the basic Global Value
Chain (GVC) features. There are three countries (J, C and U for Japan, China and USA
respectively) and two sectors indexed by {1, 2}. Table 13 displays the input output table. All
boxes with “X” denote non-zero entries while the remaining entries are zero. Note that the
IO matrix is sparse and contains only one (out of a possible 36) non-zero entries. The global
value chain is modeled across two sectors in three different countries. The upstream sector
J1 (sector 1 in country J) produces raw materials that are exported to country C. Sector
2 in country C combines these intermediate inputs from J along with its own value added
to produce final goods that are then exported to countries J and U in addition to being
consumed internally by country C. All other sectors (i.e J2, C1, U1 and U2) only produce
goods using own value added (i.e no intermediate inputs) and sell them as final demand in
the home country. Sector 2 can be interpreted as the electronics sector and sector 1 can be
interpreted as a (raw) materials sector.




                                                              59
           Table 13 – A stylized 3 country 2 sector global value chain set up

                                J                 C                U        JFinal        CFinal          Ufinal   total output
                           J1       J2       C1       C2      U1       U2
                     J1    0        0        0        X       0         0       X            0              0           X
          J
                     J2    0        0        0        0       0         0       X            0              0           X
                     C1    0        0        0        0       0         0       0            X              0           X
         C
                     C2    0        0        0        0       0         0       X            X              X           X
                     U1    0        0        0        0       0         0       0            0              X           X
         U
                     U2    0        0        0        0       0         0       0            0              X           X
      VA                   X        X        X        X       X        X
 total output              X        X        X        X       X        X


Specifying the model:

    We use Qhl to denote the gross output of sector l is country h. 28 Xslf h denotes the
intermediate input from country f sector s used in production by (h, l). Vlh denotes the value
added by (h, l). We assume a constant elasticity of substitution which is allowed to differ
across consumption and production aggregators as clarified below.

Production:

      The production function of (C, 2) is given by
                                         h                                                           σ
                                                                                                  i σ−1
                                                      1         σ−1             1           σ−1
                             QC
                              2     = (w )    V       σ   (V2C ) σ    + (w )X   σ   (X JC
                                                                                       12 )
                                                                                             σ                              (E.1)

where σ is the elasticity of substitution between the two inputs and wV and wX are weights
that can be mapped to the shares of the two inputs.
   Since all other production comprises entirely of own value added, the remaining production
functions are of the form:

                                                  Qhl = Vlh ∀(h, l) 6= (C, 2)                                               (E.2)

Consumption:

   We use Flhf to denote output of (h, l) that is absorbed in country f as final demand.
Based on table 13, the consumption aggregators for the three countries are given as follows:
 28
      Throughout this paper, superscripts will be used for countries and subscripts for sectors.




                                                                   60
                                        1                θ−1                  1           θ−1                   1                 θ−1     θ
              F J = [(κJJ θ
                             JJ
                       1 ) (F1 )
                                                          θ    + (κJJ    JJ
                                                                   2 ) (F2 )
                                                                      θ                    θ    + (κCJ    CJ
                                                                                                    2 ) (F2 )
                                                                                                       θ                           θ    ] θ−1              (E.3)
                                         1                θ−1                     1         θ−1        θ
              F C = [(κCC    CC
                       1 ) (F1 )
                                         θ                 θ    + (κCC    CC
                                                                    2 ) (F2 )
                                                                                  θ          θ    ]   θ−1                                                  (E.4)
                                         1                θ−1                     1         θ−1                      1                θ−1        θ
              F U = [(κU1 U ) (F1U U )   θ                 θ    + (κU2 U ) (F2U U )
                                                                                  θ          θ    + (κCU    CU
                                                                                                      2 ) (F2 )
                                                                                                                     θ                 θ    ]   θ−1        (E.5)

    We use large case P to denote CPI, small case pQ is used to denote price of gross output;
pV will be used to denote price of value added and pX for price of intermediate goods. θ is
the elasticity of substitution between different goods in the final consumption good bundle
and is assumed to be the same across all countries29 . κ s are weights that denote the shares
of the different components in the aggregators.
    Appendix E.1 shows how the linearized version of the model can be solved to write the
demand for value added for each entity as a function of all the value added prices assuming
that total final demand remains constant (i.e F̂ h = 0∀h), or what we define as the real
exchange rate (GVC-REER) following this partial equilibrium literature30 :



          4GV C − REERsh = V̂sh = w(v)hJ       J       hJ       J       hC       C
                                      s1 p̂(V )1 + w(v)s2 p̂(V )2 + w(v)s1 p̂(V )1

                                                    +w(v)hC       C       hU       U       hU       U
                                                         s2 p̂(V )2 + w(v)s1 p̂(V )1 + w(v)s2 p̂(V )2                                                      (E.6)

where h ∈ {J, C, U }, s ∈ {1, 2}
    To illustrate the properties of our REER weighting scheme, we focus on the weight
assignment between the two sectors that are involved in the the GVC. We use the notation
p(V )al Vlab to denote the total value added created in (a, l) that is ultimately absorbed as
country b’s final demand. Our model yields the following expression for the weight assigned
by C2 o J1:

                              p(V )C  CJ
                                                  p(V )J  JJ
                                                                        p(V )C  CC
                                                                                          p(V )J  JC
                                                                                                                p(V )C  CU
                                                                                                                                        p(V )J  JU
                          "                  !                  !                     !                 !                         !                   !#
             CJ                    2 V2                1 V1                  2 V2              1 V1                  2 V2                    1 V1
         w(v)21   =   θ                                             +                                       +
                                p(V )C
                                     2 V2
                                         C          PJFJ                p(V   )C  C
                                                                               2 V2         PCFC                    p(V   )C  C
                                                                                                                           2 V2           PUFU
                                   J JC
                                           !
                              p(Q)1 X12
                      +                      (σ   − θ)                                                                                                      (E.7)
                               p(Q)C2 Q C
                                        2




   Several aspects of the weighting schemes now become evident from (E.7). Firstly, under
the constant elasticity assumption (θ = σ = 1)the weight reduces to:
  29
    This and many other restrictions imposed so far will be relaxed in the general model presented later.
  30
    In addition to the first order conditions, the only equilibrium conditions we need are market clearing
conditions. These are listed in the appendix.




                                                                           61
                                                "                             #
                                        X           p(V )C
                                                         2 V2
                                                             Ck
                                                                  p(V )J1 V1Jk
                         w(v)CJ
                             21 =                                                 ≥0                    (E.8)
                                      k=J,C,U
                                                     (p(V )C    C    K k
                                                            2 V2 ) (P F )


    This is the same as the sum of the three terms inside the bracket in (E.7)31 . Each of
these terms can be interpreted as capturing the intensity of competition between (C, 2) and
(J, 1) in the three final goods markets, namely C, J and U . The higher is the intensity of
competition as measured by these terms, the higher would be the weight assigned by (C, 2)
to (J, 1), since in that case a fall in the price
                                               h of C(J,CU    valueJ added
                                                            1)’s              i would hurt (C, 2) more.
                                                  p(V )2 V2       p(V )1 V1JU
As an example, if the last term in (E.7)           p(V )C   C       PUFU
                                                                                 is high, it conveys that
                                                        2 V2
value added by (C, 2) and (J, 1) are competing intensively in order to satisfy country U ’s
final demand, so a fall in (J, 1)’s price will hurt (C, 2) to a greater extent.
    Secondly, note that w(v)CJ21 is strictly increasing in σ. Intuitively, the lower is the elasticity
of substitution between own value added and Japanese imports in (C, 2)’s production, the
higher will be the co-movement between the value added by (C, 2) and (J, 1). In this case,
the weight assigned by (C, 2) to (J, 1) will be lower, since a fall in the price of (J, 1) ’s value
added, which increases demand for output of (J, 1) , will also end up exerting a positive effect
on the demand for value added by (C, 2).
    Thirdly, unlike σ, the effect of an increase in θ is ambiguous. On the one hand an increase
in θ exerts a positive effect on w(v)CJ   21 via the standard expenditure switching effect–if
consumers are more willing to substitute between different goods in their consumption bundle,
a fall in the price of a substitute will decrease demand for the own good to a greater extent.
On the other hand, to the extent that the value added by (C, 2) and (J, 1) are complementary,
expenditure switching towards (J, 1)’s value added indirectly also implies a shift in expenditure
towards (C, 2)’s output and hence towards (C, 2)’s value added which is embodied in its own
output. In this example the two effects run in opposite directions.
    Lastly, (E.7) and (E.8)also illustrate the restrictive nature of the weighting scheme in
the constant elasticity case. In particular the complementarity effect discussed above is
not present, and as is evident from (E.8) the weighting scheme is not flexible enough to
accommodate negative weights.
    The appendix shows how we can derive REERs for gross output competitiveness (as
  31
    In fact, under the assumption of constant elasticity, all weights can be represented by a formula mimicking
(E.8), i.e.
                                               "                               #
                                                        h hk              c ck
                                         X        p(V  )l V  l      p(V ) s V s
                          w(v)hk
                              ls   =                              
                                                            h V h (P K F k )
                                                                                   ∀h, k, s, l
                                       k=J,C,U
                                                     p(V  ) l  l



  This is the same as 2.12 in the case of the general model.


                                                        62
opposed to competitiveness for value added which is what GVC-REER measures) and how it
compares to our GVC-REER weighting scheme in this 3 by 2 world.


Defining Aggregate Real Effective Exchange Rates for Countries

    We compute aggregate country level REERs by exploiting information on sector level trade
flows. For comparison, further in the appendix we also compute an alternate measure that
aggregates all trade flows within a country as is commonly done in the literature. Appendix
E.1 shows that the demand for value added produced by country h can be written as:


                    X        X  p(V )h V h           
                                                          p(V )h2 V2h
                                                                              
           h
        V̂ =                           1 1
                                       h   h
                                                   hf
                                               w(v)1k +        h    h
                                                                        w(v)2k p̂(V )fk
                                                                            hf
                                                                                                                              (E.9)
                                  p(V ) V                 p(V ) V
                 f ∈(J,C,U ) k∈{1,2}


    If sector level price indices are available, then (E.9) provides the most accurate measure
of competitiveness for a country as a whole. Typically however, country level REER is
computed using an aggregate country-wide price index (like the GDP deflator, CPI or some
measure of unit labor cost). To define an analogous measure in our framework we need to
make an assumption regarding the link between sector level prices and the aggregate GDP
deflator of a country. We choose to make the simplest possible assumption (which is also
made implicitly throughout this literature), namely that all sector level prices change by the
same proportion as the change in the aggregate GDP deflator. In particular,

                                              p̂(V )h = p̂(V )h1 = p̂(V )h2                                                 (E.10)

   With this assumption we can simplify (E.9) to write:


                        p(V )h1 V1h                                           p(V )h2 V2h
           X                                                                                                   
   h
 V̂ =                                      w(v)hf
                                               11   +   w(v)hf
                                                            12       +                           w(v)hf
                                                                                                     21   +   w(v)hf
                                                                                                                  21        p̂(V )f
                        p(V )h V h                                            p(V )h V h
        f ∈(J,C,U ) |                                                {z                                                 }
                                                             wA (v)hf
                                                                                          (E.11)
    Here wA (v) denotes the aggregate (i.e country level) weight assigned by country h to
                   hf

country f in the real exchange rate of country h. As is evident from (E.11), this weight is
itself a weighted sum of the weights assigned by each sector in h to each sector in f , with the
weights given by the value added shares of the sectors in h.
    In the appendix we compare our country level REER measure against the common
approach of aggregating across sectors within each country and show that these two approaches


                                                            63
yield different results except in knife-edge cases.32


E.1        Stylized 3 by 2 GVC: Details and derivations

    The associated price indices for final goods consumption (CPIs) can be computed as
follows:


                                                                                                      1
                P J = [(κJJ      J 1−θ
                         1 )(p(Q)1 )   + (κJJ      J 1−θ
                                           2 )(p(Q)2 )   + (κCJ      C 1−θ 1−θ
                                                             2 )(p(Q)2 )  ]                                     (E.12)
                                                                                   1
                P C = [(κCC      C 1−θ
                         1 )(p(Q)1 )   + (κCC      C 1−θ
                                           2 )(p(Q)2 )   ]                        1−θ                           (E.13)
                                                                                                           1
                P U = [(κU1 U )(p(Q)U1 )1−θ + (κU2 U )(p(Q)U2 )1−θ + (κCU      C 1−θ
                                                                       2 )(p(Q)2 )   ]                    1−θ   (E.14)

Market clearing conditions:

  Output of all entities except (C, 2) is sold only as final good. Table 13 implies the following
market clearing conditions:



                                                 QJ1 = X12
                                                        JC
                                                           + F1JJ                                               (E.15)
                                                 QJ2 = F2JJ                                                     (E.16)
                                                 QC
                                                  1 = F1CC                                                      (E.17)
                                                 QC
                                                  2 = F2CC + F2CJ + F2CU                                        (E.18)
                                                 QU1 = F1U U                                                    (E.19)
                                                 QU2 = F2U U                                                    (E.20)


Solving the model:

    We solve the model by combining the log linearized first order conditions with the market
clearing conditions. The first order condition for final good can be written as:
                                                          −θ
                                                 p(Q)fs
                                             
                         Fsf h   =   κfs h                      F h , h, f ∈ {J, C, U ), s ∈ {1, 2}             (E.21)
                                                  Ph
       (note that only 8 out of the 18 values of Fsf h are positive).
       We will work with the following log linearized version:
  32
       The issue of aggregation is explored in more detail after we present the general model.




                                                                  64
                                                 F̂sf h = −θp̂fs + θP̂ h + F̂ h                                                    (E.22)

   Linearizing the expressions for the CPIs in the three countries we get:

                                             !                                 !                                   !
                     U              pC  CU
                                     2 F2                        p(Q)U  UU
                                                                     1 F1                           p(Q)U  UU
                                                                                                        2 F2
                P̂        =                      p̂(Q)C
                                                      2   +                        p̂(V   )U
                                                                                           1   +                         p̂(V )U
                                                                                                                               2    (E.23)
                                    PUFU                           PUFU                               PUFU
                                                  !                                 !
                                    p(Q)C
                                        1 F1
                                            CC             p(Q)C   CC
                                                                2 F2
                P̂ C      =                      p̂(Q)C
                                                      1 +                 p̂(Q)C
                                                                               2                                                    (E.24)
                                      PCFC                   PCFC
                                              !                      !                                              !
                                    p(Q)J  JJ
                                        1 F1              p(Q)J
                                                              2 F2
                                                                  JJ                                 p(Q)C  CJ
                                                                                                         2 F2
                P̂ J      =                     p̂(Q)J
                                                     1 +               p̂(Q)J2 +                                          p̂(Q)C
                                                                                                                               2    (E.25)
                                      PJFJ                  PJFJ                                       PJFJ


   The first order conditions for production are as follows:


                                                                                       −σ
                                                                             p(Q)J1
                                                                         
                                              JC                     X
                                             X12          = w                                      QC
                                                                                                    2
                                                                             p(Q)C
                                                                                 2
                                                                                       −σ
                                                                             p(V )C
                                                                         
                                                                                  2
                                          V2C     = =            w2V                               QC
                                                                                                    2
                                                                             p(Q)C2


    These along with the production function and its associated price index can be linearized
as follows:


                           JC
                         X̂12 = −σ p̂(Q)J1 + σ p̂(Q)C     C
                                                    2 + Q̂2                                                                        (E.26)
                          V̂2C = −σ p̂(V )C            C
                                           2 + σ p̂(Q)2 + Q̂2
                                                             C
                                                                                                                                   (E.27)
                                   p(V )C    C                      JC
                                                           p(V )J1 X12
                                                                     
                                         2 V2
                             C
                          Q̂2 =                     C
                                                 V̂2 +                       JC
                                                                           X̂12                                                    (E.28)
                                   p(Q)C 2 Q C
                                             2             p(Q)   C C
                                                                   Q
                                        C C
                                                            2 J2 JC 
                                   p(V )   V                  p(V )1 X12
                           p̂C
                             2 =         2 2
                                         C C
                                                 p̂(V )C
                                                       2 +                    p̂(V )J1                                             (E.29)
                                   p(Q)2 Q2                   p(Q)C 2  Q C
                                                                         2


    Next, the non trivial market clearing conditions (E.18) and (E.15) can be linearized as
follows:

                                        p(Q)C  CC
                                                                     p(Q)C  CJ
                                                                                                   p(Q)C  CU
                                                      !                            !                           !
                           C                2 F2            CC           2 F2          CJ              2 F2          CU
                          Q̂2   =                         F̂2    +                  F̂2        +                   F̂2               (E.30)
                                         p(Q)C  C
                                             2 Q2                     p(Q)C
                                                                          2 Q2
                                                                               C                    p(Q)C  C
                                                                                                        2 Q2
                                            J JC
                                                                     p(Q)J   JJ
                                                      !                          !
                            J           p(Q)1 X12          JC            1 F1        JJ
                          Q̂1   =                         X̂12 +                   F̂1                                               (E.31)
                                         p(Q)J  J
                                             1 Q1                     p(Q)J Q
                                                                          1 1
                                                                              J




                                                                                                                                   (E.32)



                                                                       65
Computation of linearized expression for V̂2C and QC
                                                   2 in section E.

   From (E.26) and (E.26) we get:

                                                                     p(Q)J1 X12
                                                                              JC
                                                                                    
                                          Q̂C         V̂2C                                    −σ p̂(V )J1 + σ p̂(Q)C                                                 (E.33)
                                                                                                                                   
                                            2   =            +                                                     2
                                                                     p(V )C2 V2
                                                                               C


    Using the linearized first order conditions for final goods consumption (E.34) in the market
clearing condition we get:

                                              p(Q)C  CC
                                                                         p(Q)C    CJ
                                                                                                      p(Q)C  CU
                                                             !                           !                          !
                             C                    2 F2          CC            2 F2       CJ               2 F2        CU
                         Q̂2          =                       F̂2    +                 F̂2       +                 F̂2
                                               p(Q)C2 Q2
                                                        C                 p(Q)C2 Q2
                                                                                   C                 p(Q)C   C
                                                                                                          2 Q2
                                              p(Q)C    CC
                                                                                                 p(Q)C   CJ
                                                            !                                               !
                                                   2 F2                 C       C    C               2 F2               C               J        J
                                      =                       (−θ p̂(Q)2 + θ P̂ + F̂ ) +                       (−θ p̂(Q)2      + θ P̂       + F̂ )                     (E.34)
                                               p(Q)C2 Q C
                                                        2                                         p(Q)C
                                                                                                      2 QC
                                                                                                         2
                                                p(Q)C     CU
                                                              !
                                                      2 F2                C       U     U
                                            +                    (−θ p̂(Q)2 + θ P̂ + F̂ )                                                                              (E.35)
                                                       C
                                                 p(Q)2 Q2  C




   Using the expressions for the linearized CPIs as well as we can write (E.34) as follows:



Q̂c2 = w(Q)CJ       J      CJ       J      CC       C      CC       C      CU       U      CU       U
           21 p̂(V )1 +w(Q)22 p̂(V )2 +w(Q)21 p̂(V )1 +w(Q)22 p̂(V )2 +w(Q)21 p̂(V )1 +w(Q)22 p̂(V )2
                                                                                       (E.36)
where

                         p(Q)J  JC
                                                      p(Q)J  JC
                                                                         p(Q)C  CJ
                                                                                             p(Q)C  CJ
                                                                                                                   p(V )C  C
                                                                                                                                       p(Q)C  CC
                                                                                                                                                            p(Q)C  CC
                                            !                        !               !                   !                     !                        !               !
      CJ                     1 X12                        1 X12              2 F2                2 F2                   2 V2               2 F2                 2 F2
  w(Q)21     =      −θ                          +θ                                                           +θ
                             p(Q)C  C
                                 2 Q2                p(Q)C 2 Q2
                                                               C         p(Q)C  C
                                                                             2 Q2              PJFJ             p(Q)C    C
                                                                                                                      2 Q2              p(Q)C  C
                                                                                                                                            2 Q2              PCFC

                         p(Q)C  CJ                   J JJ
                                                                         p(Q)J  JC
                                                                                             p(Q)C  CU           C CU
                                            !                !                       !                   !               !
                             2 F2                p(Q)1 F 1                   1 X12               2 F2        p(Q)2 F 2
                    +θ                                         +θ                                                                                                      (E.37)
                             p(Q)C  C
                                 2 Q2              PJFJ                  p(Q)C  C
                                                                             2 Q2            p(Q)C  C
                                                                                                 2 Q2             PUFU




                                                                       p(Q)C   CJ
                                                                                     p(Q)J2 F JJ
                                                                                               
                                                                           2 F2
                                             w(Q)CJ
                                                 22              = θ                           2
                                                                                                                                                                     (E.38)
                                                                       p(Q)C2 Q2
                                                                                C
                                                                                        P JF J
                                                                       p(Q)C   CC
                                                                                      p(Q)C     CC
                                                                                                
                                                                           2 F2            1 F1
                                             w(Q)CC
                                                 21              = θ                                                                                                 (E.39)
                                                                        p(Q)C
                                                                            2 Q2
                                                                                C
                                                                                        P CF C


                                             p(V )C  C
                                                                 p(Q)C  CC
                                                                                 p(Q)C  CC
                                                                                                         p(V )C  C
                                                                                                                         p(Q)C  CJ
                                                                                                                                                     p(Q)C  CJ
                                                         !                   !                  !                    !                       !                   !
                 CC                               2 V2               2 F2            2 F2                     2 V2           2 F2                        2 F2
           w(Q)22        =       −θ + θ                                                             +θ
                                             p(Q)C
                                                 2 Q2
                                                     C           p(Q)C  C
                                                                     2 Q2           PCFC                 p(Q)C  C
                                                                                                             2 Q2        p(Q)C  C
                                                                                                                             2 Q2                      PJFJ

                                          p(V )C  C
                                                         p(V )C  CU
                                                                             p(Q)C  CU
                                                   !                   !               !
                                               2 V2           2 F2               2 F2
                                 +θ
                                          p(Q)C  C
                                              2 Q2           p(Q)C  C
                                                                 2 Q2            PUFU




                                                                                    66
                                           p(Q)C   CU
                                                          p(Q)U1 F U1 U
                                                                     
                                               2 F2
                      w(Q)CU
                          21         = θ
                                            p(Q)C
                                                2 Q2
                                                    C
                                                            PUFU
                                           p(Q)C   CU
                                                          p(Q)U2 F U2 U
                                                                     
                                               2 F2
                      w(Q)CU
                          22         = θ
                                            p(Q)C
                                                2 Q2
                                                    C
                                                            PUFU

    From (E.33) and (E.36) we can write the demand for value added by (C, 2) as a function
of prices as follows:



                  V̂2c = w(v)CJ       J       CJ       J       CC       C
                             21 p̂(V )1 + w(v)22 p̂(V )2 + w(v)21 p̂(V )1

                      + w(v)CC       C       CU       U       CU       U
                            22 p̂(V )2 + w(v)21 p̂(V )1 + w(v)22 p̂(V )2


where


                                                              p(Q)J1 X12
                                                                       JC
                                                                           
                         w(V   )CJ
                                21     =   w(Q)CJ
                                               21    +σ
                                                              p(Q)C    C
                                                                    2 Q2
                         w(V )CJ
                              22 = w(Q)CJ
                                       22

                        w(V )CC
                             21 = w(Q)CC
                                      21
                                                                       JC
                                                              p(Q)J1 X12
                                                                           
                        w(V    )CC
                                22     =   w(Q)CC
                                               22    +σ
                                                              p(Q)C    C
                                                                    2 Q2
                        w(V )CU
                             21 = w(Q)CU
                                      21

                        w(V )CU
                             22 = w(Q)CU
                                      22




                  V̂1c = w(v)CJ       J       CJ       J       CC       C
                             11 p̂(V )1 + w(v)12 p̂(V )2 + w(v)11 p̂(V )1

                      + w(v)CC       C       CU       U       CU       U
                            12 p̂(V )2 + w(v)11 p̂(V )1 + w(v)12 p̂(V )2


where




                                                67
                                                                              p(Q)C    CC
                                                                                         
                                                                                   1 F1
                                         w(V       )CC
                                                    11       =      −θ 1 −
                                                                                P CF C
                                                                        p(Q)C   CC
                                                                                        p(V )C   C
                                                                                                
                                                                             2 F2            2 V2
                                         w(V )CC
                                              12 =                  θ
                                                                          P CF C          pC
                                                                                           2 Q2
                                                                                               C

                                                                        p(Q)C   CC
                                                                                        p(Q)J1 X12
                                                                                                 JC
                                                                                                 
                                                                             2 F2
                                         w(V )CJ
                                              11 =                  θ                                                                                                (E.40)
                                                                          P CF C         p(Q)C2 Q2
                                                                                                  C

                                         w(V )CJ
                                              12 =                  w(V )CU           CU
                                                                          11 = w(V )12 = 0


   The appendix shows that the weight assigned by sector 2 in country C to sector 1 in
country J (its input supplier) is given by

                                          p(Q)J  JC
                                                                                p(Q)J  JC
                                                                                                    p(Q)C  CJ
                                                                                                                           p(Q)C  CJ
                                                         !                                     !                     !                    !
                           CJ                 1 X12                                 1 X12               2 F2                   2 F2
                       w(v)21    =                           (σ − θ) + θ
                                          p(Q)C  C
                                              2 Q2                              p(Q)C  C
                                                                                    2 Q2             p(Q)C  C
                                                                                                         2 Q2                  PJFJ
                                                                          |                             {z                                 }
                                                                                                      term2

                                                  p(V )C  C
                                                                    p(Q)C  CC
                                                                                         p(Q)C  CC
                                                            !                 !                    !
                                                       2 V2             2 F2                 2 F2
                                         +θ                                                                                                                            (E.41)
                                                  p(Q)C  C
                                                      2 Q2          p(Q)C  C
                                                                        2 Q2                 PCFC
                                          |                            {z                                }
                                                                        term3

                                                  p(Q)C  CJ
                                                                    p(Q)J  JJ
                                                                                              p(Q)J  JC
                                                                                                                     p(Q)C  CU
                                                                                                                                          p(Q)C  CU
                                                              !                   !                          !                    !                       !
                                                      2 F2              1 F1                      1 X12                  2 F2                 2 F2
                                         +θ                                             +θ                                                                             (E.42)
                                                  p(Q)C  C
                                                      2 Q2               PJFJ                  p(Q)C  C
                                                                                                   2 Q2              p(Q)C  C
                                                                                                                         2 Q2                  PUFU
                                          |                   {z                    }    |                                {z                               }
                                                          term4                                                          term5




    We can interpret the different terms on the right hand side of the above equation as
follows:

                                                  p(Q)J  JC
                                                                        p(Q)C  CJ
                                                                                             p(Q)C  CJ
                                                                                                                      p(Q)C  CJ
                                                                                                                                           p(Q)J  JJ
                                                                !                   !                    !                            !                    !
                                                      1 X12                 2 F2                 2 F2                     2 F2                 1 F1
                 term2 + term4       =    θ                                                                  +θ
                                                   p(Q)C  C
                                                       2 Q2             p(Q)C  C
                                                                            2 Q2               PJFJ                      p(Q)C  C
                                                                                                                             2 Q2              PJFJ
                                                                                        !#                                                                    
                                                   p(Q)V C C
                                                                         p(Q)C  CJ
                                                                                                p(Q)J  JC
                                                                                                                      p(Q)C  CJ                    pJ      JJ
                                              "                     !                                            !                    !
                                                       2  V2                 2 F2                   1 X12                 2 F2                      (Q)1 F 1
                                     =    θ                                                                                              +                         (E.43)
                                                    p(Q)C  C
                                                        2 Q2             p(V )C  C
                                                                              2 V2                 p(Q)C  C
                                                                                                       2 Q2               PJFJ                      PJFJ


                      
          p(V )C
               2 V2
                   C

          p(Q)C
               p(Q)C
                 Q C2 F2
                        CJ
                            is the value added created by (C, 2) that is ultimately absorbed in
               2   2              
                         p(Q)J  JC
                             1 X12
country J. Similarly p(Q)C QC p(Q)C      2 F 2 + p(Q)1 F 1 is the value added created in (J, 1)
                                             CJ       J JJ
                              2  2
that is ultimately absorbed in country J. Therefore we can simplify (E.43) to write:33

                                                                                  p(V )C   CJ
                                                                                                                 p(V )J1 V1JJ
                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                       2 V2
                                     term2 + term4 = θ                                                                                                               (E.44)
                                                                                  p(V )C2 V2
                                                                                            C
                                                                                                                   P JF J


Comparison of GVC-REER and Q-REER

   With trade in intermediate inputs, competitiveness in gross output and value added can
be delinked. The expression for gross output competitiveness in our model is as follows (We
                                                                                                                          pV C C
                                                                                                                                   
 33                                                                                                                           V2
      The derivation follows by multiplying and dividing both terms by                                                     2
                                                                                                                           pC  C          and rearranging.
                                                                                                                            2 Q2




                                                                                    68
label this measure of gross output competitiveness “Q-REER”).



         4Q − REER2c = Q̂c2 = w(Q)CJ       J       CJ       J       CC       C
                                  21 p̂(V )1 + w(Q)22 p̂(V )2 + w(Q)21 p̂(V )1                                                                 (E.45)
                                   + w(Q)CC       C       CU       U       CU       U
                                         22 p̂(V )2 + w(Q)21 p̂(V )1 + w(Q)22 p̂(V )2


where

                             p(V )C  CJ
                                               p(V )J  JJ
                                                                    p(V )C  CC
                                                                                      p(V )J  JC
                                                                                                           p(V )C  CU
                                                                                                                             p(V )J  JU
                         "                !                 !                     !                !                     !                !#
            CJ                    2 V2              1 V1                 2 V2              1 V1                 2 V2              1 V1
        w(Q)21   =   θ                                          +                                      +
                             p(V )C
                                  2 V2
                                      C          PJFJ               p(V   )C  C
                                                                           2 V2        PCFC                p(V   )C  C
                                                                                                                  2 V2        PUFU
                                  J JC
                                          !
                             p(Q)1 X12
                     −θ                                                                                                                          (E.46)
                              p(Q)C   C
                                   2 Q2
                                     p(Q)J  JC
                                               !
                             CJ          1 X12
                 =   w(v)21 − σ                                                                                                                  (E.47)
                                      p(Q)C  C
                                          2 Q2




The idea behind the “Goods-REER” measure of Bayoumi et al. (2013) is to measure com-
petitiveness of gross output as opposed to value added. The analogous expression in our
framework is given by (E.45), but as will be shown later, the two measures do not coincide
except in very restrictive and/or knife-edge cases.
     Two differences between the value added weight w(v)CJ  21 and gross output weight w(Q)21
                                                                                              CJ

are worth highlighting. First, note that as long as the production function is not Leontief
(i.e σ 6= 0) , the gross output competitiveness weight is always lower then the value added
weight (w(Q)CJ  21 < w(V )21 ). This is a consequence of the fact that substitutability in the
                           CJ

production function which causes the weight w(V )CJ    21 to increase because of the possibility
of a shift occurring from V2 to (J, 1)’s value added(embodied in X12
                              C                                         JC
                                                                           ) does not affect the
gross output weight w(Q)21 , for as far as gross output is concerned the substitution between
                            CJ

different inputs in production is irrelevant as long as the final demand for the good increases.
     Secondly note that when X12 JC
                                     = 0, the two weights are equivalent. As will be shown in
the paper later on, this is a general result–that in the absence of intermediate inputs the
gross output and value added weighting matrices are identical.


Computing Aggregate Real Effective Exchange Rates for Countries

   To derive the expression for country-level value added weights, we start with the following
decomposition of the nominal GDP of country h into its different sectoral components:

                                              p(V )h V h = p(V )h1 V1h + p(V )h2 V2h                                                           (E.48)

where pvh is the GDP deflator of country h. Log linearizing this equation we get:



                                                                       69
                                          p(V )h1 V1h                          i  p(V )h V h  h
                                                             h                                                  i
                   h
       p̂(V ) + V̂ =        h                                         h      h
                                                                p̂(V )1 + V̂1 +         2 2
                                                                                                 p̂(V ) h
                                                                                                        2 + V̂ 2
                                                                                                                h
                                                                                                                                                                     (E.49)
                                          p(V )h V h                               p(V )h V h

    Since (up to a first order approximation) the change in GDP deflator is a weighted sum
of changes in the different sector level prices, the above equation reduces to

                             p(V )h  h
                                                             p(V )h  h
                                              !                             !
                                  1 V1                            2 V2
                                                  h    i                        h    i
               h                                     h                             h
          V̂           =                           V̂1 +                         V̂2
                             p(V     )h V h                  p(V   )h V h
                                              !                                                                  !                                            
                             p(V )h  h
                                  1 V1
                                                      X            X               hf        f       p(V )h  h
                                                                                                          2 V2
                                                                                                                                X          X          hf     f
                       =                                                   w(v)1k p̂(V )k  +                                                  w(v)2k p̂(V )k 
                             p(V )h V h            f ∈{J,C,F } k∈{1,2}
                                                                                                     p(V )h V h            f ∈{J,C,F } k∈{1,2}

                                                           p(V )h    h
                                                                                             p(V )h  h
                                                      "                !                                  !            #
                                                                1 V1              hf              2 V2            hf            f
                                X             X
                       =                                                    w(v)1k +                          w(v)2k       p̂(V )k                                     (E.50)
                           f ∈(J,C,U ) k∈{1,2}
                                                           p(V )h V h                        p(V )h V h




Solution of the single sector version of the model:

   Final demand:



     F̂ f h = −θp̂(Q)fs + θP̂ h + F̂ h , (h, f ) ∈ {(C, C), (J, J), (U, U ), (C, J), (C, U )}                                                                        (E.51)

   Linearizing the expressions for the CPIs in the three countries((A.22)-(A.23)) we get:


                                                          p(Q)C F CU                                          p(Q)U F U U
                                                                                                                                  
                                P̂   U
                                          =                                          p̂(V ) +    C
                                                                                                                                         p̂(V )U                     (E.52)
                                                            PUFU                                                PUFU
                                P̂ C = p̂(V )C                                                                                                                       (E.53)
                                          p(Q)J F JJ             p(Q)C F CJ
                                                                         
                                   J
                                P̂ =                        J
                                                       p̂(Q) +                p̂(Q)C                                                                                 (E.54)
                                            P JF J                 P JF J

   The first order conditions for production are as follows:


                                                                                                              −σ
                                                                                                 p(Q)J1
                                                                                             
                                                             JC                          X
                                                            X12         = w                                            Qc2
                                                                                                 p(Q)C
                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                              −σ
                                                                                                 p(Q)C
                                                                                             
                                                                                                     2
                                                          V2C    = =               w2V                                 Qc2
                                                                                                 p(Q)C
                                                                                                     2


    These along with the production function and its associated price index can be linearized
as follows:



                                                                                         70
                Table 14 – Single sector version of the 3 by 2 model

                          J               C    U   JFinal          CFinal     Ufinal       total output
                   J      0               X    0     X               0          0                X
                   C      0               0    0     X               X          X                X
                   U      0               0    0     0               0          X                X
                  VA      X               X    X
             total output X               X    X




                    X̂ JC = −σ p̂(Q)J + σ p̂(Q)C + Q̂C                                                    (E.55)
                     V̂ C = −σ p̂(Q)C            C
                                     2 + σ p̂(Q)2 + Q̂2
                                                       C
                                                                                                          (E.56)
                              p(Q)C V C              p(V )J X JC
                                                              
                        C
                     Q̂ =                     C
                                           V̂2 +                   X̂ JC                                  (E.57)
                              p(Q)C QC               p(Q)C QC
                              p(V )C V C                p(V )J X JC
                                                                 
                        C
                      p̂ =         C   C
                                                 C
                                           p̂(V ) +           C  C
                                                                       p̂(V )J                            (E.58)
                              p(Q) Q                    p(Q) Q

   Next, the market clearing conditions (2.10) and (A.14) can be linearized as follows:


                                    p(Q)C F CC                p(Q)C F CJ
                                                                      
                       C
                      Q̂        =                  F̂ CC
                                                          +                 F̂ CJ                         (E.59)
                                     p(Q)C QC                  p(Q)C QC
                                      p(Q)C    CU
                                                  
                                            2 F2
                                  +          C   C
                                                      F̂ CU
                                       p(Q) Q
                                    p(Q)J1 X JC               p(Q)J F JJ
                                                                      
                      Q̂J       =                     JC
                                                   X̂ +                    F̂ JJ                          (E.60)
                                     p(Q)J QJ                 p(Q)J QJ

    Using these linearized first order and market clearing conditions we can derive an expression
for change in demand for value added by country C


Country Level exchange rate without exploiting sector level heterogeneity

    The production functions, price indices and final demands and market clearing conditions
are now given as follows:
                                  h                                                         σ
                                                                                         i σ−1
                                               1        σ−1               1        σ−1
                            c
                           Q = (w         CV       c
                                               ) (V )
                                               σ         σ    + (w   CX       Jc
                                                                          ) (X )
                                                                          σ         σ                     (E.61)

                                                                    1
                     p(Q)c = (wCV )(p(V )c )1−σ + (wCX )(p(Q)J )1−σ 1−σ                                   (E.62)
                            




                                                              71
                                   Qh = V h , h ∈ {J, U }                                  (E.63)

   Consumption

                                    1         θ−1            1           θ−1     θ
                    F J = [(κJJ ) θ (F JJ )    θ    + (κCJ ) θ (F CJ )    θ    ] θ−1       (E.64)
                    F C = F CC                                                             (E.65)
                                     1         θ−1               1        θ−1         θ
                    F U = [(κU U ) (F U U )
                                     θ          θ    + (κCU ) (F CU )
                                                                 θ         θ     ]   θ−1   (E.66)



                                                                                     1
                    P J = [(κJJ )(p(Q)J )1−θ + (κCJ )(p(Q)C )1−θ ] 1−θ                     (E.67)
                    P C = p(Q)C                                                            (E.68)
                                                                                      1
                    P U = [(κU U )(p(Q)U )1−θ + (κCU )(p(Q)C )1−θ ]                  1−θ   (E.69)




                                QJ = X JC + F JJ
                               QC = F CC + F CJ + F CU
                               QU = F U U

    The appendix shows that the weight assigned by country C to country J in this case is
given by:

                   V̂ C = w(v)CJ p̂(V )J + w(v)CC p̂(V )C + w(v)CU p̂(V )U                 (E.70)




                                               72
                  p(V )J X JC          p(V )J X JC          p(V )C F CC       p(V )C F CC
                                                                                   
w(v)   CJ
            = σ                  −θ                   +θ                                             (E.71)
                   p(Q)C QC            p(Q)C QC              p(Q)C QC           P CF C
                    p(V )J X JC     p(V )C F CJ      p(V )C F CJ           p(V )C F CJ     p(V )C F CJ
                                                                                              
              +θ                                                    +θ
                    p(Q)C QC         p(Q)C QC          P JF J              p(Q)C QC          P JF J
                    p(V )J X JC     p(V )C F CU      p(V )C F CU
                                                             
              +θ                                                                                     (E.72)
                    p(Q)C QC         p(Q)C QC          PUFU
                    p(V )J X JC          p(V )C V C           p(V )C V C     p(V )C F CC     p(V )C F CC
                                                                                                
w(v)CC      = −σ                   −θ                 +θ
                     p(Q)C QC            p(Q)C QC             p(Q)C QC        p(Q)C QC          P CF C
                    p(V )C V C     p(V )C F CJ      p(V )C F CJ
                                                           
              +θ
                    p(Q)C QC        p(Q)C QC          P JF J
                    p(V )C V C     p(V )C F CU      p(V )C F CU
                                                            
              +θ                                                                                     (E.73)
                    p(Q)C QC        p(Q)C QC          PUFU
                  p(V )C V C     p(V )C F CU      p(V )U F U U
                                                          
w(v)CU      = θ                                                                                      (E.74)
                  p(Q)C QC        p(V )C V C         PUFU

   It is evident from E.71 and E.11 that w(v)CJ and wA (v)CJ are not equal. The issue of
the non-equivalence of the two weighting matrices will be discussed after we have specified
the general model. For now we just want to emphasize that our weighting matrix which
exploits sector level information is unique in the literature, and so a starting point to begin a
comparison with other measures in the literature is to consider the case where there is only
one sector within each country.
   We next move on to our general model which builds on the intuition developed from this
3 by 2 setting. After discussing the relationship to other measures in the literature based on
the general model we come back to the 3 by 2 model to show some illustrative examples.


F      Sticky Prices, Dollar Invoicing and REER
    Derivation of equation 2.41 in section 2.6
    From the log linearized production function for country C:

                                    Q̂C = ω V V̂ C + (1 − ω V )X̂ J,C                           (F.1)

   substitute X̂ J,C = ω V p̂C,C − (1 − ω V )p̂J,C − p̂J,C + Q̂C (first order condition for input
demand by C)in F.1 to get:

                  Q̂C = ω V V̂ C + (1 − ω V )(ω V p̂C,C − (1 − ω V )p̂J,C − p̂J,C + Q̂C )       (F.2)


                                                    73
                                     =⇒ Q̂C = V̂ C + (1 − ω V )(p̂C,C − p̂J,C )                                                  (F.3)

    Next, from the market clearing condition for goods produced by C (QC = F C,C + F C,U +
F C,J ), and noting that F C,C= F C


                      P (Q)C F C,C                          P (Q)C F C,U                             P (Q)C F C,J
                                                                                                               
       Q̂ = C
                                         F̂ + C
                                                                                  F̂   C,U
                                                                                             +                          F̂ C,J   (F.4)
                       P (Q)C QC                             P (Q)C QC                               P (Q)C QC

using first order conditions for final demand, and the definition of price indices:

                                             p̂U (F ) = η U p̂U,U + (1 − η U )p̂C,U                                              (F.5)


                                             p̂J (F ) = η J p̂J,J + (1 − η J )p̂C,J                                              (F.6)

   Equation F.4 can be written as:


              P (Q)C F C,C             P (Q)C F C,U
                                                 
            C                   C                          C,U     U U,U          U C,U
                                                                                        
       Q̂ =                  F̂   +                    −p̂     + η  p̂   + (1 − η  )p̂
               P (Q)C QC                P (Q)C QC
              P (Q)C F C,J
                          
                                  C,J     J J,J          J C,J
                                                                                          (F.7)
                                                               
          +                   −p̂     + η  p̂   + (1 − η  )p̂
              P (Q)C QC

   Substituting equation 2.29 in equation F.3


                                                                  P C,U F C,U
                                                                                 
            C                  V   C,C            J,C
                                                               U U,U
                                                               η p̂ − p̂C,U + (1 − η U )p̂C,U
                                                                                              
       V̂       = −(1 − ω )(p̂    − p̂ ) +
                                                                  P (Q)C QC
                   C,J C,J 
                   P F
                                                                                                (F.8)
                                J J,J      C,J          J C,J
                                                                
                +               η  p̂  − p̂     + (1 − η  )p̂
                   P (Q)C QC



                                                                                  P C,U F C,U
                                                                                                     
                        C                V        C,C          J,C        U
                                                                                                           U,U
                                                                                                           p̂ − p̂C,U
                                                                                                                      
                   V̂       = −(1 − ω )(p̂  − p̂ ) + η
                                                                                  P (Q)C QC
                                  C,J C,J 
                                  P F
                               J
                                                                                                                                 (F.9)
                                              J,J      C,J
                                                            
                            +η                p̂   − p̂
                                  P (Q)C QC




                                                                     74
                             Table 15 – Input output table for G.1

                              J    C     U   J final   C final   U final   Total output
                    J         0    1     0      1         0         0            2
                   C          0    0     0     0.1      0.1         1          1. 2
                   U          0    0     0      0         0         1            1
              Value added     2   0.2    1
              Total output    2   1. 2   1



G     Heterogenous Elasticity of Substitution
    As shown in the paper, differences in the elasticity of substitution, both across product
categories (intermediate vs final) as well as across countries and sectors can have an important
bearing on the measurement of REER. This section begins by highlighting this with an
illustrative example. We then discuss the estimation of elasticities using data from the
WIOD. These elasticities are then used in the parametrization of the model to create new
GVC-REER estimates. On comparing these with the uniform elasticity estimates, we find
that the differences are much more stark for sectoral REERs than for country level REERs.

Example G.1. Three country world with limited trade in intermediate inputs:

    Consider the following 3 country one sector example where the input output linkages are
restricted to just one non-zero entry. Country C imports intermediates from country J, puts
in own value added and sells the output to all the three countries as final output. Table 15
displays the associated input-output table.
    In this simplified example only two elasticities are relevant, namely σ3 (elasticity of
substitution between C’s value added and intermediate input from J in C’s gross output)
and θ1 (elasticity of substitution between final goods in the final consumption basket of all
countries. For simplicity, this elasticity is assumed to be common across countries).
    Consider the weight assigned by country C to country J, WCJ , which measures the change
in demand for value added by C when price of value added by J changes. A decrease in
p(V )J affects the demand for C’s value added via two channels. Firstly, with regard to final
goods consumption, a decrease in p(V )J leads to a shift towards J’s value added (and goods
containing value added by J, namely the gross output of C) in the final goods consumption
bundle of all countries. The strength of this effect depends on θ1 . A higher θ1 means that
goods are more substitutable in the final goods consumption bundle of countries and hence
the shift towards J’s value added will be more pronounced when its price decreases. Secondly,
with regard to intermediate goods and production mix, a decrease in the price of J’s value
added leads to a shift towards J’s value added and a shift away from C’s value added in

                                               75
      Table 16 – Comparison of weights under different measures for example G.1

                    GVC-REER     VAREER     Q-REER      GOODS-REER     IMF Weights
                     (PWW)         (BJ)     (PWW)          (BST)         (BLS)
             WJC      -0.04        0.19      -0.04          1.0           1.00
             WJU      1. 04        0.80      1. 04            0             0
             WCJ      -0.25        0.54      -4.07         -3.40          0.26
             WCU       1.25        0.45       5.07          4.40          0.73
             WU J      0.83        0.83       0.83          0.83            0
             WU C      0.16        0.16       0.16          0.16            1
                               key
                              PWW              This paper
                                BJ    Bems and Johnson (2017)
                               BST        Bayoumi et al. (2013)
                               BLS        Bayoumi et al. (2005)


the production function of C. The strength of this effect depends on σ3 . The higher is this
elasticity, the higher is the shift towards J’s value added in C’s production (at the expense of
C’s own value added) and hence higher is the fall in demand for C’s value added.
    Table 16 presents weights based on different schemes for this example when σ3 = 1.5,
θ1 = 5. (as is done by the IMF and others, weights are normalized so that own weight
is -1 and is not reported). Several aspects of the differences in the weighting schemes are
noteworthy. Firstly, note that there are no negative weights in the IMF and the VAREER
weighting matrix. In fact it can be easily shown that these weighting schemes are not flexible
enough to accommodate negative weights under any circumstances. Next, note from column
1 that WJC and WCJ are negative in the GVC-REER measure. As discussed above, this is a
consequence of the input output structure and a combination of a relatively high θ1 (=5) and
low σ3 (=1. 5). Column 3 illustrates that as far as gross output is concerned, the magnitude
of the negative weight assigned by country C to country J is much larger. This is because
only the first effect discussed above (i.e shift in final demand) affects gross output, whereas
the second effect (shift towards intermediate composition) does not affect the gross output
measure.
    That the uniform elasticity assumption is overly restrictive can also be noted from the
observation that the VAREER(BJ) weight which does take into account trade in intermediates,
does worse than the IMF weight which ignores it, although both have the wrong sign.
    Column 4 shows that the Goods-REER measure of Bayoumi et al. (2013) falls somewhere
in between the GVC-REER and the Q-REER measures (columns 1 and 3) so that it measures
neither gross output competitiveness nor value added competitiveness. Although the aim
in Bayoumi et al. (2013) is to capture gross competitiveness, they fall short of doing so

                                              76
because their measure uses the IMF weighting scheme which does not account for trade in
intermediates. This aspect is further illustrated by the fact that the GOODS-REER measure
(which in turn inherits this property from the IMF measure) assigns a value of 0 to WJU
because there is no direct trade between J and U. However, J’s value added does reach U via
C and so the correct weighting matrix must have WJU 6= 0.
    Lastly, note from the last two rows of table 16 that the weights assigned by country
U to the remaining two countries are the same in all the measures except IMF. This is a
consequence of the fact that the in the example the US trades in only final goods and all its
production comprises entirely of its own value added.
    Figure G.1 shows how the weight assigned by C to J changes with the elasticities. The top
left figure plots WCJ for three measure(GVC-REER, VAREER(BJ) and IMF) for different
values of σ3 with θ1 fixed at 1. 5. The top right picture plots the same weights for different
values of θ1 with σ3 fixed at 5. The bottom left figure shows a 3D plot of WCJ for the
GVC-REER measure for different values of σ3 and θ1 while the bottom right augments this
graph by adding a surface each for VAREER and IMF weights.


G.1      Estimation of elasticities

G.1.1     Framework

    The approach used here will be based on recent work by Soderbery (2015) which outlines
certain drawbacks in the preceding two papers and proposes an estimator which outperforms
them. Consider a generic CES Armington aggregator defined as follows:
                                          "                                    η
                                                                            # η−1
                                              X                       η−1
                                   Dt =             (wk )1/η (Dkt )    η                           (G.1)
                                              k∈K

   The objective is to estimate the demand elasticity η. The double differenced demand
equation in terms of expenditure shares is given by34 :

                               4r ln(skt ) = −(η − 1)4r ln(pkt ) + rkt                            (G.2)

where 4r ln(xkt ) = 4ln(xkt ) − 4ln(xrt ) and 4ln(xjt ) = ln(xjt ) − ln(xj(t−1) ), x = s, p r is
called a reference variety and is typically chosen to be the one with the largest share . skt is
the expenditure share of the k th variety and is given by:
  34
    See Soderbery (2015) , Broda and Weinstein (2006) or Feenstra (1994) for further details including the
actual derivation




                                                        77
                                     Figure G.1 – Illustration of Role of Elasticities: Example G.1
                                     W(CJ) for different                 with       fixed                                                         W(CJ) for different theta with    fixed
        0.8                                                                                                             0.8



        0.6                                                                                                             0.6



        0.4                                                                                                             0.4



        0.2                                                                                                             0.2

                                                                                                                                                                                            GVC-REER
W(CJ)




                                                                                                               W(CJ)                                                                        VAREER(BJ)
          0                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                                                                                                            IMF
        -0.2                                                                                                           -0.2
                                                                                            GVC-REER
                                                                                            VAREER(BJ)
        -0.4                                                                                IMF                        -0.4



        -0.6                                                                                                           -0.6



        -0.8                                                                                                           -0.8
               1       1.5       2       2.5       3           3.5        4         4.5     5    5.5       6                  1           2             3           4       5       6            7       8


                                                                                                                                                                W(CJ)
                                                                                                                                                                                                     GVC-REER
                                                                                                                                                                                                     VAREER
                                                                                                                                                                                                     IMF


          1                                                                                                              1


         0.5                                                                                                           0.5


          0                                                                                                              0
W(CJ)




        -0.5                                                                                                           -0.5


         -1                                                                                                             -1


        -1.5                                                                                                           -1.5
           6                                                                                                              6
                   5                                                                                               8              5                                                          8
                             4                                                                         7                              4
                                                                                                6                                                                                   6
                                     3                                                      5                                                 3
                                                                                      4                                                                                         4
                                               2                                3                                                                   2                   2
                                                                     2
                                                       1   1                                                                                                1   0




                                                                                                       78
                                                     pkt Dkt
                                          skt = P                                                   (G.3)
                                                    k∈K pkt Dkt

   Next, given a supply curve with elasticity ρ, the supply curve in terms of differenced
shares and prices can be written as:
                                                        
                                                   ρ
                                  r
                               4 ln(pkt ) =                  4r ln(skt ) + δkt
                                                                            r
                                                                                                    (G.4)
                                                  1+ρ
   If the demand and supply disturbances are independent across time, then the 2 equations
can be multiplied and scaled to yield:

                                      Ykt = θ1 Z1kt + θ2 Z2kt + ukt                                 (G.5)

where Ykt = (4r ln(pkt ))2 , Z1kt = (4r ln(skt ))2 , Z2kt = (4r ln(pkt ))(4r ln(skt )), and ukt =
rkt δkt
      r

 1−φ
         .
      Further, the parameters of this regression model can be mapped to the primitive parameters
of the demand and supply system as follows:
      φ = ρ(η−1)
           1+ρη
                  ∈ [0, σ−1
                         σ
                            )
                φ               2φ−1
      θ1 = (η−1)2 (1−φ) θ2 = (η−1)(1−φ)
      Consistent estimates of θ1 can be obtained by using the moment condition E(ukt ) = 0,
where consistency relies on T → ∞. 35 If standard procedures (2SLS or LIML) yield a value
of θ1 that gives imaginary values for η and ρ or values with the wrong sign, then the grid
search or the non-linear search method of Soderbery (2015) can be used.

G.1.2     Results

    We construct sectoral price indices for all cells in the WIOD input output table using the
tables in previous year prices. For a fixed production entity (identified by the country-sector
pair (c, l)) and a fixed sector s, table 17 shows how the estimation of the different elasticities
in the model maps onto the procedure outlined above.
    Table 18 provides median estimates for each elasticity computed using the WIOD sample
form 1995-2009. The medians are computed across all estimates, whose number differs
according to the degree of aggregation in the nested CES framework. Although slightly on
the higher side, these numbers are broadly in the range of estimates obtained in the trade
literature (Broda and Weinstein (2006)), but fairly high compared to the estimates obtained
  35
    Given the nature of the data, the value of T is typically very small. For example Soderbery (2015) uses
an unbalanced panel with 15 years of data




                                                    79
                                   Table 17 – Elasticity Estimation

                                                     D               Dk                     pk
                 Production elasticities
                        σs1 (c, l)             (X(f )csl )           (Xslkc )           p(Q)ks
                       σs1h (c, l)              (Xslc )       (Xslcc ), (X(f )csl )     p(Q)ks
                        σ 2 (c, l)              (Xlc )               (Xklc
                                                                           )           p(X)ckl
                        σ 3 (c, l)               (Qcl )                c
                                                                 (Xl , Vl )  c
                                                                                    (p(Q)cl , p(V )cl )

              Consumption elasticities
                        θs1 (c)          (F (f )cs )      (Fskc )        p(Q)ks
                        θs1h (c)          (Fsc )     (Fsc ), (F (f )cs ) p(Q)ks
                           1                  c               c
                        θ (c)             (F )             (Fk )          Pkc
This table shows how the model in section 2.2 maps into the general framework for estimation
of elasticities discussed in section G.1
 Table 18 – Estimates of elasticities of substitution by sector (for production) and by
 country (for consumption elasticity) groups


                      Median Consumption Elasticities
                       θ1     θ1h         θ2                                   Median Production Elasticities
                                                                                σ1     σ 1h    σ2      σ3
   Full Sample        16.05     6.06         1.93
    OECD(28)          14.84     5.46         2.13             Full Sample      16.94     8.93     4.26    0.93
  Non-OECD(13)         21.49    9.00         1.32               primary(2)     15.96     13.20    6.13    0.84
     Asia (7)          22.32    2.40         2.155            secondary(15)    16.19     5.33     5.08    0.94
    Europe (29)       15.088    6.06         1.16              tertiary(18)    17.74     10.59    3.79    1.02
   Americas (4)       14.23     7.31         1.65




in the macro literature (Justiniano and Preston (2010))36 Our goal in this paper is to illustrate
the extent to which relaxing the uniform elasticity assumption impacts the measurement
of REER. To that end, we take a first step by only introducing a single estimate for each
of the seven structural elasticities in the model. The role of heterogeneity in elasticities of
substitution across different sector and country groups would also be of interest and can be
easily incorporated and studied in our framework. Table 18 in appendix G.1 provides some
estimates for different sector and country groups.

 36
      As shown in Imbs and Mejean (2015), the macro estimates suffer from a downward bias due to aggregation.




                                                         80
                      Table 19 – Divergence index for Countries and sectors

                              level of Aggregation   Country    Country-Sector
                                   Sample size         41           1435
                                    M ean(de )        0.10          0.24
                                  M edian(de )        0.07          0.21
                                    Stdev(de )        0.07          0.14

                                   min(de )            0               0
                                   max(de )           0.29           0.79



G.2       Comparing GVC-REERs: uniform elasticity vs heterogenous elasticity

    In order to assess the importance of incorporating heterogeneity in the elasticity of
substitution emphasized above, we define a statistic to qualitatively capture the differences
in REER based on uniform and heterogenous elasticity. For each entity (e) and for each year,
we create a variable det which takes the value one if the GVC-REER uniform elasticity and
heterogenous elasticity indices move in opposite directions and zero otherwise.



          det = 1 (sign(4GV C − REER(BM )t ) 6= sign(4GV C − REER(CE)t ))               (G.6)

   We then compute the mean of det for each e across all time periods and to define the
“Divergence index” for entity e as follows:
                                                     PT
                                                    det
                                                e
                                              d =         t=2
                                                                                         (G.7)
                                                 T −1
    Note that de takes the value zero if the two REER measures always agree in their direction
of movement and takes the value of 1 if they never agree, i.e always move in opposite
directions.
    Table 19 summarizes the distribution of the divergence index for GVC-REER.37 At the
country level, the maximum number of times the measures move in opposite directions is 4
out of 14 years (29%). This happens for the Netherlands. At the country-sector level, the
divergence index is much larger on average and reaches as high as 79% (11 out of 14 years)
for certain country-sectors in the sample. The main takeaway from these results is that the
consequences of heterogeneity in elasticities, at least qualitatively, are more evident in the
case of REERs at the country-sector rather than at the aggregate country level.

 37
      The results for other REERs including Q-REER are qualitatively similar


                                                     81
H     Bilateral GVC-RER: Example
    Consider a two country world where each country has two sectors. There is no trade in
intermediate goods and production comprises entirely of own value added. Table 20 shows
how the final demand is distributed across sectors.

                              Table 20 – IO table for bilateral RER

                                        C             U        CFinal   Ufinal   total output
                                   C1       C2   U1       U2
                              C1   0        0    0        0      1        1           2
                    C
                              C2   0        0    0        0      3        0           3
                              U1   0        0    0        0      0        1           1
                    U
                              U2   0        0    0        0      0        1           1
                    VA              2        3    1        1
               total output         2        3    1        1


    Suppose in addition, p̂(V )C
                               1 = −0.01, p̂(V )2 = 0.02, p̂(V )1 = 0, p̂(V )2 = 0 (all prices are
                                                C               U            U

in a common currency, so nominal exchange rate is already incorporated)
    Based on the conventional RER definition using an aggregate country level price index,

                               ˆ U S−CH = p̂(V )C − p̂(V )U = 0.008
                              RER                                                               (H.1)

and hence the conventional RER measure would indicate an increase in competitiveness of
the US. This however is misleading since the entire price increase comes from China’s sector
2 which does not compete with any of the US sectors. Moreover, the Chinese sector which
does compete with the US is C1, which actually experiences a decrease in its price, so the
correct measure of competitiveness must signal an appreciation of the US exchange rate
against China, not a depreciation as measured by the standard RER in 3.1.


I    List of countries and sectors
   List of countries: Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Brazil (EME) Canada, China
(EME), Cyprus , Czech Republic (EME), Germany, Denmark, Spain, Estonia, Finland, France,
United Kingdom, Greece, Hungary (EME), Indonesia (EME), India (EME), Ireland, Italy,
Japan, Korea (EME), Lithuania, Luxembourg, Latvia, Mexico (EME), Malta, Netherlands,
Poland (EME), Portugal, Romania, Russia (EME), Slovak Republic, Slovenia, Sweden, Turkey
(EME),Taiwan (EME)United States.



                                                      82
                         Table 21 – Sectoral classification and description

                                                                                                                     Broad 3 sector Classification
WIOD sector                                 Sector description                                       NACE code    (Primary, secondary and tertiary)
    c01                  AGRICULTURE, HUNTING, FORESTRY AND FISHING                                     AtB                    Primary
    c02                                 MINING AND QUARRYING                                                C                  Primary
    c03                           FOOD , BEVERAGES AND TOBACCO                                         15t16                   Primary
    c04                                       Textiles and textile                                     17t18                  Secondary
    c05                                 Leather, leather and footwear                                   19                    Secondary
    c06                             WOOD AND OF WOOD AND CORK                                           20                    Secondary
    c07                  PULP, PAPER, PAPER , PRINTING AND PUBLISHING                                  21t22                  Secondary
    c08                            Coke, refined petroleum and nuclear fuel                             23                    Secondary
    c09                                    Chemicals and chemical                                       24                    Secondary
    c10                                      Rubber and plastics                                        25                    Secondary
    c11                             OTHER NON-METALLIC MINERAL                                          26                    Secondary
    c12                        BASIC METALS AND FABRICATED METAL                                       27t28                  Secondary
    c13                                      MACHINERY, NEC                                             29                    Secondary
    c14                         ELECTRICAL AND OPTICAL EQUIPMENT                                       30t33                  Secondary
    c15                                  TRANSPORT EQUIPMENT                                           34t35                  Secondary
    c16                           MANUFACTURING NEC; RECYCLING                                         36t37                  Secondary
    c17                         ELECTRICITY, GAS AND WATER SUPPLY                                           E                 Secondary
    c18                                       CONSTRUCTION                                                  F                 Secondary
    c19       Sale, maintenance and repair of motor vehicles and motorcycles; retail sale of fuel       50                     Tertiary
    c20       Wholesale trade and commission trade, except of motor vehicles and motorcycles            51                     Tertiary
    c21       Retail trade, except of motor vehicles and motorcycles; repair of household goods         52                     Tertiary
    c22                                HOTELS AND RESTAURANTS                                               H                  Tertiary



                    Table 21 – Sectoral classification and description cont.

                                                                                                                   Broad 3 sector Classification
WIOD sector                                 Sector description                                      NACE code    (Primary, secondary and tertiary)
    c23                                    Other Inland transport                                      60                    Tertiary
    c24                                    Other Water transport                                       61                    Tertiary
    c25                                     Other Air transport                                        62                    Tertiary
    c26       Other Supporting and auxiliary transport activities; activities of travel agencies       63                    Tertiary
    c27                           POST AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS                                          64                    Tertiary
    c28                              FINANCIAL INTERMEDIATION                                           J                    Tertiary
    c29                                     Real estate activities                                     70                    Tertiary
    c30                        Renting of m&eq and other business activities                          71t74                  Tertiary
    c31         PUBLIC ADMIN AND DEFENCE; COMPULSORY SOCIAL SECURITY                                   L                     Tertiary
    c32                                        EDUCATION                                               M                     Tertiary
    c33                               HEALTH AND SOCIAL WORK                                           N                     Tertiary
    c34              OTHER COMMUNITY, SOCIAL AND PERSONAL SERVICES                                     O                     Tertiary
    c35                 PRIVATE HOUSEHOLDS WITH EMPLOYED PERSONS                                       P                     Tertiary



                                                                83
    Figure J.1 – Correlation between Value added and Gross Output REER Weights
                  0.95
                                                  Sector level
                                                  Country level
                   0.9

                  0.85

                   0.8

                  0.75

                   0.7

                  0.65
                     2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014


J   Corresponding figures for section 3 based on the WIOD
    2016 release (2000-2014)




                                        84
          Figure J.2 – Comparison of three REER indices for select countries
                     China, People's Republic of                       China, People's Republic of
                                                       1.5
            0.5
                                                          1

                                                       0.5
             0
                                                          0

                                                      -0.5     Manufacture of computer, electronic and optical products
                                                               Manufacture of coke and refined petroleum products
           -0.5                                           -1
                                                               Aggregate


                                                      -1.5

            -1                                            -2
             2000        2005          2009        2014 2000                  2005        2009                        2014
                                Ireland                                           Ireland
              3
                                                        2
            2.5
                                                        1
              2
                                                        0
            1.5

              1                                        -1

            0.5                                        -2

              0                                        -3      Telecommunications
                                                               Postal and courier activities
            -0.5
                                                       -4      Aggregate

              2000        2005         2009        2014 2000                 2005         2009                      2014
                           United States                                        United States

             1                                         0.2

                                                          0

            0.5                                       -0.2     Manufacture of computer, electronic and optical products
                                                               Water transport
                                                      -0.4     Aggregate


             0                                        -0.6

                                                      -0.8

                                                          -1
           -0.5
                                                      -1.2

             2000        2005         2009         2014 2000                  2005             2009                   2014




Sectors in the right hand panel do not correspond to ones in the manuscript due to lack of
correspondence between sectoral classifications in the two WIOD data releases.




                                                     85
      Figure J.3 – Comparison of sectoral REERs indices for the electronics sector
                        China, People's Republic of                                       Japan
             0                                                       0


           -0.5                                                 -0.5


            -1                        GVC-REER
                                      Q-REER                         -1
                                      TW-REER(Goldberg(2004))
                                      EW-REER(Goldberg(2004))
           -1.5
                                                                -1.5
                                                                          GVC-REER
                                                                          Q-REER
            -2
                                                                          TW-REER(Goldberg(2004))
                                                                     -2   EW-REER(Goldberg(2004))

             2000            2005         2009            2014 2000                2005            2009         2014
                             Republic of Korea                                            Taiwan
             0                                                       0

           -0.2

           -0.4                                                 -0.5

           -0.6
                                                                     -1
           -0.8

            -1      GVC-REER                                              GVC-REER
                    Q-REER                                      -1.5      Q-REER
           -1.2     TW-REER(Goldberg(2004))                               TW-REER(Goldberg(2004))
                    EW-REER(Goldberg(2004))                               EW-REER(Goldberg(2004))
           -1.4
             2000            2005             2009        2014 2000                2005         2009            2014
                                    Ireland                                          United States
                                                                     0

           0.2                                                  -0.2

             0                                                  -0.4
                                                                                            GVC-REER
           -0.2                                                 -0.6
                                                                                            Q-REER
                                                                                            TW-REER(Goldberg(2004))
           -0.4                                                 -0.8                        EW-REER(Goldberg(2004))

           -0.6             GVC-REER                                 -1
                            Q-REER
                            TW-REER(Goldberg(2004))             -1.2
           -0.8
                            EW-REER(Goldberg(2004))
                                                              -1.4
             2000            2005             2009        2014 2000                2005            2009         2014

Notes: GVC-REER and Q-REER are measures proposed in this paper. TW-REER and
EW-REER are trade and export weighted REERs respectively, computed at the sector level
using the framework proposed by Goldberg (2004). Electronics sector (Code 17 in WIOD
2016 release, the correspondence with WIOD 2013 release reported int eh main paper is not
exact)




                                                                86
           Figure J.4 – Comparison of three REER indices for select countries
                    China, People's Republic of                                     Germany
           0.5                                                     0.08
                    GVC-REER                                                                        GVC-REER
                    IMF-REER                                                                        IMF-REER
                                                                   0.06
                    VAREER                                                                          VAREER
           0.4
                                                                   0.04

           0.3                                                     0.02

                                                                      0
           0.2
                                                               -0.02
           0.1                                                 -0.04

                                                               -0.06
             0
            2000        2005              2009              2014     2000        2005            2009              2014
                                 Spain                                                  France
                                                                   0.15
                    GVC-REER                                                 GVC-REER
           0.25     IMF-REER                                                 IMF-REER
                    VAREER                                                   VAREER
            0.2
                                                                    0.1

           0.15


            0.1                                                    0.05

           0.05


             0                                                       0
             2000        2005             2009              2014     2000        2005        2009                  2014
                                Ireland                                            United States
                                                                                                        GVC-REER
           0.35
                                                                                                        IMF-REER
                                                                      0                                 VAREER
            0.3

           0.25
                                                                   -0.05
            0.2

           0.15                                                     -0.1

            0.1
                                                 GVC-REER          -0.15
           0.05                                  IMF-REER
                                                 VAREER
             0
             2000        2005             2009              2014      2000       2005            2009              2014

Comparison of three REER indices for select countries.The GVC-REER is our proposed
measure of REER which incorporates input-output linkages as well as sectoral heterogeneity
(in both REER weights as well as price indices). The VAREER corresponds to the value-
added REER measure proposed in Bems and Johnson (2017) which accounts for input-output
linkages but not sectoral heterogeneity. IMF-REER is a measure which uses the IMF weighting
scheme that ignores both input-output linkages as well as sectoral heterogeneity.




                                                               87
       Figure J.5 – Comparison of GVC-REER and Q-REER for select countries
                   China, People's Republic of                                     Germany
           0.5     GVC-REER
                   Q-REER                                     0.06
           0.4     IMF-REER
                                                              0.04
           0.3
                                                              0.02

           0.2                                                   0

           0.1                                            -0.02

                                                          -0.04
            0                                                           GVC-REER
                                                                        Q-REER
                                                          -0.06         IMF-REER
          -0.1
            2000       2005              2009          2014      2000       2005            2009          2014
                                Spain                                              France
                   GVC-REER                                   0.14      GVC-REER
          0.25     Q-REER                                               Q-REER
                   IMF-REER                                   0.12      IMF-REER
           0.2                                                 0.1

                                                              0.08
          0.15
                                                              0.06
           0.1                                                0.04

          0.05                                                0.02

                                                                 0
            0
            2000        2005             2009          2014     2000        2005        2009              2014
                               Ireland                                        United States
                                                                                               GVC-REER
          0.35
                                                                                               Q-REER
                                                                 0                             IMF-REER
           0.3

          0.25
                                                              -0.05
           0.2

          0.15
                                                               -0.1
           0.1
                                            GVC-REER
          0.05                              Q-REER
                                            IMF-REER          -0.15
            0
            2000       2005              2009          2014      2000       2005            2009          2014

Comparison of GVC-REER and Q-REER for select countries. GVC-REER measures value
added competitiveness, whereas Q-REER measures competitiveness of gross output produced
by the country.




                                                         88
Figure J.6 – Comparison of VAREER and GVC-REER weights for China and Ireland
Average of GVC-REER and VAREER weights




                                                                                                                                                                 Average of GVC-REER and VAREER weights




                                                               China, People's Republic of                                                                                                                                                                Ireland
                                          0.3                                                                                                                                                              0.2      United States
                                                 ROW

                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ROW
                                         0.25
                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland

                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.14
                                          0.2

                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.12
                                                                                                                                           United States

                                         0.15                                                                                                                                                              0.1


                                                                                     Japan                                                                                                                0.08                                      Germany

                                          0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 France
                                                                                                      Germany                                                                                             0.04                                                  Italy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    China, People's Republic of
                                         0.05               Republic of Korea                                                                                                                                                                                   Japan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Netherlands
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Spain
                                                   Taiwan                                       France United    Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
                                                                                                          Australia                                                                                                                                Switzerland
                                                                                                                   Russian Federation                                                                     0.02                                                   Belgium
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Canada
                                                                                                 Italy
                                                                                                  India Canada
                                                                                                    Brazil                                                                                                                                                  Sweden
                                                                                                Spain  Indonesia
                                                                                                  Netherlands                                                                                                                                                 Republic   of Korea
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Russian
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Australia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   India
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Norway
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               DenmarkBrazil Federation
                                                                                        Mexico Turkey
                                                                                                 Switzerland
                                                                                               Belgium
                                                                                                Sweden                                                                                                                                                          Poland
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Austria
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Mexico
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Turkey
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Taiwan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Finland
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Portugal
                                                                                                  Norway
                                                                                               Poland
                                                                                             Denmark
                                                                                               Austria
                                                                                             Finland
                                                                                             Ireland
                                                                                               Greece
                                                                                              Czech
                                                                                            Hungary
                                                                                               Romania
                                                                                              Portugal Republic                                                                                                                                                   Greece
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Czech
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Romania
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Slovakia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Croatia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 SloveniaRepublic
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Indonesia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Luxembourg
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Hungary
                                                                                              Luxembourg
                                                                                             Slovakia
                                                                                              Croatia
                                                                                              Slovenia
                                                                                              Bulgaria
                                                                                              Lithuania
                                                                                              Cyprus
                                                                                              Estonia
                                                                                              Latvia
                                                                                              Malta                                                                                                                                                              Bulgaria
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Lithuania
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Cyprus
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Latvia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Estonia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Malta
                                           0                                                                                                                                                                 0
                                            -8         -6          -4           -2           0            2           4           6            8                                                            -0.01    -0.008    -0.006   -0.004     -0.002      0       0.002     0.004    0.006   0.008     0.01
                                                                                                                                             -3
                                         Difference between GVC-REER and VAREER weights
                                                                                 10
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Difference between GVC-REER and VAREER weights




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 89
