                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   TRANSPORTATION COSTS AND THE SPATIAL ORGANIZATION OF ECONOMIC
                             ACTIVITY

                                       Stephen J. Redding
                                       Matthew A. Turner

                                      Working Paper 20235
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w20235


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2014




We are grateful to Chang Sun and Tanner Regan for excellent research assistance. We would also
like to thank Nate Baum-Snow, Gilles Duranton, Will Strange, Vernon Henderson and participants
at the conference for the Handbook for Regional and Urban Economics for excellent comments and
suggestions. The usual disclaimer applies. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Stephen J. Redding and Matthew A. Turner. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Transportation Costs and the Spatial Organization of Economic Activity
Stephen J. Redding and Matthew A. Turner
NBER Working Paper No. 20235
June 2014
JEL No. F15,R12,R40

                                                ABSTRACT

This paper surveys the theoretical and empirical literature on the relationship between the spatial distribution
of economic activity and transportation costs. We develop a multi-region model of economic geography
that we use to understand the general equilibrium implications of transportation infrastructure improvements
within and between locations for wages, population, trade and industry composition. Guided by the
predictions of this model, we review the empirical literature on the effects of transportation infrastructure
improvements on economic development, paying particular attention to the use of exogenous sources
of variation in the construction of transportation infrastructure. We examine evidence from different
spatial scales, between and within cities. We outline a variety of areas for further research, including
distinguishing reallocation from growth and dynamics.


Stephen J. Redding
Department of Economics
and Woodrow Wilson School
Princeton University
Fisher Hall
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
reddings@princeton.edu

Matthew A. Turner
Department of Economics
University of Toronto
150 St. George Street
Toronto, ON M5S 3G7
CANADA
mturner@chass.utoronto.ca
1     Introduction

The organization of economic activity in geographic space depends crucially on the transportation
of goods and people. Most production involves the movement of inputs such as raw materials,
labor and fuel from different locations. Most consumption requires either the conveyance of finished
goods or the transfer of people to the points at which goods and services are supplied. The transport
sector as a whole typically accounts for around five percent of Gross Domestic Product (GDP), and
transport networks comprise some of the largest investments ever made. In the United States (U . S .),
the Interstate Construction Program extended to 42,795 miles of highways with an estimated cost
of $128.9 billion (1991 U . S . dollars).1 Multiplying estimates of the cost per interstate lane kilometer
found in Duranton and Turner (2012) by the extent of the system, gives much larger values. In
China, the National Trunk Highway System (NTHS) involved the construction of around 21,747
miles (35,000 kilometers) of highways over a period of 15 years at an estimated construction cost of
around $120 billion (in current price U . S . dollars).2
     Transportation technologies themselves have undergone large-scale changes over time, which
have in turn reshaped the spatial organization of economic activity. For most of human history, the
movement of goods and people was limited by the physical capabilities of humans and their ani-
mals. The invention of the railroad reduced transport costs and created a hub and spoke transport
network that was characterized by substantial fixed costs (e.g. in stations and goods yards) and
favored point-to-point travel between the central cities. The development of the internal combus-
tion engine (and hence the automobile and truck) in turn created greater flexibility in transportation,
benefiting lower-density locations relative to central cities.3 Even within existing transport technolo-
gies, such as maritime shipping, there have been large-scale changes in the organization of economic
activity in the form of containerization and the adoption of new information and communication
technologies (ICTs) such as the computer. These innovations have played an important part in the
development of integrated logistics networks, which control the movement of a package from its
origin to its destination, and integrate packaging, storage, transport, inventories, administration and
management. The discovery of entirely new modes of transportation, such as air travel, has further
transformed the relative attractiveness of locations for economic activity.
     This chapter describes our current understanding of the way that transportation costs and trans-
portation infrastructure affect the organization of economic activity within a country. We first pro-
vide some basic facts about transportation costs within and between cities. Next we develop a multi-
region model of economic geography as a framework to organize our discussion of the empirical
literature. The existing empirical literature on the effects of transportation costs and infrastructure
can be usefully divided into two parts. The first of these parts considers the role of transportation
costs between cities and is mainly interested in the movement of goods, while the second considers
    1 U.S. Department of Transportation, Federal Highway Administration, interstate cost estimates reported to Congress.
    2 Faber  (2013)
    3 See, for example, the discussion in Glaeser and Ponzetto (2013).




                                                            2
the role of transportation costs within cities and is mainly interested in the movement of people. Our
model unifies the analysis of within and between city transportation, thereby allowing us to simul-
taneously consider the two previously disparate strands of the empirical literature. Analysis of our
model yields structural equations corresponding to the reduced form estimating equations on which
the two parts of the empirical literature are based. The divergence between theoretically founded
structural equations and reduced form estimating equations, in turn, provides insight into the infer-
ence problems that reduced form estimation must overcome. Finally, with a handful of exceptions,
the existing literature provides only an incomplete understanding of general equilibrium effects of
transportation infrastructure and little basis for welfare analysis. The model that we develop illus-
trates a possible direction for research on this issue.
   The available empirical literature provides credible, causal estimates of the effect of roads, rail-
roads and subways on outcomes such as population density, land rents and output. In addition to
providing particular elasticity estimates, this literature is large enough to suggest three preliminary
conclusions. First, that the effects of different types of infrastructure are similar across economies
at different stages of development and are not especially sensitive to the spatial scale of the unit of
observation. Second, that different modes of transportation are not interchangeable. Railroads affect
production more than population and the effects of railroads on the location of production varies sys-
tematically with the weight to value ratio of output, while the spatial organization of population is
more sensitive to roads and subways than to railroads. Finally, and unsurprisingly, institutions mat-
ter. The existing empirical literature suggests that politics plays an important role in the allocation of
infrastructure and that these politics vary systematically across countries.
   Determining the extent to which the effects of transportation infrastructure reflect growth or reor-
ganization is fundamental to understanding its role in the spatial organization of economic activity.
Indeed, this question is at the heart of Fogel’s classic study of railroads in the late 19th century United
States. While the current empirical literature provides credible causal estimates of the effects of trans-
portation infrastructure, it is impossible for the reduced form regressions conducted by almost all of
the empirical papers that we survey to separately identify the effect of transportation infrastructure
on the growth and reorganization of economic activity. We suggest two approaches to this problem,
one is a simple extension of the existing reduced form literature, and the second is an implementa-
tion of our structural model. The handful of papers which shed light on this question suggest that
reorganization is often about as important as growth. This is an important area for further research.
   The remainder of this chapter is structured as follows. Section 2 reports some descriptive evi-
dence on transportation costs across countries and over time. Section 3 introduces the theoretical
framework that we use to organize our discussion of the empirical evidence. Section 4 uses the
model to develop a reduced-form framework for examining the impacts of transport infrastructure
on the distribution of economic activity between and within cities. Section 5 uses this reduced-form
framework to review existing empirical evidence on these impacts. Section 6 discusses the interpre-
tation of this existing evidence. Section 7 summarizes our conclusions.


                                                    3
2     Stylized Facts about Transportation

In this section, we present stylized facts about transportation costs for goods and people, both over
a long historical time period and across countries.4 Key features of the data are as follows. First,
there is a secular decline in transportation costs for goods. Second, there is a change in the relative
importance of different transport modes over time (e.g. rail versus road versus air) and for value
versus weight. Third, transportation costs for people continue to be important. Commuting costs
remain substantial, both in terms of the opportunity cost of time and in terms of overall household
expenditure.

2.1     Transportation Costs for Goods

To provide a rough indication of the real resources involved in the transportation sector over time,
Figure 1 displays the share of the transport sectors in U . S .             GDP   from the late nineteenth to the early
twentieth century.5 The striking feature of this figure is the long secular decline in the share of the
transport sector, which is even more rapid towards the end of the twentieth century if air transport
is included. The share of U . S .      GDP   attributed to transportation6 has fallen from about 8% in 1929 to
about 3% by 1990, of which about one quarter is air transport. While these numbers are striking, they
may reflect the increased importance of non-traded services rather than a decrease in the importance
of transportation. In addition, while these GDP figures tell us about the resources devoted to moving
goods, they do not tell us about the amount and value of the goods being moved.
      To provide a more direct measure, Figure 2 displays the transport costs for a given mode of
transport (railroads) in the       U.S.   over a similar time period (measured as costs per ton mile in 2001
dollars). The figure confirms a secular decline in transport costs over time. The price per ton mile of
rail freight fell from about 18.5 cents in 1890 to about 2 in 2000. Figure 3 compares the evolution of the
cost of truck, rail and pipeline transport costs for the U . S . during the post Second World War period
(measured as revenue per ton mile in 2001 dollars). As apparent from the figure, truck transport is
substantially more expensive than rail transport, and its real costs have fallen even more rapidly than
those of rail transport over this period.7
      Figure 4 shows the evolution of ton miles of freight over time from the mid-1960s. Rail is rela-
tively more important than trucks when we measure volume shipped than value because of a widely
observed selection effect in which more expensive items are disproportionately shipped by the more
expensive transport mode.8 As a share of the value of goods, Glaeser and Kohlhase (2004) find that
    4 For a more detailed analysis of the evolution of transport costs over time in the U . S ., see Glaeser and Kohlhase (2004).
    5 Figures 1–4 replicate similar figures that appear in Glaeser and Kohlhase (2004).
    6 Defined as rail, water, pipeline, trucking, warehousing, air transport, transportation services and local and interurban

rail transit.
    7 These figures invite the question of why people use trucks at all, the nominally more costly mode. Although trucks

have a higher cost per ton mile than rail, the real cost of quality-adjusted transport services also depends on speed, flexi-
bility, reliability and a number of other attributes. The large-scale reallocation of transport expenditure from rail to trucks
following the invention of the internal combustion engines suggests that this invention was associated with a substantial
reduction in the real cost of quality-adjusted transport services, at least for many types of shipments and journeys.
    8 This is an example of the Alchian-Allen effect from the international trade literature or “Shipping the good apples



                                                               4
for heavy low-value goods traveling by truck, e.g., lumber, the cost of an average shipment distance
can be as high as 20% of the value of the good. For more typical sectors this value is of the order
of 5%. For goods travelling by rail, the corresponding values range from one tenth to two percent.
These findings highlight that the cost of moving freight has dropped dramatically to the point that
freight transportation is about 3% of the U . S . economy and that freight charges make up only a small
share of the value of final output.
    To show that these patterns are not specific to the U . S ., Figure 5 describes ton kilometers of do-
mestic trade for seven countries by mode and year. While there are differences between countries,
several patterns are clear. First, there is a general trend up in the amount of domestic trade, as ex-
pected given a secular increase in the level economic activity over time. Second, trucking is not the
dominant mode of travel in any of our countries by this metric. Third, the amount of material being
moved is immense.9
    Table 1 shows the value of international trade by mode for a sample of countries in 2007. In figure
5 we see that the share of ton kilometers that travel by air is negligible. In contrast, in table 1, we see
that the share of the value of trade travelling by air is often large. While the two tables are not directly
comparable, one measures domestic trade and the other measures international trade, together they
strongly suggest that high value goods travel by air and low value goods travel by ship or rail.
    Table 2 compares employment in for hire transportation by mode for Canada, Mexico, and the
U.S.   in 2002 or 2003 (depending on data availability). Transportation is typically smaller as a share
of employment than as a share of               GDP .   The share of employment in transportation is about 3%
for the   U.S.   and Canada, and almost 6% for Mexico. In all three countries, the largest fraction of
transportation employment is devoted to trucking. Note that the share of labor devoted to for hire
transportation is close to the same as the share devoted to commuting.
    A striking feature of international trade in goods is the extent to which the volume of trade in
goods declines with distance. Hillberry and Hummels (2008) examines the pattern of shipments
between U . S . mining, manufacturing and wholesaling firms and find that three quarters of all ship-
ments, weighted by the value of shipments, begin and end in the same zipcode, a conclusion that
does not appear to be driven by shipments from wholesalers to retailers. Hummels (1999) documents
the cost of air freight between the 1950s and the 2000s and finds that it decreases by a factor of about
12.5, while the cost of shipping was approximately constant. For comparison, the corresponding
decrease for rail, from Glaeser and Kohlhase (2004), is about a factor of 8 for 110 years.10 Over the
same 1955 to 2004 period, Hummels (1999) documents 5-7% increases in the value and weight of
international trade and an 11% average annual increase in the share of traded value that travels by
air. Limão and Venables (2001) use data describing market price to ship a standard 40 foot container
out.”
   9 To get a sense for this, a typical coal train in the U . S . is about 100 cars long, about two kilometers, and each car carries

about 100 tons of coal, which implies 10,000 tons per train. If such a train travels 100 kilometers it provides one million ton
kilometers of freight service. To carry 5,000 billion ton kilometers of freight per year, a bit less than the current U . S . annual
total, we require about 1,200 such trains to operate 24 hours per day 365 days per year at 50 kph.
  10 Note that rail was at its peak in 1890 and airfreight was novel in 1950.




                                                                 5
from Baltimore Maryland to one of about 50 countries around the world in the late 1990s.11 In a
regression of total freight charge on a land-locked country indicator, sea distance and land distance
to destination, they find that the cost to ship a standard container 1,000km by sea is about 190 dollars
while to ship it the same distance over land is about 1,380 dollars. Recalling that a standard con-
tainer can hold about 30 tons, this gives sea rates of about half a cent per ton mile and land rates of
about 5 cents per ton mile, so that overland travel is about 10 times as expensive as sea travel. These
rates seem somewhat low compared to the price of U . S . truck and rail rates reported in Glaeser and
Kohlhase (2004) (28 cents per ton mile for trucks and 3 cents per ton mile for rail). Finally, Clark et al.
(2004) find that the cost of shipping all maritime freight to and from the U . S . is equal to about 5.25%
of the value of freight and that port efficiency is an important contributor to this cost.
     These facts paint a subtle picture. While the real costs of moving goods has fallen to astonishingly
low levels and the weight of trade is immense, the fact that not all trade travels by the cheapest mode
and that most trade travels very short distances, suggests the decline in the price per ton of moving
goods is not leading to the ‘death of distance’.
     While it is natural to think of time costs as being most important for the movement of people, the
rise of air trade suggests that time in transit is an increasingly important part of the cost of transit
for goods. A back of the envelope calculation bolsters this idea. The capacity of a typical 40 foot
container is about 30 tons. From Duranton et al. (2013), the value per ton of an average U . S . domestic
shipment of electrical appliances is about six thousand dollars per ton. Thus, a typical container
of   U.S.   electrical appliances can hold about $200,000 worth of freight. From Glaeser and Kohlhase
(2004), shipping this container 1,000 miles by rail will cost about 1, 000 × 30 × 0.023 = $700. At a 5%
annual rate, daily interest on a million dollar cargo is 200, 000 × 0.05/365 = $28, so that on a five day
journey the opportunity cost of travel time is about equal to a fifth of freight charges. An average ton
of manufactures is worth less than a tenth of this, while a typical ton of computer equipment is 15
times as valuable. At least for relatively high value to weight products, time in transit is important.
     Moreover, the predominance of short haul trade suggests that, not only are transportation costs
important, but the geography of production is influenced by transportation costs. For example, the
development of 19th century Chicago was heavily influenced by its location relative to its surround-
ing agricultural hinterland, as discussed in Cronon (1991). This points to an important econometric
problem in interpreting the transport costs data presented so far: these data describe equilibrium
transport costs. Therefore, they do not isolate the supply-side production function (or cost func-
tion) for transportation, but are rather influenced by both demand and supply. Although these data
on transport costs are still suggestive, they capture both the cost of transportation (supply) and the
endogenous organization of economic activity in space in response to the cost of transportation (de-
mand). This presents important and difficult econometric problems to which we return below.
     Another striking feature of micro data on trade and production is Atalay et al. (2013)’s finding
  11 To
      get a sense for the nature of the sample, when the countries are ranked by kilometers of paved road per person,
the median country is Kenya. For evidence on the role of containerization in reducing international transport costs, see
Bernhofen et al. (2013).


                                                           6
that most vertically integrated firms actually ship very little between plants. From the above, we
have the puzzling collection of facts: the cost of moving goods is a small fraction of their value, most
shipments occur over very small distances, most shipments do not travel by the cheapest mode, and
the time cost of freight is probably important. One possible way of rationalizing this combination of
findings is that there is something valuable about proximity other than the reduction in transporta-
tion costs, i.e., agglomeration effects including knowledge spillovers and idea flows. In this case,
trade could decline rapidly with distance even in a world in which transport costs are small, be-
cause most economic activity is clustered together for these other reasons and hence most economic
interactions are over short distances.
      Alternatively, one could question whether the idea that transportation costs are really as small as
share of value-added as some of the figures above suggest. Arguably labor used in transportation
should be compared to labor used in production and we should take into account the same kinds of
costs that we think about for commuting, time costs and scheduling costs.

2.2     Household travel and commuting

While the trade literature has typically focused on the movement of goods, another important source
of transport costs in the urban literature is the movement of people. These costs of transporting peo-
ple remain substantial, both in terms of the opportunity cost of time and in terms of a share of overall
household expenditure. Table 3 lists round trip commute times in minutes in a sample of countries
and years for which data was easily available. While we should be concerned that differences in
commute times across countries reflect sampling error and differences in survey methodology, with
this caveat, these data suggest that the country mean round trip commute is about 40 minutes in the
2000-5 window where we have the most observations. These times are fairly closely clustered, with
a standard deviation of just less than eight minutes. If the ‘work day’ consists of eight hours at work
and time in commute, then commuting consumes about 7.5% of labor. Alternatively, if we value time
in commute at half the wage (as is common in the transportation economics literature, see Small and
Verhoef (2007)) and suppose an eight-hour work day, then the value of commute time is about equal
to 3.5% of the value of labor. While this is a large number, it understates the cost of household travel
by restricting attention to commuters and commute trips.
      Alternatively, Schafer (2000) summarizes 26 national household travel surveys from countries all
over the world. Averaging across these surveys, again with the caveat about the comparability of
surveys, he finds that daily household travel time is about 73 minutes with a standard deviation of
about 12 minutes. If we value this time at half the wage and again suppose an eight-hour work day,
then the value of time spent in household travel is about 8% of the value of labor.                     12   If we take the
  12 We note that this estimate is problematic for at least two reasons. First, it assigns the time cost of an average worker

to an average traveler, when many travellers are likely to have a lower value of time. Second, it assigns the time cost of
an average worker to an average commuter, when wages probably vary systematically with commute distance. With this
said, on the basis of these surveys, a rough guess would be that the aggregate time cost of household travel is somewhere
between 3.5% and 8% of the aggregate value of labor in an economy.



                                                             7
labor share of GDP to be close to the current U . S . level at 0.6, then the time cost of household travel is
between 2.4 and 4.8% of GDP.
      Table 4 describes household expenditure shares on transportation for 26 countries and several
years. Again noting the possibility of different methodologies across countries, the mean expen-
diture share is about 16.2% for the 2000-2004 window and about 14.6% for the 2005-9 window with
standard deviations of 5.4 and 3.7%, respectively. Schafer (2000) investigates these shares using older
and somewhat more extensive national accounts data and finds that across countries the average ex-
penditure share for household travel is about 11% with a standard deviation of about 3%. Weighting
household transportation share by 0.6, about the share of expenditure in current             U.S.   GDP ,   and
adding time costs, we have that the total costs of household travel are between 9 and 11.4% of GDP.
      Two further points are made in Schafer (2000). First, for country level aggregates, per capita
travel time and expenditure share are negatively correlated. Second, for Zambia, only 5% of all trips
are longer than 10km while for the          U.S.   5% of trips are longer than 50km. To the extent that these
findings are driven by differences in transportation technologies, they suggest that the transferral of
developed-country transportation technologies to developing countries is likely to lead to substantial
changes in the spatial organization of economic activity.

2.3     External costs

We have so far concerned ourselves with private costs of transportation, time and private expense.
We now turn attention to two costs of transportation that are rarely priced, carbon emissions and
congestion.
      Table 5 presents total 2007 CO2e emissions for the transportation sector for Canada, Mexico, the
U.S.   and the UK. Total emissions for the U . S . in 2007 were about 7,000 Mt, so that the transportation
sector accounts for about 30% of U . S . emissions. To the extent that these costs of transportation are
not priced, the market allocation of resources to the transportation sector will be in general inefficient.
Note, that with a 100$US/ton social cost of carbon, or about 30$US/ ton CO2e, the social cost of CO2e
emissions from transportation in the U . S . is about 21 billion $US/year. This is only about one tenth
of one percent of U . S .   GDP .   Thus, while greenhouse gas emissions from transportation are important
in an absolute sense, they are small relative the total cost of transportation.
      Parry et al. (2007) provides a comprehensive survey of the externalities to automobile use, includ-
ing local air pollution, global air pollution, traffic congestion, traffic accidents and other externalities
(such as noise and highway maintenance costs). Couture et al. (2012) estimate the deadweight loss
from traffic congestion in the U . S . to be on the order of 100 bn $US/year, although we note that these
costs are already reflected in transportation expenditure data described above.




                                                           8
3      Theoretical Framework

In this section, we outline a multi-region extension of the Helpman (1998) model that follows Red-
ding and Sturm (2008) and Redding (2012). The model incorporates many locations, goods trans-
portation costs within and between locations, and commuting costs within locations. We use the
model to show the effects of improvements in transportation infrastructure on the spatial distribu-
tion of wages, land rents, population and trade within and between locations. Although the model
does not capture all of the theoretical foundations considered in the regional and urban literatures, it
captures many of the standard ingredients, and we use its predictions to structure our review of the
empirical evidence below.13

3.1     Preferences and Endowments

The economy consists of a set of locations indexed by n or i ∈ N, where n will typically refer to a
consuming region and i to a producing region. To refer to a pairwise quantity, such as a distance
or a quantity of trade, we use two subscripts with the first indicating the location of consumption
and the second the location of production. The economy is populated by a mass of representative
consumers, L̄, who are mobile across locations and are endowed with a single unit of labor that is
supplied inelastically with zero disutility. The effective supply of labor for each location i depends
on its population (Li ) and commuting technology (bi ), where commuting costs are assumed to take
the iceberg form. For each unit of labor residing in location i, only a fraction bi is available for
production, where 0 < bi < 1 and the remaining fraction 1 − bi is lost in commuting. While we treat
bi as a primitive of the model here, it could in principle depend on equilibrium population density
(e.g. if higher population density increases congestion costs).
      Preferences are defined over a consumption index of tradeable varieties, Cn , and consumption of
a non-tradeable amenity, Hn , which can be interpreted as housing. For simplicity, we treat the stock
of housing as a primitive of the model, although it could also in principle depend on equilibrium
population density (e.g. if a higher population density increases the supply of housing). The upper
level utility function is assumed to be Cobb-Douglas:14

                                                   µ   1− µ
                                          Un = Cn Hn              ,    0 < µ < 1.                                     (1)

The tradeables consumption index takes the standard constant elasticity of substitution (CES) form:
                                                       "                     # σ−σ 1
                                                                      σ −1
                                               Cn =        ∑ Mi cni     σ
                                                                                       ,
                                                           i∈ N

    13 The
         model builds on the new economic geography literature synthesized in Fujita et al. (1999). While this literature
assumes firm product differentiation and monopolistic competition, the model shares many properties with perfectly com-
petitive models such as Eaton and Kortum (2002) (see Redding (2012)) or the Armington model of product differentiation
by location (see Allen and Arkolakis (2013)). The organization of economic activity within countries has recently received
renewed attention, as in Cosar and Fajgelbaum (2013) and Ramondo et al. (2012).
  14 For empirical evidence using U . S . data in support of the constant housing expenditure share implied by the Cobb-

Douglas functional form, see Davis and Ortalo-Magne (2011).


                                                                  9
where σ is the elasticity of substitution between varieties and we assume that varieties are substitutes
(σ > 1); cni denotes consumption in country n of a variety produced in country i; we have used the
fact that the measure of varieties Mi produced in location i are consumed in location n in the same
amount cni . Varieties are assumed to be subject to iceberg trade costs. In order for one unit of a
variety produced in location i to arrive in location n, a quantity dni > 1 must be shipped, so that
dni − 1 measures proportional trade costs. The price index dual to the tradeables consumption index
Cn is given by:
                                                "                 #1/(1−σ)
                                         Pn =       ∑ Mi p1ni−σ              ,                       (2)
                                                    i∈ N

where we have used the fact that the measure Mi of varieties produced in location i face the same
elasticity of demand and charge the same equilibrium price pni = dni pi to consumers in location n.
      Applying Shephard’s lemma to the tradeables price index, equilibrium demand in location n for
a tradeable variety produced in i is:

                                    xni = pi−σ (dni )1−σ (µvn Ln ) ( Pn )σ−1 ,                       (3)

where vn Ln denotes total income which equals total expenditure and, with Cobb-Douglas utility,
consumers spend a constant share of their income, µ, on tradeables.
      With constant expenditure shares and an inelastic supply of the non-tradeable amenity, the equi-
librium price of this amenity depends solely on the expenditure share, (1 − µ), total income, vn Ln ,
and the supply of the non-tradeable amenity, H̄n :

                                                       (1 − µ ) v n L n
                                               rn =                     .                            (4)
                                                           H̄n
      Total income is the sum of labor income and expenditure on the non-tradeable amenity, which is
assumed to be redistributed lump-sum to the location’s residents:

                                                                             w n bn L n
                                v n L n = w n bn L n + ( 1 − µ ) v n L n =              ,            (5)
                                                                                 µ

where we have used the fact that only a fraction bn of the labor in location i is used in production
because of commuting costs. Therefore total labor income equals the wage per effective unit of labor
(wn ) times the measure of effective units of labor (bn Ln ).

3.2     Production Technology

There is a fixed cost in terms of labor of producing tradeable varieties (F > 0) and a constant variable
cost that depends on a location’s productivity (Ai ). Both the fixed cost and the variable cost are
the same across all varieties produced within a location. The total amount of labor (li ) required to
produce xi units of a variety in location i is:
                                                                xi
                                                    li = F +       ,                                 (6)
                                                                Ai


                                                           10
where we allow productivity (Ai ) to vary across locations to capture variation in production funda-
mentals.
      Profit maximization implies that equilibrium prices are a constant markup over marginal cost:
                                                      
                                                   σ     dni wi
                                         pni =                  .                                 (7)
                                                  σ−1      Ai
Combining profit maximization and zero profits, equilibrium output of each tradeable variety equals
the following constant:
                                        x̄ = xi =    ∑ xni = Ai F(σ − 1).                                  (8)
                                                      n
      Labor market clearing for each location implies that labor demand equals the effective labor sup-
ply in that location, which is in turn determined by population mobility. Using the constant equi-
librium output of each variety (8) and the tradeables production technology (6), the labor market
clearing condition can be written as follows:

                                                bi Li = Mi l i = Mi Fσ,                                    (9)

where l i denotes the constant equilibrium labor demand for each variety. This relationship pins
down the measure of tradeable varieties produced in each location as a function of the location’s
population, the commuting technology, and the parameters of the model.

3.3     Market Access and Wages

Given demand in all markets and trade costs, the free on board price (pi ) charged for a tradeable va-
riety by a firm in each location must be low enough in order to sell the quantity x̄ and cover the firm’s
fixed production costs. We saw above that prices are a constant mark-up over marginal cost. There-
fore, given demand in all markets, the equilibrium wage in location i, wi , must be sufficiently low in
order for a firm to sell x̄ and cover its fixed production costs. Using demand (3), profit maximization
(7) and equilibrium output (8), we obtain the tradeables wage equation:
                             σ wi σ
                                   
                                           1
                                        = ∑ (wn bn Ln ) ( Pn )σ−1 (dni )1−σ .                             (10)
                           σ − 1 Ai        x n∈ N

      This relationship pins down the maximum wage that a firm in location i can afford to pay given
demand in all markets, trade costs and the production technology. On the right-hand side of the
equation, market n demand for tradeables produced in i depends on total expenditure on tradeable
varieties, µvn Ln = wn bn Ln , the tradeables price index, Pn , that summarizes the price of competing
varieties, and on bilateral trade costs, dni . Total demand for tradeables produced in i is the weighted
sum of demand in all markets, where the weights are these bilateral trade costs, dni .
      Following Redding and Venables (2004), we define the weighted sum of market demands faced
by firms as firm market access, f mai , such that the tradeables wage equation can be written more
compactly as:
                             σ −1
                   wi = ξ Ai σ [ f mai ]1/σ ,        f mai ≡   ∑      (wn bn Ln ) ( Pn )σ−1 (dni )1−σ ,   (11)
                                                               n∈ N


                                                          11
where ξ ≡ ( F (σ − 1))−1/σ (σ − 1) /σ collects together earlier constants. Therefore wages are increas-
ing in both productivity Ai and firm market access ( f mai ). Investments in transportation infrastruc-
ture that reduce the costs of transporting goods (dni ) to market demands ((wn bn Ln ) ( Pn )σ−1 ) raise
market access and wages. Improvements in the commuting technology (bn ) increase the effective
supply of labor (bn Ln ) and hence total income, which also raises market access and wages.

3.4     Labor Market Equilibrium

With perfect population mobility, workers move across locations to arbitrage away real income differ-
ences. Real income in each location depends on per capita income (vn ), the price index for tradeables
(Pn ), and the price of the non-tradeable amenity (rn ). Therefore population mobility implies:
                                                                   vn
                                             Vn =                             = V̄,                    (12)
                                                          ( Pn ) (rn )1−µ
                                                               µ


for all locations that are populated in equilibrium, where we have collected the constants µ−µ and
(1 − µ)−(1−µ) into the definition of Vn and V̄.
      The price index (2) that enters the above expression for real income depends on consumers’ access
to tradeable varieties, as captured by the measure of varieties and their free on board prices in each
location i, together with the trade costs of shipping the varieties from locations i to n. We summarize
consumers’ access to tradeables using the concept of consumer market access, cman :

                            Pn = [cman ]1/(1−σ) ,                  cman ≡     ∑ Mi ( pi dni )1−σ .     (13)
                                                                              i∈ N

      Substituting for vn , Pn and rn , the labor mobility condition (12) can be re-written to yield an ex-
pression linking the equilibrium population of a location (Ln ) to its productivity (An ), its commuting
technology (bn ), the supply of the non-traded amenity (Hn ), and the two endogenous measures of
market access introduced above (one for firms ( f man ) and one for consumers (cman )):
                                       µ      µ ( σ −1)                   µ                 µ
                                      1− µ    σ (1− µ )
                             Ln = χbn An                  H̄n ( f man ) σ(1−µ) (cman ) (1−µ)(σ−1) ,    (14)

where χ = V̄ −1/(1−µ) ξ µ/(1−µ) µ−µ/(1−µ) (1 − µ)−1 is a function of the common real income V̄.
      Therefore equilibrium population (Ln ) is increasing in the quality of the commuting technology
(bn ), the productivity of the final goods production technology (An ), and the supply of the non-
traded amenity ( H̄n ). Investments in transportation infrastructure that reduce the costs of transport-
ing goods (dni ) raise both firm and consumer market access ( f man and cman ) and hence increase
equilibrium population. Improvements in the commuting technology (bn ) also have positive indirect
effects on equilibrium population through higher firm and consumer market access.
      From land market clearing (4) and total labor income (5), land prices can be written in terms of
wages and total population:
                                                           ( 1 − µ ) w n bn L n
                                              rn =                              .                      (15)
                                                               µ        H̄n


                                                                   12
Therefore higher firm market access raises ( f man ) land prices through both higher wages (from (10))
and higher population (from (14)), while higher consumer market access (cman ) raises land prices
through a higher population alone (from (14)). Reductions in the cost of transporting goods (dni ) raise
land prices through both firm and consumer market access. Improvements in commuting technology
(bn ) raise land prices directly and also indirectly through higher wages and population.

3.5     Trade Flows

Using CES demand, the share of location n’s expenditure on varieties produced by location i can be
expressed as:
                                                              Mi p1ni−σ
                                                  πni =                         ,                                          (16)
                                                           ∑k∈ N Mk p1nk−σ
which, using the equilibrium pricing rule (7) and the labor market clearing condition for each location
(9), can be written as:
                                                     bi Li (dni wi )1−σ ( Ai )σ−1
                                        πni =                            1− σ
                                                                                               .                           (17)
                                                 ∑k∈ N bk Lk (dnk wk )          ( A k ) σ −1
This expression for bilateral trade shares (πni ) corresponds to a “gravity equation,” in which bilateral
trade between exporter i and importer n depends on both “bilateral resistance” (i.e. the bilateral
goods of trading goods between i and n (dni ) in the numerator) and “multilateral resistance” (i.e. the
bilateral costs for importer n of sourcing goods from all exporters k (dnk ) in the denominator). In this
gravity equation specification, bilateral trade depends on characteristics of the exporter i (e.g. the
exporter’s wage wi in the numerator), bilateral trade costs (dni ), and characteristics of the importer n
(i.e. the importer’s access to all sources of supply in the denominator).15
      Taking the ratio of these expenditure shares, the value of trade between locations (Xni ) relative to
trade within locations (Xnn ) is:

                                       Xni   πni    bi Li (dni wi )1−σ ( Ai )σ−1
                                           =     =                               .                                         (18)
                                       Xnn   πnn   bn Ln (dnn wn )1−σ ( An )σ−1

Therefore transportation infrastructure improvements that reduce the cost of transporting goods
within locations (dnn ) by the same proportion as they reduce the cost of transporting goods between
locations (dni ) leave the ratio of trade between locations to trade within locations unchanged. One
potential example is building roads within cities that make it easier for goods to circulate within the
city and to leave the city to connect with long distance highways. Transportation cost improvements
that reduce commuting costs for all locations (increase bn and bi ) also leave the ratio of trade between
locations to trade within locations unchanged.
      In this model with a single differentiated sector, all trade takes the form of intra-industry trade,
and transport infrastructure improvements affect the volume of this intra-industry trade. More gen-
erally, in a setting with multiple differentiated sectors that differ in terms of the magnitude of trade
 15 For   an insightful review of the gravity equation in the international trade literature, see Head and Mayer (2013).




                                                              13
costs (e.g. high value to weight versus low value to weight sectors), transport infrastructure im-
provements also affect the pattern of inter-industry trade and the composition of employment and
production across sectors within locations.

3.6     Welfare

We now show how the structure of the model can be used to derive an expression for the welfare
effects of transport infrastructure improvements in terms of observables. Using the trade share (16),
the price index (2) can be re-written in terms of each location’s trade share with itself and parameters:
                                                                                    1−1 σ
                                                σ                        bn L n                  dnn wn
                                          Pn =                                                          .                          (19)
                                               σ−1                      σFπnn                     An
Using this expression for the price index and land market clearing (15), the population mobility
condition (12) can be used to obtain another expression for equilibrium population in each location
as a function of fundamentals (bn , An , H̄n , dnn ), the location’s trade share with itself (πnn ) and the
common level of real income (V̄) across locations:
                                                             σ−µ 1                   µσ              σ(1σ−−µ1)−1
                                                    1                     1− µ     µ
                                                  σFπnn                 H̄n bnσ−1 An
                                  Ln =                                                              ,                  .        (20)
                                                                                                      
                                           1− µ 1− µ
                                                                                µ
                                                                            σ                 µ
                                         µ µ                              σ −1          V̄dnn

where terms in wages (wn ) have canceled and labor market clearing for the economy as a whole
implies:
                                                                ∑        Ln = L̄.                                                  (21)
                                                               n∈ N
      Re-arranging the population mobility condition (20), the real income in each location can be writ-
ten in terms of its population, trade share with itself and parameters.
                                                                                   
                                                     σ−µ 1             σ (1−µ)−1
                                                               −           σ −1             1− µ
                                                                                                        µσ
                                            1                                                                    µ
                                          σFπnn                Ln                       H̄n          bnσ−1 An
                             Vn =                                  1− µ                                            = V̄.         (22)
                                                            1− µ                  σ
                                                                                        µ       µ
                                                    µ        µ                  σ −1          dnn

      Writing the population mobility condition in this form shows that the change in each location’s
trade share with itself and the change in its population are sufficient statistics for the welfare effects
of improvements in transport technology that reduce the costs of trading goods (see Redding (2012)):
                                                                                                      
                                                             σ−µ 1                    σ(1−µ)−1
                                   Vn1               0                    L0n                                    V̄ 1
                                                                                         σ −1
                                                    πnn
                                          =                                                                =          ,            (23)
                                   Vn0               1
                                                    πnn                   L1n                                    V̄ 0
where the superscripts 0 and 1 denote the value of variables before and after the improvement in
transport technology respectively. The welfare effects of improvements in transport technology that
reduce commuting costs are similar but also depend directly on the change in commuting costs
(though the resulting increase in the effective supply of labor):
                                                                                                                
                                                 σµσ                   σ−µ 1                      σ (1−µ)−1
                            Vn1           bn1                  0                    L0n                                   V̄ 1
                                                  −1
                                                                                                       σ −1
                                                              πnn
                                  =                                                                                  =         .   (24)
                            Vn0           bn0                  1
                                                              πnn                   L1n                                   V̄ 0

                                                                         14
While these transport infrastructure improvements have uneven effects on wages, land prices, and
population, the mobility of workers across locations ensures that they have the same effect on welfare
across all populated locations.
      The intuition for the role of changes in the domestic trade share in the welfare effects of an im-
provement in transport technology can be seen from considering the extreme case in which the trans-
port improvement opens goods trade between locations. When a location is closed to goods trade,
its domestic trade share is necessarily equal to one. In contrast, once the location is opened to goods
trade, it has the potential to specialize and gain from trade with other locations. To the extent that
such trade is attractive, the domestic trade share will fall below one, and this fall in the domestic
trade share reflects welfare gains from trade.
      The intuition for the role of population changes in the welfare effects of an improvement in trans-
port technology is that labor mobility requires real wages to be equalized across all populated lo-
cations. Therefore, if goods trade is opened between locations, and some locations (e.g. coastal re-
gions) benefit more than other locations (e.g. interior regions) at the initial labor allocation, workers
must relocate to arbitrage away real wage differences. Those locations that experience larger welfare
gains from trade at the initial labor allocation will experience population inflows, which increases
the demand for the immobile factor land, and bids up land prices. In contrast, those locations that
experience smaller welfare gains from trade at the initial labor allocation will experience popula-
tion outflows, which decreases the demand for land, and bids down land prices. This process will
continue until real wages are again equalized across all populated locations.
      Therefore, together, the change in a location’s domestic trade share and its population are suffi-
cient statistics for the effects of a transport improvement that reduces the costs of trading goods (dni ).
A transport improvement that reduces the commuting costs for a region (bn ) also directly increases
the supply of labor for that region, which is taken into account in the welfare formula.

3.7     General Equilibrium

The general equilibrium of the model can be represented by the share of workers in each location
(λn = Ln / L̄), the share of each location’s expenditure on goods produced by other locations (πni )
and the wage in each location (wn ). Using labor income (5), the trade share (16), population mobility
(20) and labor market clearing (21), the equilibrium triple {λn , πni , wn } solves the following system
of equations for all i, n ∈ N (see Redding, 2012):

                                         w i bi λ i =   ∑      πni wn bn λn ,                         (25)
                                                        n∈ N


                                                 bi λi (dni wi /Ai )1−σ
                                    πni =                                       1− σ
                                                                                       ,              (26)
                                            ∑k∈ N bk λk (dnk wk /Ak )




                                                          15
                                                                  σ−µ 1      µσ
                                                                                                  σ(1σ−−µ1)−1
                                                1− µ          1                σ −1      µ −µ
                                              H̄n            πnn              bn        An dnn
                               λn =                                                                     σ(1σ−−µ1)−1 .       (27)
                                                                        σ−µ 1       µσ
                                                    1− µ            1                          µ −µ
                                      ∑k∈ N        Hk              πkk             bk σ −1
                                                                                              Ak dkk

The assumption that σ(1 − µ) > 1 corresponds to the “no black hole” condition in Krugman (1991)
and Helpman (1998). For parameter values satisfying this inequality, the model’s agglomeration
forces from love of variety, increasing returns to scale and transport costs (which are inversely related
to σ) are not too strong relative to its congestion forces from an inelastic supply of land (captured by
1 − µ). As a result, each location’s real income is monotonically decreasing in its population, which
ensures the existence of a unique stable non-degenerate distribution of population across locations.
      While the existence of a unique equilibrium ensures that the model remains tractable and amenable
to counterfactual analysis, often the rationale for transport investments is cast in terms of shifting the
distribution of economic activity between multiple equilibria. To the extent that such multiple equi-
libria exist, their analysis requires either consideration of the range of the parameter space for which
the model has multiple equilibria or the use of a richer theoretical framework.16

3.8     Counterfactuals

The system of equations for general equilibrium (25)-(27) can be used to undertake model-based
counterfactuals in an extension of the trade-based approach of Dekle et al. (2007) to incorporate factor
mobility across locations. The system of equations for general equilibrium must hold both before
and after any counterfactual change in for example transport infrastructure. Denote the value of
variables in the counterfactual equilibrium with a prime (x 0 ) and the relative value of variables in the
counterfactual and initial equilibria by a hat (x̂ = x 0 /x). Using this notation, the system of equations
for the counterfactual equilibrium (25)-(27) can be re-written as follows:

                                         ŵi b̂i λ̂i Yi =      ∑         π̂ni πni ŵn b̂n λ̂n Yn ,                           (28)
                                                              n∈ N

                                                                            1− σ
                                                 πni λ̂i b̂i dˆni ŵi / Âi
                                   π̂ni πni =                                   1− σ ,                                     (29)
                                                                   ˆ
                                              ∑k∈ N πnk λ̂i b̂i dnk ŵk / Âi
                                                                                                        σ −1
                                                                 −        µ        µσ                 σ (1−µ)−1
                                                                                µ −µ
                                              λn       H̄ˆ 1−µ π̂nnσ−1 b̂nσ−1 Ân dˆnn
                              λ̂n λn =                                                                        σ −1     ,   (30)
                                                                               µ         µσ                 σ (1−µ)−1
                                                                 1− µ −              µ −µ
                                         ∑k∈ N λk            H̄ˆ k π̂kk σ−1 b̂kσ−1 Âk dˆkk

where Yi = wi bi Li denotes labor income in the initial equilibrium.
  16 Anempirical literature has examined whether large and temporary shocks have permanent effects on the location of
economic activity and interpreted these permanent effects as either evidence of multiple equilibria or path dependence
more broadly. See for example Bleakley and Lin (2012), Davis and Weinstein (2002), Maystadt and Duranton (2014),
Redding et al. (2011) and Sarvimäki et al. (2010).




                                                                      16
     Given an exogenous change in transportation infrastructure that affects the costs of trading goods
  ˆ
(dni ) or the costs of commuting (b̂n ), this system of equations (28)-(30) can be solved for the coun-
terfactual changes in wages (ŵn ), population shares (λ̂n ) and trade shares (π̂ni ). Implementing
these counterfactuals requires only observed values of              GDP ,   trade shares and population shares
{Yn , πni , λn } for all locations i, n ∈ N in the initial equilibrium. For parameter values for which
the model has a unique stable equilibrium (σ(1 − µ) > 1), these counterfactuals yield determinate
predictions for the impact of the change in transportation costs. From the welfare analysis above,
the changes in each location’s population and its domestic trade share provide sufficient statistics for
the welfare effect of transport improvements that affect the costs of trading goods (dˆni ). In contrast,
transport improvements that affect the costs of commuting (b̂n ) also have direct effects on welfare
in addition to their effects through population and domestic trade shares. With perfect population
mobility, these welfare effects must be the same across all populated locations.


4      Reduced-form Econometric Framework
4.1     A simple taxonomy

We survey the recent empirical literature investigating the effects of infrastructure on the geographic
distribution of economic activity. The preponderance of this literature can be described with a re-
markably simple taxonomy.
      Let t index time periods, and, preserving the notation from above, let n and i ∈ N index a set of
geographic locations, typically cities or counties. Let Lit denote an outcome of interest for location
i at time t; employment, population, rent or centralization. Let xit be a vector of location and time
specific covariates, and finally, let bit and dit denote the transportation variables of interest. In par-
ticular, consistent with notation in our theoretical model, let bit denote a measure of transportation
infrastructure that is internal to unit i, and dit a measure of transportation infrastructure external
to unit i. For example, bit could count radial highways within a metropolitan area while dit could
indicate whether a rural county is connected to a highway network.
      With this notation in place, define the ‘intracity regression’ as

                                     Lit = C0 + C1 bit + C2 xit + δi + θt + eit ,                                 (31)

where δi denotes location specific time invariant unobservables, θt a common time effect for all lo-
cations and eit the time varying location specific residual. The coefficient of interest is C1 , which
measures the effect of within-city infrastructure on the city level outcome.17
      Similarly, define the ‘intercity regression’ as

                                     Lit = C0 + C1 dit + C2 xit + δi + θt + eit ,                                 (32)
    17 Pioneering
               studies of the role of automobiles and highways in reorganizing the distributions of population and eco-
nomic activity within metropolitan areas are Moses (1958) and Moses and Williamson (1963).




                                                          17
which differs from the intracity regression only in that the explanatory variable of interest describes
transportation costs between unit i and other units, rather than within-city infrastructure.
      These equations require some discussion before we turn to a description of results. First, both
estimating equations are natural reduced form versions of equation (14), or if the outcome of inter-
est is land rent, (15). Thus, they are broadly consistent with the theoretical framework described
earlier. Second, comparing the regression equations with their theoretical counterparts immediately
suggests four inference problems that estimations of the intracity and intercity regressions should
confront.
      First, equilibrium employment or land rent depends on the location specific productivity, An .
This will generally be unobserved, and thus will be reflected in the error terms of our regression
equations. It is natural to expect that intracity and intercity infrastructure will depend on location
specific productivity, and hence, be endogenous in the two regression equations. Second, equilibrium
employment or land rent depends on the level of a location specific amenity, Hn . In our model, this
reflects a supply of housing, but in reality, may also reflect unobserved location characteristics that
augment or reduce the welfare of residents at a location. We might also be concerned that such
amenities, to the extent that they are unobserved, affect infrastructure allocation and give rise to an
endogeneity problem. More generally, the intercity and intracity regressions do not by themselves
distinguish between the demand for and supply of transportation.
      Third, equations (14) and (15) involve expressions for market access not present explicitly in the
estimating equations. To the extent that market access depends on transportation costs between
cities, the treatment of market access in these estimations deserves careful attention. Fourth, to the
extent that there are general equilibrium effects of transport infrastructure on all locations, these
are not captured by C1 . Instead they are captured in the time effects θt and cannot be separated
from other time-varying factors that are common to all locations without further assumptions. More
generally, in general equilibrium, transport investments between a pair of regions i and j can have
effects on third regions k, which are not captured by the transportation variables for regions i and j.

4.2     Identification of causal effects

As discussed above, perhaps the biggest empirical challenge in estimating the intercity and intracity
regressions is constructing the appropriate counterfactual for the absence of the transport improve-
ment. In particular, ordinary least squares (OLS) regressions comparing treated and untreated lo-
cations are unlikely to consistently estimate the causal effect of the transport improvement, because
the selection of locations into the treatment group is non-random. The main empirical approach
to addressing this challenge has been to develop instruments for the assignment of transport im-
provements that plausibly satisfy the exclusion restriction of only affecting the economic outcome
of interest through the transport improvement.18 More formally, this approach to identifying the
  18 While the program evaluation literature suggests other complementary approaches, such as conducting randomized

experiments with transport improvements or the use of matching estimators, these have been less widely applied in this



                                                         18
causal effects posits an additional first-stage regression that determines the assignment of transport
infrastructure:
                                 Iit = D0 + D1 xit + D2 zit + ηi + γt + uit ,                               (33)

where Iit ∈ {bit , dit } is the transportation variables of interest (depending on whether the specifi-
cation is intracity or intercity); xit are the location and time-varying controls from the second-stage
regression ((31) or (32)); ηi are location specific time invariant unobservables; γt are time indicators;
uit is a time varying location specific residual; and zit are the instruments or excluded exogenous
variables.
    Combining the second-stage equation ((31) or (32)) with the first-stage equation (33), the impact
of transport infrastructure on the economic outcomes of interest (C1 ) can be estimated using two-
stage least squares. Credible identification of the causal impact of transport infrastructure requires
that two conditions are satisfied: (i) the instruments have power in the first-stage regression (D2 6= 0)
and (ii) the instruments satisfy the exclusion restriction of only affecting the economic outcomes of
interest through transport infrastructure conditional on the controls xit , that is, cov(eit , uit ) = 0.
    The existing literature has followed three main instrumental variables strategies. The first, the
planned route IV, is an instrumental variables strategy which relies on planning maps and documents
as a source of quasi-random variation in the observed infrastructure. The second, the historical route
IV, relies on very old transportation routes as a source of quasi-random variation in observed in-
frastructure. The third, the inconsequential place approach, relies on choosing a sample that is incon-
sequential in the sense that unobservable attributes do not affect the placement of infrastructure.
The plausibility of these identification strategies depends sensitively on the details of their imple-
mentation and is sometimes contentious. With this said, we here briefly describe these identification
strategies and the rationale for their use. We avoid discussion of the validity of these strategies in
particular contexts. Broadly, the strategies we describe are the best approaches currently available
for estimating the causal effects of transport infrastructure on the organization of economic activity.

4.2.1   Planned Route IV

Baum-Snow (2007) pioneers the planned route IV by using a circa 1947 plan for the interstate high-
way network as a source of quasi-random variation in the way the actual network was developed.
In the specific context of Baum-Snow (2007), this means counting the number of planned radial high-
ways entering a metropolitan area and using this variable to predict the actual number of interstate
highway rays. Since the network plan was developed under a mandate to serve military purposes,
the validity of this instrument hinges on the extent to which military purposes are orthogonal to the
needs of post war commuters. Several other empirical investigations into the effects of the U . S . road
and highway network exploit instruments based on the 1947 highway plan, while Hsu and Zhang
(2012) develop a similar instrument for Japan. Michaels et al. (2012) uses an even earlier plan of the
empirical literature.




                                                     19
U.S.    highway network, the ‘Pershing plan’, as a source of quasi-random variation in the U . S . high-
way network. Although Donaldson (2013) stops short of using hypothetical planned networks as
instruments for realized networks, he does compare the development of districts without railroads
and without planned railroads to those without railroads but with planned railroads. That these sets
of districts develop in the same way suggests that the planning process did not pick out districts on
the basis of different unobservable characteristics.

4.2.2    Historical Route IV

Duranton and Turner (2012) develop the historical route IV approach. In regressions predicting MSA
level economic outcomes they rely on maps of historical transportation networks, the U . S . railroad
network circa 1898 and the routes of major expeditions of exploration of the U . S . between 1535 and
1850 as sources of quasi-random variation in the U . S . interstate highway network at the end of the
20th century. The validity of these instruments requires that, conditional on controls, factors that do
not directly affect economic activity in U . S . metropolitan areas at the end of the 20th century deter-
mine the configuration of these historical networks. A series of papers, Duranton and Turner (2011),
Duranton and Turner (2012) and Duranton et al. (2013), use the two historical route instruments and
the 1947 highway plan as sources of quasi-random variation in regressions predicting metropolitan
total vehicle kilometers traveled, changes in metropolitan employment, and trade flows between
cities as functions of the interstate highway network.
   One distinctive feature of Duranton and Turner (2011), Duranton and Turner (2012), and Du-
ranton et al. (2013) is the use of multiple instruments based on different sources of variation. With
more instruments than endogenous variables, the specification can be estimated with either all or
subsets to the instruments, and over-identification tests can be used as a check on the identifying
assumptions. Conditional on one of the instruments being valid, these over identification tests check
the validity of the other instruments. Given that the instruments exploit quite different sources of
variation in the data, if a specification passes the over-identification test, this implies that either all of
the instruments are valid or that an improbable relationship exists between the instruments and the
errors of the first and second-stage regressions.
   Several other authors develop historical transportation networks as a source of quasi-random
variation in modern transportation networks in other regions. Baum-Snow et al. (2012) rely on Chi-
nese road and rail networks from 1962 as a source of quasi-random variation in road and rail net-
works after 2000. Garcia-Lopez et al. (2013) use 18th century postal routes and Roman roads for
Spain. Hsu and Zhang (2012) relies on historical Japanese railroad networks. Martincus et al. (2012)
uses the Inca roads for Peru. Duranton and Turner (2012) provides a more detailed discussion of the
validity of these instruments.




                                                     20
4.2.3    Inconsequential Units Approach

To estimate the intercity regression, researchers often rely on the inconsequential units approach to
identification, sometimes in conjunction with one or both of the instrumental variables strategies de-
scribed above. If we consider economically small units lying between large cities, then we expect
that intercity links will traverse these units only when they lie along a convenient route between the
two large cities. That is, we expect that the unobserved characteristics of units between large cities
are inconsequential to the choice of route, and therefore that the connection status of these units will
not depend on the extent to which these units are affected by the road. Chandra and Thompson
(2000) pioneer this strategy in their analysis of the effect of access to the interstate highway system
on rural counties in the U . S .. By restricting attention to rural highways they hope to restrict attention
to counties that received interstates ‘accidentally’, by virtue of lying between larger cities. While it is
difficult to assess the validity of this approach, some of the regressions reported in Michaels (2008)
are quite similar to those in Chandra and Thompson (2000) but rely on the 1947 planned highway
network for identification. That the two methods arrive at similar estimates is reassuring. Banerjee
et al. (2012) also use the inconsequential units strategy in their analysis of the effects of Chinese trans-
portation networks. In particular, they construct a hypothetical transportation network connecting
historical treaty ports to major interior trading centers. Counties near these predicted networks are
there accidentally in the same sense that rural counties may be accidentally near interstates in the
U.S.    Similarly, and also for China, Faber (2013) constructs a hypothetical least cost network con-
necting major Chinese cities and examines the impact of proximity to this network on outcomes in
nearby rural counties.
      These three econometric responses to the probable endogeneity of transportation infrastructure
are widely used. Other approaches to this problem typically exploit natural experiments that, while
they may provide credible quasi-random variation in infrastructure, are not easily extended to other
applications.

4.3     Distinguishing growth from reorganization

As Fogel observes in his classic analysis of the role of railroad construction in the economic devel-
opment of the 19th century U . S . (Fogel, 1964), an assessment of the economic impacts of transporta-
tion infrastructure depends fundamentally on whether changes in transportation costs change the
amount of economic activity or reorganize existing economic activity. For example, the welfare im-
plications of a road or light rail line that attracts pre-existing firms are quite different than those of
one that leads to the creation of new firms. Importantly, this issue is distinct from the endogene-
ity problem discussed above. The problem of endogeneity follows from non-random assignment
of transportation infrastructure to ‘treated’ observations. The problem of distinguishing between
growth and reorganization persists even when transportation is assigned to observations at random.
Even in the case in which a region experiences an exogenous change in transport infrastructure, the



                                                    21
observed effects on economic activity in the region can either reflect reorganization or growth. This
same issue of distinguishing growth and reorganization appears in the literature evaluating place-
based policies, as discussed in Neumark and Simpson (2014) in this volume.19
    Figure 6 illustrates a simple hypothetical data set with the same structure as those typically used
to estimate the intercity and intracity estimating equations. Figure 6 describes a sample consisting
of three regions: a region that is ‘treated’ in some way that affects transportation costs in this region,
e.g., a new road; an untreated region which is typically near the treated region but is not subject to a
change in transportation infrastructure; and third, everyplace else. The outcome variable of interest
is y and the new road creates a units of this outcome in the treated region and displaces d units from
the untreated to the treated region.
    Fundamentally, the intercity and intracity regressions estimate the effect of treatment on the dif-
ference between treated regions and untreated comparison regions. As the figure makes clear, the
difference in the outcome between treated and untreated regions is 2d + a, the compound effect of
reorganization and growth. At its core, the problem of distinguishing between reorganization and
growth requires us to identify two quantities. Without further assumptions, these two quantities
cannot be separately identified if we estimate only a single equation, regardless of whether it is the
intercity or intracity estimating equation. To identify both the growth and reorganization effect, we
must estimate two linearly independent equations.
    In the context of the sample described in figure 6 these two equations could involve a comparison
of any two of the three possible pairs of regions, i.e., treated and untreated, untreated and residual,
treated and residual. Alternatively, with panel data, one could estimate the change in the treated
region following a change in transportation costs and also the change in the untreated region follow-
ing the change in the treated region. While the literature has carefully addressed the possibility that
transportation costs and infrastructure are not assigned to regions at random, few authors conduct
estimations allowing the separate identification of growth and reorganization.
    While figure 6 suggests simple methods for distinguishing between growth and reorganization,
this reflects implicit simplifying assumptions. In particular, the new road in the treated district does
not lead to migration of economic activity from the residual to the untreated or the treated region and
does not cause growth in the untreated or residual district. If we allow these effects, then the effect
of a new road in the treated region is characterized by six parameters rather than two. Identifying all
of these parameters will generally require estimating six linearly independent equations and will not
generally be possible with cross-sectional data. In the context of ‘real data’, with a more complex ge-
ography and many regions subject to treatment, distinguishing between growth and reorganization
requires a priori restrictions on the nature of these effects.
    The literature has, as yet, devoted little attention to what these identifying assumptions should
be. As suggested by figure 6, this problem can be resolved with transparent but ad hoc assumptions.
  19 For  approaches to distinguishing growth and reorganization in this literature on place-based policies, see Criscuolo
et al. (2012) and Thierry Mayer and Py (2013).



                                                           22
Alternatively, the theoretical model described in section 3 provides a theoretically founded basis for
distinguishing between growth and reorganization which derives from the iceberg structure of trans-
portation costs and increasing returns to scale in cities. Importantly, if the new road in the treated
region affects the level of economic activity in all three regions, then no cross-sectional estimate can
recover this effect. This requires time series data or cross-sectional data describing ‘replications’ of
figure 6. More generally, for a penetration road or single transport project, it may be possible to con-
struct plausible definitions of treated, untreated and residual regions, as in Figure 6. However, for an
evaluation of a national highway system, there may be no plausible residual regions, in which case
we are necessarily in a general equilibrium world.


5     Reduced-form empirical results
5.1     Intracity infrastructure and the geographic organization of economic activity
5.1.1    Infrastructure and decentralization

Baum-Snow (2007) partitions a sample of U . S . metropolitan areas into an ‘old central business dis-
trict’, the central business district circa 1950, and the residual suburbs. He then estimates a version
of the intracity regression, equation (31), in first differences, where the unit of observation is a U . S .
MSA ,   the measure of infrastructure is the count of radial interstate highways, and the instrument is a
measure of rays based on the 1947 highway plan discussed above. He finds that each radial segment
of the interstate highway network causes about a 9% decrease in central city population. Since one
standard deviation in the number of rays in an MSA is 1.5, this means that a one standard deviation
increase in the number of rays causes about a 14% decrease in central city population. To get a sense
for the magnitude of this effect,   U.S.   population grew by 64% during his study period,      MSA   popu-
lation by 72% and constant boundary central city population declined by 17%. Thus, the interstate
highway system can account for almost the entire decline in old central city population densities.
Note that, since Baum-Snow (2007) estimates the share of population in the treated area, he avoids
the problem of distinguishing between growth and reorganization. The share of population in the
central city reflects changes in the level of central city and suburb and migration between the two.
      This result has been extended to two other contexts. Baum-Snow et al. (2012) conduct essentially
the same regression using data describing Chinese prefectures between 1990 and 2010. They first
partition each prefecture into the constant boundary administrative central city and the residual
prefecture, and then examine the effect of several measures of infrastructure on the decentralization
of population and employment. They rely on a historical routes (from 1962) as a source of quasi-
random variation in city level infrastructure. They find that each major highway ray causes about a
5% decrease in central city population. No other measure of infrastructure; kilometers of highways,
ring road capacity, kilometers of railroads, ring rail capacity or radial rail capacity, has a measurable
effect on the organization of population in Chinese prefectures. Baum-Snow et al. (2012) also examine
the effect of infrastructure on the organization of production. They find that radial railroads and


                                                     23
highway ring capacity both have dramatic effects on the organization of production. In particular,
each radial railroad causes about 26% of central city manufacturing to migrate to the periphery while
ring roads also have a dramatic effect. This effect varies by industry. Industries with relatively low
weight to value ratios are more affected. None of the other infrastructure measures they investigate
affect the organization of production.
    Finally, Garcia-Lopez et al. (2013) consider the effect of limited access highways on the organiza-
tion of population in Spanish cities between 1991 and 2011. Their unit of observation is one of 123
Spanish metropolitan regions. They conduct a version of the intracity regression in first differences
to explain the change in central city population between 1991 and 2011 as a function of changes in the
highway network over the same period. They rely on three historical road networks to instrument
for changes in the modern network: the Roman road network; a network of postal roads, circa 1760;
and a network of 19th century main roads. They find that each radial highway causes about a 5%
decrease in central city population, and that kilometers of central city or suburban highways have no
measurable effect. Using a similar instrumentation strategy, Àngel Garcia-López (2012) examines the
impact of transport improvements on the location of population within the city of Barcelona. Consis-
tent with some of the findings discussed above, improvements to the highway and railroad systems
are found to foster population growth in suburban areas, whereas the expansion of the transit system
is found to affect the location of population inside the central business district (CBD).20
    Where the decentralization papers above investigate the effect on central cities of infrastructure
improvements which reduce the cost of accessing peripheral land, the Ahlfeldt et al. (2012) consid-
ers the effect of changes in transportation cost between two adjacent parts of the same central city.
Specifically, Ahlfeldt et al. (2012) consider the effect of the construction and destruction of the Berlin
wall, which bisected the historical central business district, on the organization of population, em-
ployment and land values in 1936, before the partition of the city, 1986, shortly before reunification,
and 2006, 15 years after reunification. That is, when the cost of commuting from the West to the East
was, low, prohibitively high, and low again.
    Methodologically, Ahlfeldt et al. (2012) differs dramatically from the centralization papers above.
Their sample consists of approximately 16,000 ‘statistical blocks’ comprising metropolitan Berlin,
each with a population of about 250 people in 2005. Loosely, for each block, Ahlfeldt et al. (2012)
record location, population, land rent and employment in the three years of their study. They use
these data to estimate a first differences variant of the intercity regression, equation (32). The reduced
form results in Ahlfeldt et al. (2012) show that the construction of the Berlin Wall caused the central
business district to migrate so that it was more nearly central in the territory of West Berlin, and
that the removal of the Berlin Wall approximately reversed this process. The identifying assumption
underlying this natural experiment is that change in access to economic activity following from divi-
sion and reunification is uncorrelated with other changes in the way the city was organized, except
  20 One issue that has received relatively little attention in the intracity literature is the role of transport infrastructure in
segregating cities and leaving some neighborhoods “on the wrong side of the tracks.”



                                                                24
through its effect on access to economic activity. In addition to these reduced form results, Ahlfeldt
et al. (2012) also conduct structural estimations, which we discuss later.

5.1.2   Infrastructure and miscellaneous city level outcomes

Beyond the literature investigating infrastructure and decentralization, a series of papers by Duran-
ton and Turner investigates the relationship between roads and employment growth, intercity trade
and driving.
   Duranton and Turner (2012) investigate the relationship between employment growth in            U.S.

MSA s   between 1984 and 2004. Their principle regression is a variant of the intracity regression for
which the outcome is employment growth between 1984 and 2004, and their measure of transporta-
tion is kilometers of interstate highways within city boundaries. They rely on the 1947 highway
plan, a map of the 1898 railroad network and maps of historical routes of exploration as sources of
exogenous variation in the interstate highway network. Their main finding is that a 10% increase in
kilometers of interstate highways causes about a 1.5% increase in employment over 20 years. Alter-
natively, a one standard deviation in initial roads causes a change in employment growth of about
15% over 20 years. This is a bit under two thirds of the sample average growth rate.
   Duranton and Turner (2012) also estimate a second equation in which they examine the effect
on employment growth of changes in the stock of roads in the nearest large city. In the context of
figure 6, this corresponds to looking for an effect in the treated region from changes in the residual
region. They find no effect. This regression, together with their main intracity regression, provides
a tentative basis for concluding that roads cause employment growth in cities rather than simply
rearranging employment across cities.
   In a second exercise, Duranton et al. (2013) investigate the relationship between intercity trade
flows in 2007 and the interstate highway network. Their unit of analysis is a U . S . ‘commodity flow
survey area’: a reporting unit somewhat larger than an      MSA .   They record the weight and value
of pairwise trade flows between 69 such units and also aggregate flows in and out of each area by
sector. On the basis of a methodology pioneered in Redding and Venables (2004) and Anderson and
van Wincoop (2003) they develop two estimating equations. The first is a variant of the intercity
regression and explains pairwise trade flows of weight and value as a function of pairwise interstate
distance. The second is a variant of the intracity regression and predicts aggregate flows in and out of
each city, by weight and value (irrespective of destination). In each case they use the 1947 highway
plan and the 1898 railroad network to derive instrumental variables. For the intracity regression,
they also use instruments derived from routes of major explorations between 1530 and 1850. They
arrive at three main findings. First, a one percent decrease in pairwise travel distance causes about
a 1.4% increase in the value of pairwise trade and a 1.7% increase in its weight. Second, within-city
highways affect the weight of exports, but not their value. Specifically, a 1% increase in the lane
kilometers of within commodity flow survey area interstate highways causes about a 0.5% increase
in the weight of exports but has no measurable effect on the value of exports. A 50 year panel of


                                                   25
employment data confirms this result. Cities with more highways employ more people to make
heavy manufactured goods, and conversely.
   Finally, Duranton and Turner (2011) investigate the effect of the supply of roads and highways on
the amount of driving in a city. More specifically, they conduct a version of the intracity regression.
The outcome variable of interest is a measure of the total vehicle kilometers driven in a       U . S . MSA

on particular road networks in a year and the explanatory variables of interest measure the extent
of road networks. They conduct this regression in levels, first differences and second differences.
They also rely on maps of the 1947 highway plan, the 1898 railroad network and of routes of major
expeditions of exploration between 1530 and 1850 as sources of exogenous variation in          MSA   roads.
They establish a “fundamental law of road congestion,” according to which driving increases by
about 1% for each 1% increase in the stock of roadways, a finding that is robust across all of their
specifications. They provide a rough decomposition of the sources of the marginal induced driving.
About half comes from changes in individual behavior. Increases in commercial driving are less
important. Migration in response to new roads and diversion of traffic from other networks appears
to be least important. Hsu and Zhang (2012) replicate the analysis of Duranton and Turner (2011)
using Japanese data. They arrive at the same conclusion. Driving in Japanese cities increases about
1% for each 1% increase in the extent of the road network.
   While the above papers are concerned with the relationship between overall traffic volumes and
lane kilometers of roads, Couture et al. (2012) examine the determinants of driving speed in large U.S.
cities. Remarkably, their paper is the first to estimate an econometric framework in which the supply
and demand for travel are both explicitly modeled. The estimation results are used to construct
a city-level index of driving speed and to undertake a welfare analysis of counterfactual changes
in driving speed. Cities differ substantially in terms of driving speed and the welfare gains from
improvements in driving speed in the slowest cities are found to be large. Taken together, these
results are consistent with substantial deadweight losses from congestion.
   Although most of the intracity literature is based on one of the three instrumental variables esti-
mation strategies discussed above, Gonzalez-Navarro and Quintana-Domeque (2013) is noteworthy
for its use of a randomized experiment research design to examine the effects of road paving in Mex-
ico. Homes in treatment streets that were paved experienced an increase in value of between 15-17%
relative to those in control streets. The estimated rate of return to road pavement is 2% without
taking into account externalities, but rises to 55% after incorporating externalities.

5.1.3   Subways and the internal organization of cities, and related other results

A large literature examines the effect of subways on the internal organization of cities. These papers
typically consider a unit of analysis that is small relative to the city, e.g., a census tract or zip code.
The explanatory variable of interest is typically the distance to the subway. The outcome of interest
is typically population or employment density, land prices or ridership rates. That is, these papers
perform a version of the intercity regression (here inaptly named), equation (32), at a subcity scale


                                                    26
of analysis. As we discuss in sections 4.2 and 4.3, such regressions must overcome two problems,
endogeneity and distinguishing between growth and reorganization.
   The literature on subways is too large to survey exhaustively. We focus on three papers which
provide, in our opinion, the best resolution to the endogeniety problem; Gibbons and Machin (2005),
Billings (2011) and Ahlfeldt et al. (2012), on two papers showing that within-city roads are associated
with qualitatively similar density gradients as subways; Baum-Snow (2007) and Garcia-Lopez et al.
(2013), and finally, on two others which provide cross-city evidence of the effects of subways; Baum-
Snow and Kahn (2005) and Gordon and Willson (1984). Gibbons and Machin (2005) and Billings
(2011), in particular, provide more extensive surveys.
   Gibbons and Machin (2005) conduct a difference in differences estimate of the intercity estimation
equation in order to evaluate the effect on London residential real estate prices of subway extension
in the late 1990s. Their unit of observation is a ‘postcode unit’, an administrative unit containing
10-15 households. They observe real estate transactions by postcode unit before and after the Dock-
lands light rail extension in South London. As a consequence of this extension, parts of their sample
experience a decrease in distance to a subway station. This makes a difference in differences esti-
mate possible: they compare the change in real estate prices in postcodes that experienced changes
in subway access to the change in postcodes that did not.
   They find that, for properties within 2km of a station, a 1km reduction in station distance causes
about a 2% increase in real estate prices. Usefully, Gibbons and Machin (2005) compare their dif-
ference in differences estimate with a more conventional cross-sectional estimate. They find that
estimates based on cross-sectional variation alone are three times as large as difference in difference
estimates. This suggests that, as we might hope, subway station locations are not selected at random
and more valuable land is more likely to receive subway service.
   Billings (2011) and Ahlfeldt et al. (2012) also conduct difference in differences estimates of the
effects of subways. For a newly opened light rail line in Charlotte, North Carolina, Billings (2011)
finds that residential real estate prices within one mile of a station increase by about 4% for single
family homes, by about 11% for condominiums and that light rail access has no effect on commercial
property prices. Ahlfeldt et al. (2012) find that properties further than 250m from a 1936 subway line
experienced about a 40% smaller decrease in value as a consequence of the division of Berlin than
did those within 250m. Glaeser et al. (2008) look at the effects of the New York city subway and find
evidence that poor people move to be closer to subway stations.
   Each of these three papers investigates the rate at which land rent declines with distance from a
subway or light rail line. Baum-Snow (2007) and Garcia-Lopez et al. (2013) investigate how popu-
lation density varies with distance to a highway. The unit of observation in Baum-Snow (2007) is a
census tract. For each   U.S.   census tract in a 1990   MSA ,   he observes population density in 1970 and
1990 and distance to an interstate highway. This allows him to estimate a variant of the intercity
estimating equation for two cross-sections and in first differences. He finds that a 10% decrease in
the distance to a highway is associated with about a 0.13% increase in population density in 1970 and


                                                     27
a slightly smaller increase in 1990. First difference estimates are similar. Garcia-Lopez et al. (2013)
arrives at similar estimates using Spanish data.
      While each of these papers attempts to resolve the problem of endogenous placement of infras-
tructure, they do not provide a basis for determining whether subways cause growth or reorganiza-
tion of nearby economic outcomes. In particular, they are unable to measure whether a change in a
city’s subway network affects city level variables. In the context of figure 6 this would correspond
to asking whether a change in treated unit infrastructure affects the level of an outcome in all three
regions. This question, which is of obvious public policy interest, requires cross-city data describing
subways and city level outcomes, i.e., data which allows the estimation of the intracity regression,
equation (31). Since subways are relatively rare, this sort of data is difficult to assemble and we know
of only two such efforts to date. The first, Gordon and Willson (1984) constructs a single cross-section
of 52 cities that describes population density, subway passenger kilometers per year and a handful
of city level control variables. In a simple cross-sectional estimate of ridership on density they find
a strong positive relationship. Baum-Snow and Kahn (2005) construct disaggregated panel data de-
scribing a panel of 16   U.S.   metropolitan areas with subways. In addition to describing the extent
of each city’s subway network, their data describe ridership commute times. Overall they find little
evidence that U . S . subway expansions elicit large increases in ridership.

5.2     Intercity infrastructure and the geographic organization of economic activity

We now turn attention to the effect of infrastructure that connects a unit of observation, typically
a county, to the rest of the world. This most often involves estimating a version of the intercity
regression. We first describe results for high income countries and then turn to results for low income
countries and historical data.

5.2.1    High income countries

Chandra and Thompson (2000) considers the effect of the interstate highway system on a sample of
185 non-metropolitan     U.S.   counties that received a highway after 1969, and 391 neighboring non-
metropolitan counties that did not. By restricting attention to non-metropolitan counties, Chandra
and Thompson (2000) hope to restrict attention to counties that were treated with highways ‘acci-
dentally’, and in particular, without regard for effect of highways on the treated counties. This is the
pioneering use of the inconsequential place approach to identification. Their outcome measures are
aggregate annual earnings by county, year and one digit       SIC   code, for all years between 1969 and
1993, inclusive.
      Chandra and Thompson (2000) estimate a distributed lag version of the intercity regression with
county fixed effects. In particular, they include 24 dummies for the age of the highway connection in
each year as explanatory variables. Their results are striking. They find that a marginally positive 24
year effect of a highway connection on earnings in: Finance, Insurance, Real Estate; Transportation
and Public Utilities; and, Retail and Services. They find that the effect on earnings in manufacturing


                                                    28
and farming is marginally negative. Overall, the 24 year effect on earnings of a highway connec-
tion of a non-metropolitan county is a 6-8% increase. The effect on untreated neighboring counties
is approximately opposite. Overall, untreated neighbor counties see a decrease in total earnings of
between 1 and 3%. Note that Chandra and Thompson (2000) estimate two distinct equations. In the
context of figure 6, the first predicts the effect of changes in infrastructure on the treated area, the
second the effect of changes in infrastructure on neighboring untreated regions. Together, these two
regressions are exactly what is required to distinguish between growth and reorganization. Impor-
tantly, Chandra and Thompson (2000) cannot reject the hypothesis that aggregate changes in earn-
ings caused by a highway connection sum to zero across the whole sample of treated and neighbor
counties.
   Michaels (2008) considers a sample of 2000 counties in the U . S . that are more than 50% rural and
have no highways in 1950, i.e., the inconsequential place approach. He then identifies a subset of
the interstate network constructed between 1959 and 1975 to serve intercity travel. His explanatory
variable of interest is an indicator of whether a county is connected to this network at the end of the
study period. He also relies on a planned route IV based on the 1947 highway plan. He considers
a number of outcome variables, in particular, per capita earnings in trucking and retail sales, and
in the relative wages of skilled and unskilled workers. He finds that rural counties receiving high-
way connections experience about the same increase in trucking and retail earnings as Chandra and
Thompson (2000) observe, the only two outcome variables common to the two papers. This is reas-
suring given the quite different identification strategies. He also finds that highways cause a small
increase in the wage of skilled relative to unskilled workers.
   In two related, but methodologically quite different papers, Redding and Sturm (2008) consider
the effect of the post-war partition of Germany on the organization of economic activity. They find
that the population of German cities near the East-West border grew more slowly than those far from
the border. That is, in response to an increase in the cost of travel between East and West Germany,
economic activity migrates away from the border region. Duranton et al. (2013) examine the effect of
pairwise distance on pairwise trade of manufactured goods between         U.S.   cities in 2007. They find
that trade responds to highway distance rather than straight line distance, that the effect of distance
on trade is large, and that it is larger on the weight of goods than on their value. Unsurprisingly,
Duranton et al. (2013) also find that trade by rail is less sensitive to distance than is trade by road.
Curiously, Duranton (2014) replicates Duranton et al. (2013) using data describing trade in Columbia
rather than the   U.S.   He reaches somewhat different conclusions: trade is less sensitive to distance,
the value and weight of trade are about equally sensitive to infrastructure, and the value of trade
responds to infrastructure.
   While most of the intercity literature has focused on roads, Sheard (2014) estimates the effects of
airport infrastructure on relative sectoral employment at the metropolitan-area level, using data from
the United States. To address the potential endogeneity in the determination of airport sizes, the 1944
National Airport Plan is used to instrument for the current distribution of airports. Airport size is


                                                    29
found to have a positive effect on the employment share of tradable services, controlling for overall
local employment, but no measurable effect on manufacturing or most non-tradable sectors. The
effect of airport size on overall local employment is practically zero, suggesting that airports lead
to specialization but not growth at the metropolitan-area level. The implied elasticity of tradable-
service employment with respect to airport size is approximately 0.22.

5.2.2   Low income countries

Donaldson (2013) considers the effect of railroads on a sample of 235 ‘districts’ covering the prepon-
derance of India during the period from 1870 to 1930. He uses these data to estimate the intercity
regression with district and year fixed effects. His outcome variable is the aggregate annual value
of 17 agricultural crops per unit of district area. During this study period, agriculture accounted for
about two thirds of Indian GDP, and the 17 crops Donaldson considers accounted for 93% of the value
of agricultural output. To investigate the probable endogeneity of railroads, Donaldson gathers data
describing hypothetical planned railroad networks that were competitors to the realized network. He
finds no difference in output between districts treated with planned networks and those not treated.
This suggests that the realized network did not target the most productive districts.
    Donaldson finds that districts with access to the railroad report about 17% higher real agricultural
income per unit of district area than districts without railroads. Because Donaldson’s regression
equation contains year and district effects, this means that a district treated with a railroad connection
sees income increase by 17% relative to untreated districts. This is a large effect. Over the course of
the 1870-1930 study period, India’s real agricultural income increased by only about 22%, so that a
rail connection was equivalent to more than 40 years of economic growth.
    In a related paper, Donaldson and Hornbeck (2013), consider a sample of about 2200 counties
in the continental   U.S.   between 1870 and 1890, a period of rapid rail expansion. Donaldson and
Hornbeck (2013) also perform a variant of the intercity regression, this time with county fixed effects,
state-year fixed effects, and a cubic polynomial in latitude and longitude. The outcome variable of
interest is the total value of a county’s agricultural land.
    Donaldson and Hornbeck (2013) find that counties treated with rail access in a year experience a
34% increase in aggregate agricultural land rent relative to others in the same state and year. If the
share of agricultural land in production stays approximately constant during their study period then
this implies the same effect on output, nominally larger than the corresponding estimate for India.
With this said, the rate of growth in the U . S . was much higher during this period, so a rail link was
equivalent to only about 7.5 years of economic growth, as opposed to more than 40 years for Indian
districts.
    Beyond the inclusion of county fixed effects and other controls, Donaldson and Hornbeck (2013)
do not have a strategy to deal with the endogeniety of rail access in the specification discussed above.
Instead, they conduct an alternative regression where the explanatory variable of interest is a mea-
sure of market access. Their measure of market access results from a model similar to the one we


                                                    30
describe in section 3, and is well approximated by a ‘gravity’ measure of population, i.e., an inverse
travel time weighted sum of county populations. They find that the effects of this measure are simi-
lar to those of the connection indicator. They also find that the effects of a restricted gravity measure,
which excludes nearby counties, has a similar effect. That the two gravity measures have similar
effects suggests that the effect of rail access on a county depends equally on rail access to places near
and far.
   Haines and Margo (2008) conduct a similar analysis to Donaldson and Hornbeck (2013). They
consider a sample of 655 counties in 12 U . S . states and estimate the intercity regression in first differ-
ences. Their study period runs from 1850-1860, just before the 1870-1890 period that Donaldson and
Hornbeck consider. They primarily consider the following outcome measures; share of urban popu-
lation, agricultural wage, agricultural output per acre and improved acreage share. Their measure of
rail access is an indicator variable describing whether or not a rail line passes through a county in a
year. They find that rail access is associated with a 10% increase in the share of a county’s improved
acreage, a 3% increase in farm wages, no effect on output per improved acre, a small increase in
service sector employment and a 4% decrease in agricultural employment. In spite of the fact that
Haines and Margo (2008) consider many of the same counties as Donaldson and Hornbeck (2013),
and that the two study periods are adjacent, these results are much smaller than those obtained by
Donaldson and Hornbeck (2013).
   Bogart (2009) uses a sample of about 3000 English parishes and townships between 1692 and 1798
to estimate the intercity regression in first differences. His dependent variable is land rent per acre.
His measure of transportation is an indicator of whether a parish or township is close to a turnpike,
an improved road maintained by tolls. He also conducts an instrumental variables variant of the
first differences intercity regression, where he uses proximity to a major trade route as an instrument
for the presence of a turnpike. This is a variant of the inconsequential places approach developed
in Chandra and Thompson (2000). Bogart (2009) finds that a turnpike increases parish or township
land rent by about 11% in first difference estimates and by about 30% in IV estimates.
   Banerjee et al. (2012) use county level Chinese data to estimate the intercity regression with
provincial and year fixed effects, and county level controls. They consider a sample of 310 Chi-
nese counties for which they observe per capita      GDP   annually from 1986 until 2006, a period when
Chinese road and rail infrastructure expanded dramatically. They also consider a census of firms
for a larger set of counties in a smaller number of years. To measure infrastructure, Banerjee et al.
(2012) construct a hypothetical network constructing ‘treaty ports’ to interior trading centers and use
this network as an instrument. Again, this is a variant of the inconsequential places approach. Their
measure of infrastructure is the distance from a county to a line in this hypothetical network, which
predicts proximity to both railroads and major highways.
   Since Banerjee et al. (2012) have one instrument and two endogenous dependent variables, prox-
imity to railroads and highways, they cannot separately identify the effects of roads and railroads.
Instead, they present the results of an intercity regression in which the measure of transportation


                                                     31
access is distance to the hypothetical line. Therefore, as the authors acknowledge, these results are
somewhat difficult to interpret. With this said, Banerjee et al. (2012) arrive at robust and interesting
results. In particular, a 10% increase in distance to a ‘line’ causes about a 6% decrease in county GDP,
and has no effect on the growth of income. They find that the gradient for the density of firms is
slightly steeper and that proximity to a line has no effect, or possibly a small negative effect, on the
growth rate of firm density.
    Storeygard (2012) uses a sample of 287 small cities in sub-Saharan Africa between 1992 and 2008
to estimate a first differences variant of the intercity regression. This paper is innovative in two
regards. First, it uses ‘lights at night data’ as a proxy measure for city GDP in small developing coun-
tries where data availability is limited.21 Second, to generate time series variance in transportation
costs he interacts constant network distances with a measure of the price of oil on international mar-
kets. As the author observes, the validity of this approach hinges on the claim that, conditional on
controls, oil prices do not affect city lights except through transportation costs. Thus, more specifi-
cally, for a sample of 287 small cities, Storeygard (2012) estimates a variant of the intercity regression
where the outcome of interest is a measure of average annual light intensity for constant boundary
cities, the measure of transportation costs is the interaction of network distance with annual average
oil prices, city fixed effects and variables to control for other possible channels through which oil
prices might affect light intensity. Storeygard (2012) estimates that doubling the distance between a
sample city and the primate port city causes about a 6% reduction in GDP, and that this is close to the
effect of a quadrupling of fuel costs.
    Jedwab and Moradi (2013) provide evidence on the intercity regression using rail construction
in colonial Sub-Saharan Africa, where over 90% of African railroad lines were built before inde-
pendence. Colonial railroads are found to have strong effects on commercial agriculture and urban
growth before independence. A number of identification strategies are used to provide evidence that
these effects are causal, including placebo lines that were planned but not built and a version of the
inconsequential units approach. Furthermore, using the fact that African railroads fell largely out of
use post-independence, due to mismanagement and lack of maintenance, the paper shows that colo-
nial railroads had a persistent impact on cities. While colonial sunk investments (e.g., schools, hos-
pitals and roads) partly contributed to urban path dependence, the evidence suggests that railroad
cities persisted because their early emergence served as a mechanism to coordinate contemporary
investments for each subsequent period.
    Faber (2013) also estimates a version of our intercity regression using a sample of about 1,300 rural
Chinese counties that are more than 50km from a major city and that he observes in 1990, 1997 and
2006. For each county/year he observes county level GDP in three sectors; agriculture, industrial and
services, as well as government expenditure. He also observes a rich set of county level controls. His
measure of infrastructure is the distance from the county centroid to the nearest segment of the trunk
  21 Henderson et al. (2012) pioneers the use of these data and show that they are highly correlated with national level GDP ,

a result that Storeygard (2012) confirms at the sub-national level.



                                                             32
highway network, the limited access highway network that was substantially constructed during
Faber’s study period. To resolve the probable endogeneity of the network placement he relies on
two hypothetical networks, the first resembles the hypothetical network developed by Banerjee et al.
(2012). The second describes the cost minimizing network to connect a set of major cities targeted
by plans for the realized network. Faber (2013) finds that industrial GDP, total GDP and government
revenue all decrease with proximity to the network. This result, which appears robust, is without
precedent in the literature. Every other implementation of this research design we survey arrives
at the opposite conclusion, that is, that transportation infrastructure attracts (or creates) economic
activity.
      Ghani et al. (2013) use the inconsequential units approach to estimate the intercity regression for
”The Golden Quadrilateral project”, which upgraded the quality and width of 5,846 km of roads
in India. A difference-in-differences specification is used to compare non-nodal districts based on
their distance from the highway system. Positive treatment effects are found for non-nodal districts
located 0-10 km from the Golden Quadrilateral that are not present in districts 10-50 km away, most
notably for higher entry rates and increases in plant productivity.


6     Discussion
6.1     Growth versus reorganization

Determining the extent to which the observed effects of infrastructure reflect changes in the level of
economic activity versus a reorganization of existing activity is fundamental to understanding the
effects of infrastructure and to policy analysis. The existing reduced form literature generally does
not provide a basis for separately identifying the two effects. In spite of this, we can suggest some
tentative conclusions about the contributions of growth and reorganization to the observed effects of
infrastructure. These conclusions are based on comparisons between four sets of estimation results.
      First, Duranton et al. (2013) examine the effect of within-city highways on the composition and
value of intercity trade for   U.S.   cities. They find that an increase in within-city highways causes
cities to become more specialized in the production of heavy goods, but has at most small effects on
the total value of trade. Here, the primary effect of within city highways is to reorganize economic
activity, not to create it.
      Second, using the result in Baum-Snow (2007), Garcia-Lopez et al. (2013) and Baum-Snow et al.
(2012), respectively, the effects of a one standard deviation increase in the number of radial highways
causes central city population to decrease by 14%, 5%, and 17% where secular rates of city population
growth were 72%, 30% and 55%. Thus, the transportation network causes reorganizations of cities
that are large compared to forces affecting them. On the other hand, Duranton and Turner (2012) find
that a one standard deviation increase in within city lane kilometers of interstate highways causes
about a 15% increase in population over 20 years. Happily, the sample of cities and years considered
by Baum-Snow (2007) and Duranton and Turner (2012) substantially overlaps. While the comparison


                                                     33
is somewhat strained, it suggests that growth and reorganization are about equally important.
      Third, Banerjee et al. (2012) conduct intercity regressions where the outcome variable is the level
of GDP, and where it is the growth of       GDP .   They find that transportation infrastructure (really, their
hypothetical network connecting treaty ports and interior trading centers) has important effects on
the level of output, but not on its growth.
      Fourth, and finally, Chandra and Thompson (2000) find that interstate highways increase firm
earnings in     U.S.   counties treated with interstate highways at the expense of their untreated neigh-
bors. Summing over the treated and untreated counties, they cannot reject the hypothesis of no
change.
      While our evidence here is fragmentary, it suggests two conclusions. First, within large cities,
relocation of economic activity in response to transportation infrastructure is at least as important
as the creation of economic activity. This conclusion is broadly consistent with current estimates of
agglomeration effects: if output increases by 2% with each doubling of city size, then even if in-
frastructure can double population size, we will see only small increases in productivity. Second, for
non-urban counties, the primary effect of treatment with highways or railroads is to attract economic
activity at the expense of more remote areas, with some variation by industry.

6.2       The effects of transportation infrastructure on economic activity
6.2.1       Invariance across economies

Quite different data underlie the three decentralization papers. Baum-Snow (2007) considers a 40
year study period and a        U.S.   unit of observation with mean population around 160,000. Garcia-
Lopez et al. (2013) considers a 20 year study period and a Spanish unit of observation with mean
population around 120,000. Baum-Snow et al. (2012) consider a 20 year study period and a Chinese
unit of observation with population near 4 million. In spite of this, the three studies find remarkably
similar effects of highways on the decentralization of population from central cities to suburbs; 5%
per ray in Spanish cities, 9% per ray for U . S . cities and 5% for Chinese cities. That the effect of radial
highways on population decentralization is so nearly the same in such different contexts suggests
that the effects of infrastructure are not sensitive to the scale of analysis or the details of the economies
where the cities are located.22
      Other comparisons bolster this proposition. First, Duranton and Turner (2011) and Hsu and
Zhang (2012) find, respectively, that a 1% increase in limited access highways in a metropolitan area
increases driving by 1% in       U.S.   and Japanese metropolitan regions. Second, the effect of subways
on land rent gradients appears to be about the same in suburban London as in Charlotte, North
Carolina, while the effect of highway access on population density gradients appears similar in the
U.S.      and Spain.
      Finally, with a few exceptions, there is broad agreement among the many papers that estimate the
  22 It
      also suggests that the changes caused by radial highways may occur more rapidly than these 20 or 40 year study
periods considered by extant research.



                                                         34
intercity regression: Chandra and Thompson (2000) find a 6-8% increase in firm earnings in counties
adjacent on the interstate highway network; Michaels (2008) confirms Chandra and Thompson (2000)
in the two industries where they overlap; Donaldson (2013) finds 17% higher real agricultural income
for Indian districts with rail access; Haines and Margo (2008) find a 3% increase in farm wages for
counties served by a railroad; Bogart (2009) finds an 11-30% increase in land rent for parishes served
by a turnpike; Banerjee et al. (2012) find a 6% decrease in per capita income from doubling the dis-
tance to a hypothetical trade route and Storeygard (2012) finds a 6% decrease in city light intensity
from doubling travel cost the primate city. Donaldson and Hornbeck (2013) and Faber (2013) are
outliers, predicting a 34% increase in agricultural land rent for counties served by a railroad and a
decrease in output for counties closer to highway.
    Excluding Faber (2013), and ignoring the problem of comparing the gradient estimates of Baner-
jee et al. (2012) and Storeygard (2012) with discrete treatment effects in the others, these estimates are
all within one order of magnitude.23 Given the differences in the underlying economies that are the
subject of these studies, this seems remarkable.
    In sum, the literature suggests that transportation infrastructure has similar effects on the organi-
zation of economic activity across a range of countries and levels of development. More specifically:
highways cause the decentralization of economic activity and an increase in its level in cities; high-
ways cause a dramatic increase in driving; highways and railroads cause an increase in economic
activity in rural areas near highways. This conclusion is subject to four caveats. First, there is some
disagreement among papers estimating the intercity regression. Second, although the methods and
data used in these papers are similar, they are not identical, so comparisons between them need to
be regarded with caution. Third, as we note above, we do not have much basis for distinguishing
growth from reorganization. Fourth, and finally, Duranton et al. (2013) and Duranton (2014) examine
the effects of roads on trade in the U . S . and Columbia and find different effects.

6.2.2   Variability across activities and modes

While the literature surveyed above suggests a number of general results, it also provides suggestive
evidence that different activities respond differently to changes in infrastructure. The three decentral-
ization studies, Baum-Snow (2007), Baum-Snow et al. (2012) and Garcia-Lopez et al. (2013) find that
decreasing transportation costs leads population to migrate to the lower density periphery. Here,
reductions in transportation costs reduce central city population density. Baum-Snow et al. (2012)
finds that manufacturing decentralizes along with population.
    Empirical results from the literature conducting intercity regressions also suggest heterogenous
responses by industries. Chandra and Thompson (2000) finds different responses to the interstate
  23 Banerjee et al. (2012) consider the effect of distance to a line, rather than an indicator for whether a line crosses a county.

Therefore their results cannot be compared directly to results based on treatment indicators. However, an average county
in their sample is approximately 2,000km2 , the area of a square about 45km on a side. Given this, doubling or quadrupling
the distance from a county center to a line should usually be enough to remove an intersecting segment. This suggests that
the effect of an indicator variable for line presence should be in the neighborhood of 6-12%.



                                                                35
highway access in rural counties by different sectors, a result confirmed in Michaels (2008). Haines
and Margo (2008) finds a shift of land into agriculture and of employment into services with rail
access in 19th century U . S . counties. Duranton et al. (2013) find that U . S . cities with more highways
specialize in the production of heavier goods.
   Finally, the gradient estimates in Banerjee et al. (2012) can be directly compared to within-city
regressions estimating the effects of population density or land rent on proximity to a road, e.g.,
Baum-Snow (2007) and Garcia-Lopez et al. (2013). This comparison suggests a much steeper gradient
for economic activity near rural highways than near urban highways.
   Broadly, these studies support the claim that the weight per unit value of output, land share of
production, and sensitivity to agglomeration are all economically important determinants of how
a firm or industry responds to changes in transportation infrastructure. The literature is as yet too
incomplete to provide much insight into the relative importance of these different factors. More
speculatively still, highways may have larger effects on the organization of economic activity in rural
areas than in cities.

6.2.3   Political economy of infrastructure allocation

As discussed above, a central issue in evaluating the effects of transport improvements is that these
improvements are not randomly assigned. Implicit evidence on the process through which trans-
port investments are assigned can be obtained by comparing the OLS coefficients for the inter and
intracity regressions (which capture the impact of transport investments assigned through the ex-
isting political process) with the IV coefficients (which capture the impact of transport investments
assigned through quasi-experimental variation). In Baum-Snow (2007) and Duranton and Turner
(2012), IV estimates are larger in magnitude than OLS. This suggests that the equilibrium allocation
process assigns roads to places growing more slowly than a randomly selected city. Baum-Snow et al.
(2012) and Garcia-Lopez et al. (2013) find contrary results for China and Spain. Thus, conditional on
the validity of their respective identification strategies, these papers point to implicit differences in
the political economy of infrastructure funding across countries.
   Further research is needed explicitly examining the political economy of transport infrastruc-
ture investments. Knight (2002) examines the U.S. Federal Aid Highway Program, over which the
House Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure and the Senate Environment and Public
Works Committee have jurisdiction. The paper finds evidence that measures of the political power
of state delegations affect the allocation of funds, including a state’s proportion of members serving
on the transportation authorization committee, the proportion of a state’s representatives in the ma-
jority party, and the average tenure of a state’s representatives. Federal highway grants are found to
crowd out state highway spending, leading to little or no increase in net spending.




                                                    36
6.3     General equilibrium effects

Generally, studies of the effect of infrastructure on the internal organization of cities do not consider
the role of market access. This occurs despite the fact that market access is a component of the
theoretical precursor of both the intercity and intracity regression equations. This appears to rest on
the assumption, usually implicit, that cities are small open units and that we can examine changes
in their internal structure and level of economic activity without reference to other cities. In fact,
Duranton and Turner (2012) make this small open city assumption explicitly and attempt to test it by
examining the effect on a target city of a change in roads in the nearest large city. While this is not a
particularly satisfying test, that they find no effect suggests that ignoring interactions between cities
while studying the effect of transportation infrastructure on their internal workings is reasonable.
      The problem of market access merits two further comments. First, for the purpose of examining
pairwise trade flows, Redding and Venables (2004) develop a framework which allows the explicit
estimation of market access and variants of estimating equations (32) and (31) based on a two step
estimation procedure. It is this framework that Duranton et al. (2013) apply to their investigation of
the effect of the interstate highway system on pairwise trade flows between U . S . cities. Second, the
extant empirical literature can be usefully divided into two classes. The first follows a long tradition
of conducting city level regressions that assume implicitly (or explicitly in the case of Duranton and
Turner (2012)) that cities can be regarded as independent units. In this framework, what happens in
each city is pinned down by the utility level in a residual rural sector. This implies that what happens
in one city does not affect what happens in others. The second follows the trade or new economic ge-
ography literature, e.g., Redding and Sturm (2008), and supposes that the interactions between cities
are important. An interesting area for further research is reconciling these two different approaches.

6.4     Structural estimation, general equilibrium and welfare

The recent reduced form literature has made important strides in identifying causal effects of in-
frastructure on economic activity in rural regions. Specifically, this literature estimates changes in
economic activity by industry and changes in population for cities and rural regions. We are just
beginning to investigate whether different modes of transportation have different effects. With this
said, the existing literature provides at most suggestive evidence on the extent to which the observed
effects of infrastructure reflect the reorganization or creation of economic activity. Progress on this
issue appears to, fundamentally require an econometric framework which is capable of dealing with
general equilibrium effects such as the possibility that infrastructure moves activity from one unit to
another.
      In the remainder of this section, we discuss a number of studies that have used structural ap-
proaches to estimate intercity or intracity effects of transport infrastructure. These studies highlight
four main advantages of a structural approach. First, as discussed above, this approach enables gen-
eral equilibrium effects to be captured. Second, a structural approach allows for the estimation or



                                                   37
testing of specific economic mechanisms. Third, the estimated model can be used to quantify ag-
gregate welfare effects (as for example in Section 3.6). Fourth, the estimated model can be used to
undertake counterfactuals and generate ex ante predictions for the effects of policies that have not yet
been implemented (see for example Section 3.8).
    We begin with intercity studies. Redding and Sturm (2008) use the division of Germany after
the Second World War and the reunification of East and West Germany in 1990 as a natural experi-
ment to provide evidence in support of a quantitative model of economic geography. As discussed
above, in the aftermath of division, cities in West Germany close to the East-West German border
experienced a substantial decline in population growth relative to other West German cities, and the
estimated treatment effect is larger for small than for large cities. In a multi-region extension of the
Helpman (1998) model, the treatment effect of division on border cities depends on two parameter
combinations that capture (a) the strength of agglomeration and dispersion forces and (b) the elastic-
ity of trade with respect to distance. For plausible values of these parameter combinations, the model
can account quantitatively for both the average treatment effect of division and the larger treatment
effect for small than for large cities. Smaller cities are more adversely affected by division, because
they are disproportionately dependent on markets in other cities.
    Donaldson (2013) combines a general equilibrium trade model with archival data from colonial
India to investigate the impact of India’s vast railroad network. The empirical analysis is structured
around an extension of Eaton and Kortum (2002) to incorporate multiple agricultural commodities
that shares some features with the theoretical framework developed in Section 3 above. This model
delivers four key theoretical predictions that are taken to the data. First, for goods that are traded
between regions, price differences between those regions can be used to measure bilateral trade costs.
Second, the model yields a gravity equation for bilateral trade flows that can be used to estimate the
response of trade flows to trade costs. Third, railroads increase real income levels, as measured
by the real value of land income per unit area. Fourth, as in the theoretical framework developed
above, each location’s trade share with itself is a sufficient statistic for welfare. Consistent with these
predictions of the model, there is a strong and statistically significant estimated effect of railroads on
real income levels, but this effect becomes statistically insignificant after controlling for the model’s
sufficient statistic of a region’s own trade share. These results provide evidence that the estimated
effects of railroads are capturing the goods trade mechanism emphasized in the model.24
    To quantity the intercity effects of road construction, Duranton and Turner (2012) develop a sys-
tem of cities model that they use to derive a system of equations for employment and roadway
growth that can be estimated empirically. Utility in each city depends on the quality of amenities,
consumption of a numeraire composite good, distance travelled and consumption of land. Pro-
ductivity in producing the composite good is increasing in city employment through a standard
agglomeration economy. The cost of travel per unit of distance is decreasing in the length of road-
  24 Transport infrastructure may not only promote internal trade within countries (as considered here) but may also enable

the interior regions of countries to participate in external (international) trade, as examined in Fajgelbaum and Redding
(2013) using the natural experiment of Argentina’s integration into the world economy in the late nineteenth century.


                                                           38
way and increasing in aggregate vehicle traffic through a standard congestion effect. Population
mobility implies that utility in each city is equalized with utility in the outside alternative of a rural
area. Equilibrium city size is determined by the willingness of residents to drive to the city center.
Using equalization of utility between cities and rural areas, together with equilibrium in land and
travel markets, equilibrium city employment can be expressed as a power function of the length of
roadways. Specifying a partial adjustment process, according to which city employment growth is a
function of the distance between a city’s actual population and its equilibrium population, the model
delivers the following equation for city employment growth:

                                nit+1 − nit = A1 + arit + λnit + c1 xi + e1it ,                          (34)

where nit is log employment in city i at time t; rit is log roadway; xi are controls for city characteristics;
and e1it is a stochastic error. Specifying a similar partial adjustment process for road construction,
we obtain an analogous equation for the city roadway growth:

                                rit+1 − rit = A2 + θrit + ηnit + c2 xi + e2it ,                          (35)

where e2it is a stochastic error. Equilibrium log roadway length is assumed to depend on log city pop-
ulation, the city characteristics controls, xi , and instruments, zi that satisfy the exclusion restriction
of only affecting city population through roadways:

                                    rit = A3 + c3 nit + c4 xi + c5 zi + e3it ,                           (36)

where e3it is a stochastic error. The identification assumptions for instrument validity are:

                                                    c5 6= 0,                                             (37)

                                               Cov(z, e1 ) = 0,                                          (38)

                                               Cov(z, e2 ) = 0.                                          (39)

As discussed above, the instrumental variables estimates imply that a 10 percent increase in a city’s
stock of interstate highways causes about a 1.5 percent increase in its employment growth over 20
years. These instrumental variables estimates are somewhat larger than the OLS estimates. Therefore
an additional kilometre of highway allocated to a city at random is associated with a larger increase
in employment or population than for a road assigned to a city by the prevailing political process.
These results are consistent with the view that the existing political process tends to assign highways
to more slowly growing cities.
   The intercity study of Desmet and Rossi-Hansberg (2013) highlights the way in which a general
equilibrium model can be used to quantify the relative importance of different mechanisms and
evaluate welfare effects. The paper develops a system of cities model that incorporates heterogeneity
in productivity, amenities and congestion costs as determinants of city sizes. Congestion costs are
modelled as depending on city-specific transport infrastructure. Data on U . S . metropolitan statistical

                                                       39
areas (MSAs) are used to estimate these city characteristics and decompose the variation in city sizes
into their contributions. All three characteristics are important for explaining the observed city size
distribution. Eliminating differences across cities in any one characteristic leads to large population
reallocations but has small welfare effects (population reallocations of as large as 40 percent can have
welfare gains of as small as 2 percent). This pattern of results is consistent with the idea that welfare is
approximately equalized across cities in the initial equilibrium, in which case the envelope theorem
implies small welfare effects from population reallocations. In contrast, when the same methodology
is applied to Chinese cities, eliminating differences across cities in any one characteristic leads to both
large population reallocations and large changes in welfare. These contrasting results between the
two countries are consistent with urban policies in China playing an important role in determining
relative city sizes and aggregate welfare.
    The intercity study of Allen and Arkolakis (2013) also uses a structural approach to quantify al-
ternative economic mechanisms and evaluate welfare effects. The paper develops an Armington
model of trade and factor mobility that incorporates both an economic and geographic component.
The economic component combines the gravity structure of trade in goods with labor mobility to
determine the equilibrium distribution of economic activity on a space with any continuous topog-
raphy of exogenous productivity and amenity differences and any continuous bilateral trade costs.
To incorporate the possibility of agglomeration and dispersion forces, the overall productivity and
amenity in a location can endogenously depend on its population. The paper provides general condi-
tions for the existence, uniqueness and stability of the spatial economic equilibrium. The geographic
component of the model provides a micro foundations for bilateral trade costs as the accumulation
of instantaneous trade costs along the least-cost route between locations. Combining these economic
and geographic components, the model is used to estimate the topography of trade costs, produc-
tivities and amenities in the United States. Geographical location is found to account for at least
twenty percent of the spatial variation in U . S . income. The construction of the U . S . interstate high-
way system is estimated to increase welfare by 1.1-1.4 percent, which is substantially larger than its
cost.
    We now turn to intracity studies. Until recently, theoretical models of internal city structure
were highly stylized, which limited their usefulness for empirical research. Much of the theoreti-
cal literature has focused on the monocentric city model, in which firms are assumed to locate in
a Central Business District (CBD) and workers decide how close to live to this CBD.25 Lucas and
Rossi-Hansberg (2002) were the first to develop a model of a two-dimensional city, in which equi-
librium patterns of economic activity can be nonmonocentric.26 In their model, space is continuous
and the city is assumed to be symmetric, so that distance from the center is a summary statistic for
the organization of economic activity within the city. Empirically, however, cities are not perfectly
   25 The classic urban agglomeration models of Alonso (1964), Mills (1967) and Muth (1969) impose a monocentric city

structure. While Fujita and Ogawa (1982) and Fujita and Krugman (1995) allow for non-monocentricity, they model one-
dimensional cities on the real line.
   26 For an analysis of optimal urban land use policies in such a setting, see Rossi-Hansberg (2004).




                                                         40
symmetric because of variation in locational fundamentals, and most data on cities are reported for
discrete spatial units such as blocks.27
    To address these challenges, Ahlfeldt et al. (2012) develop a quantitative theoretical model of in-
ternal city structure that allows for a large number of discrete locations within the city that can differ
in their natural advantages for production, residential amenities, land supply and transport infras-
tructure. The model remains tractable and amenable to empirical analysis because of the stochastic
formulation of workers’ commuting decisions that follows Eaton and Kortum (2002) and McFadden
(1974). The city is populated by an endogenous measure of H̄ workers, who are perfectly mobile
within the city and larger economy. Workers experience idiosyncratic shocks to the utility they de-
rive from each possible pair of residence and employment locations within the city. Workers choose
their residence and employment locations and consumption of residential land and a tradable final
good to maximize their utility. This idiosyncratic formulation of utility yields a gravity equation for
bilateral commuting flows:

                                                        1− β − e
                                                                       e
                                               Tij dij Qi         Bi w j
                                   πij =                                            ,                                (40)
                                                              1− β − e
                                                                 
                                         ∑rS=1 ∑Ss=1 Trs drs Qr          ( Br ws )e

where Tij is a Fréchet scale parameter that determines the average attractiveness of the bilateral
commute from residence location i to employment location j; dij is the iceberg cost in terms of utility
of commuting between i and j; Qi is land prices; Bi denotes amenities at residential location i; and w j
denotes wages at employment location j.
    In this setting, transport technology influences the organization of economic activity within the
city through the matrix of bilateral commuting costs dij . Both residential amenities (Bi ) and fi-
nal goods productivity (A j which determines w j ) are characterized by agglomeration economies
and hence depend on the transport technology through the endogenous employment distribution.
Ahlfeldt et al. (2012) use the division and reunification of Berlin as an exogenous shock to struc-
turally estimate the strength of the model’s agglomeration and dispersion forces and to show that
the model can account quantitatively for the observed changes in city structure. The model also pro-
vides a framework that can be used to analyze the effects of other public policy interventions, such
as transport infrastructure investments that reduce commuting costs dij between pairs of locations.
    Another structural intracity approach is Combes et al. (2012), which develops a methodology for
estimating congestion costs (which depend on transport technology) using land transactions data.
The key insight behind this methodology is that residential mobility implies that urban (dis)amenities
and commuting costs are ultimately reflected in land prices. A system of cities model is developed,
in which each city is monocentric and workers face costs of commuting to the Central Business Dis-
trict (CBD). The model highlights that the elasticity of urban costs with respect to city population
is the product of three quantities: the elasticity of unit land prices at the city centre with respect
  27 Forempirical evidence on the extent to which the organization of economic activity within cities is indeed symmetric,
see Brinkman (2013).


                                                           41
to population, the share of land in housing, and the share of housing in consumption expenditure.
Implementing this methodology, the paper’s preferred estimates for these three elasticities are 0.72,
0.25 and 0.23 respectively. Taking the product of these three parameters, the preferred elasticity of
urban costs with respect to city population is 0.041, which is close to existing estimates of agglomer-
ation economies in the form of the elasticity of city productivity with respect to city population. This
finding that cities operate near aggregate constant returns to scale suggests that the fundamental
trade-off of spatial economics – between agglomeration economies and congestion costs – may play
only a limited role in explaining the observed distribution of city sizes. This prediction is in turn
consistent with the observation that cities of vastly different sizes exist and prosper.


7   Conclusion

To determine the causal effect of infrastructure on the spatial organization of economic activity, the
central inference problem that researchers must overcome is that infrastructure is not assigned to
locations at random, but rather on the basis of many of the same unobserved location character-
istics that affect economic activity. The recent empirical literature is organized around three main
approaches to this problem, planned routes IV, historical routes IV and the inconsequential places
approach. While these approaches remain open to criticism and refinement, they are about as good
as can be hoped for in an environment where experiments seem implausible.
    This literature suggests a number of tentative conclusions about the effects of infrastructure. Most
studies estimate that population or employment density falls between 6 and 15% with a doubling
of the distance to a highway or railroad (where railroads are the primary mode of transportation).
Highways decentralize urban populations, and with less certainty, manufacturing activity. They
may also lead to a complementary concentration of services. Different sectors appear to respond
differently to different modes of transportation and people respond differently than firms. The effects
of infrastructure seem similar across countries at different stages of development.
    While much effort has been directed to unraveling the problem of non-random assignment of
infrastructure to places, much less has been directed to distinguishing between growth and reorga-
nization. This distinction is clearly central to any understanding of the role of infrastructure and
transportation costs in an economy. We suggest two approaches to resolving this problem. The first
is a two equation generalization of the current single equation reduced form models. The second
relies on our structural model to resolve this problem. With this said, the literature does suggest that
much of the estimated effect of transportation costs and infrastructure on the spatial organization of
economic activity is probably due to reorganization rather than growth. Refining our understanding
of this issue seems an obvious place for further research.
    In addition to the largely reduced-form literature currently available, structural models of trans-
portation costs and the spatial organization of economic activity are beginning to appear. Structural
models have the important advantage of allowing for estimates of general equilibrium effects, such



                                                   42
as the migration of economic activity in response to changes in transportation costs, on the basis
of theoretically founded estimating equations. They also have obvious advantages for welfare and
counterfactual analysis: available results suggest the importance of the ‘share of trade with self’ as an
indicator of welfare. With this said, there is disagreement in the literature on fundamental assump-
tions underlying these models. In particular, whether we should think of cities as drawing people
from the countryside or as competing with cities other for residents. Resolving this issue appears to
be an important prerequisite for further progress.
   Finally, the existing literature has devoted little attention, empirical or theoretical, to the dynamics
of how transportation infrastructure affects economic development. In particular, there are few panel
data studies conducting impulse response estimates. This seems to be an important, though difficult
area for further research.


References

Ahlfeldt, Gabriel M., Stephen J. Redding, Daniel M. Sturm, and Nikolaus Wolf. 2012. The economics
  of density: Evidence from the Berlin Wall. CEP Discussion Paper No. 1154, London School of
  Economics.

Allen, Treb and Costas Arkolakis. 2013. Trade and the topography of the spatial economy. Processed,
  Yale University.

Alonso, William. 1964. Location and land use: Toward a general theory of land rent. Cambridge,        MA :

  Harvard University Press.

Anderson, James E. and Eric van Wincoop. 2003. Gravity with gravitas: A solution to the border
  puzzle. American Economic Review 93(1):170–192.

Àngel Garcia-López, Miquel. 2012. Urban spatial structure, suburbanization and transportation in
  Barcelona. Journal of Urban Economics 72:176–190.

Atalay, Enghin, Ali Hortacsu, and Chad Syverson. 2013. Vertical integration and input flows. Pro-
  cessed, University of Chicago.

Banerjee, Abhijit, Esther Duflo, and Nancy Qian. 2012. On the road: Transportation infrastructure
  and economic growth in China. Technical report, NBER Working Paper no. 17897.

Baum-Snow, Nathaniel. 2007. Did highways cause suburbanization? Quarterly Journal of Economics
  122(2):775–805.

Baum-Snow, Nathaniel, Loren Brandt, J. Vernon Henderson, Matthew A. Turner, and Qinghua
  Zhang. 2012. Roads, railroads and decentralization of Chinese cities. Processed, University of
  Toronto.



                                                   43
Baum-Snow, Nathaniel and Matthew E. Kahn. 2005. Effects of urban rail transit expansions: Evidence
  from sixteen cities, 1970-2000. Brookings-Wharton Papers on Urban Affaires: 2005 1(4):147–197.

Bernhofen, Daniel M., Zouheir El-Sahli, and Richard Kneller. 2013. Estimating the effects of con-
  tainerization on world trade. Processed, University of Nottingham.

Billings, Stephen B. 2011. Estimating the value of a new transit option. Regional Science and Urban
  Economics 41(6):525–536.

Bleakley, Hoyt and Jeffrey Lin. 2012. Portage: Path dependence and increasing returns in U.S. history.
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 127:587–644.

Bogart, Dan. 2009. Turnpike trusts and property income: New evidence on the effects of transport
  improvements and legislation in eighteenth-century England. Economic History Review 62(1):128–
  152.

Brinkman, Jeffrey C. 2013. Transportation technologies, agglomeration, and the structure of cities.
  Processed, Philadelphia Federal Reserve Bank.

Bureau of Labour Statistics. 2012. Consumer expenditure survey: Average annual expenditures and
  characteristics of all consumer units. www.bls.gov. Accessed: 2013-06-01.

Bureau of Transportation Statistics. 2012a. National transportation statistics: Table 1-49, US ton-miles
  of freight. www.rita.dot.gov. Accessed: 2013-05-21.

Bureau of Transportation Statistics. 2012b. National transportation statistics: Table 3-23, employment
  in for-hire transportation and selected related industries. www.rita.dot.gov. Accessed: 2013-05-02.

Census Bureau. 2009. Commuting (journey to work): Travel time tables. www.census.gov. Accessed:
  2013-06-01.

Chandra, Amitabh and Eric Thompson. 2000. Does public infrastructure affect economic activity?
  Evidence from the rural interstate highway system. Regional Science and Urban Economics 30(4):457–
  490.

China Data Online. 2010.      China statistical yearbook 2010: Table 16-9, freight ton-kilometers.
  www.chinadataonline.org. Accessed: 2013-05-23.

China Data Online. 2011. China statistical yearbook 2011: Tables 10-5 (urban) and 10-25 (rural).
  www.chinadataonline.org. Accessed: 2013-06-18.

Clark, Ximena, David Dollar, and Alejandro Micco. 2004. Port efficiency, maritime transport costs,
  and bilateral trade. Journal of Development Economics 75(2):417–450.

Combes, Pierre-Philippe, Gilles Duranton, and Laurent Gobillon. 2012. The costs of agglomeration:
  Land prices in French cities. Processed, University of Pennsylvania.

                                                  44
Cosar, Kerem and Pablo Fajgelbaum. 2013. Internal geography, international trade, and regional
  specialization. Processed, UCLA.

Couture, Victor, Gilles Duranton, and Matthew A. Turner. 2012. Speed. Processed, University of
  Toronto.

Criscuolo, Chiara, Ralf Martin, Henry G. Overman, and John Van Reenen. 2012. The causal effects of
  an industrial policy. CEP Discussion Paper No 1113.

Cronon, William. 1991. Nature’s metropolis: Chicago and the Great West. New York: W. W. Norton &
  Co.

Davis, Donald R. and David E. Weinstein. 2002. Bones, bombs, and break points: The geography of
  economic activity. American Economic Review 92(5):1269–1289.

Davis, Morris A. and François Ortalo-Magne. 2011. Household expenditures, wages, rents. Review of
  Economic Dynamics 14(2):248–261.

Dekle, Robert, Jonathan Eaton, and Samuel Kortum. 2007. Unbalanced trade. American Economic
  Review 97(2):351–55.

Department for Transport. 2012. Table tsgb0306: Greenhouse gas emissions by transport mode.
  www.gov.uk. Accessed: 2013-06-08.

Desmet, Klaus and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg. 2013. Urban accounting and welfare. American Economic
  Review .

Donaldson, D. and R. Hornbeck. 2013. Railroads and american economic growth: A “market access”
  approach. Technical report, NBER working paper no. 19213.

Donaldson, David. 2013. Railroads of the Raj: Estimating the impact of transportation infrastructure.
  American Economic Review, forthcoming.

Duranton, Gilles. 2014. Roads and trade in Columbia. Processed, University of Pennsylvania.

Duranton, Gilles, Peter Morrow, and Matthew A. Turner. 2013. Roads and trade: Evidence from the
  US .   Review of Economic Studies :forthcoming.

Duranton, Gilles and Matthew A. Turner. 2011. The fundamental law of road congestion: Evidence
  from US cities. American Economic Review 101(6):2616–2652.

Duranton, Gilles and Matthew A. Turner. 2012. Urban growth and transportation. Review of Economic
  Studies 79(4):1407–1440.

Eaton, Jonathan and Samuel Kortum. 2002.            Technology, geography, and trade.   Econometrica
  70(5):1741–1780.

                                                    45
Eurofound. 2000.        Third european survey on working conditions 2000:                      Figure 37.
  www.eurofound.europa.eu. Accessed: 2013-06-17.

Eurostat.   2009.          Mean       consumption          expenditure    by    detailed   coicop    level.
  www.epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu. Accessed: 2014-05-18.

Eurostat. 2010. Transport database. www.epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu. Accessed: 2013-05-01.

Eurostat.   2012.         Extra    eu27       trade   since     1999     by    mode   of   transport(nstr).
  www.epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu. Accessed: 2013-06-17.

Faber, Ben. 2013. Trade integration, market size, and industrialization: Evidence from China’s Na-
  tional Trunk Highway system. Processed, University of California at Berkeley.

Fajgelbaum, Pablo and Stephen Redding. 2013. External integration, structural transformation and
  economic development: Evidence from Argentina. Processed, Princeton University.

Fogel, Robert. 1964. Railroads and American economic growth: Essays in econometric history. Baltimore
  (MD): Johns Hopkins University Press.

Fujita, Masahisa and Paul Krugman. 1995. When is the economy monocentric? Von Thünen and
  Chamberlain unified. Regional Science and Urban Economics 25(4):505–528.

Fujita, Masahisa, Paul Krugman, and Anthony Venables. 1999. The spatial economy: Cities, regions, and
  international trade. Cambridge MA: MIT Press.

Fujita, Masahisa and Hideaki Ogawa. 1982. Multiple equilibria and structural transition of non-
  monocentric urban configurations. Regional Science and Urban Economics 12(2):161–196.

Garcia-Lopez, Miquel-Angel, Adelheid Holl, and Elisabet Viladecans-Marsal. 2013. Suburbaniza-
  tion and highways: When the Romans, the Bourbons and the first cars still shape Spanish cities.
  Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona & IEB.

Ghani, Ejaz, Arti Grover Goswami, and William R. Kerr. 2013. Highway to success in India: The
  impact of the Golden Quadrilateral project for the location and performance of manufacturing.
  World Bank, Policy Research Working Paper 6320.

Gibbons, Stephen and Stephen Machin. 2005. Valuing rail access using transport innovations. Journal
  of Urban Economics 57(1):148–169.

Glaeser, Edward L., Matthew E. Kahn, and Jordan Rappaport. 2008. Why do the poor live in cities?
  The role of public transportation. Journal of Urban Economics 63(1):1–24.

Glaeser, Edward L. and Janet E. Kohlhase. 2004. Cities, regions and the decline of transport costs.
  Papers in Regional Science 83(1):197–228.


                                                      46
Glaeser, Edward L. and Giacomo A.M. Ponzetto. 2013. Did the death of distance hurt Detroit and
  help New York? NBER Working Paper, 13710.

Gonzalez-Navarro, Marco and Climent Quintana-Domeque. 2013. Roads to development: Experi-
  mental evidence from urban road pavement. Processed, University of Toronto.

Gordon, Peter and Rishard Willson. 1984. The determinants of light-rail transit demand - an interna-
  tional cross-sectional comparison. Transportation Research Part A: General 18(2):135–140.

Haines, Michael R. and Robert A. Margo. 2008. Railroads and local economic development: The
  United States in the 1850s. In Joshua L. Rosenbloom (ed.) Quantitative Economic History: The Good
  of Counting. London; New York: Routledge, 78–99.

Head, Keith and Thierry Mayer. 2013. What separates us? sources of resistance to globalization.
  Canadian Journal of Economics 46(4):1196–1231.

Helpman, Elhanan. 1998. The size of regions. In Topics in Public Economics: Theoretical and Applied
  Analysis. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 33–54.

Henderson, J. Vernon, Adam Storeygard, and David N. Weil. 2012. Measuring economic growth
  from outer space. American Economic Review 102(2):994–1028.

Hillberry, Russell and David Hummels. 2008. Trade responses to geographic frictions: A decompo-
  sition using microdata. European Economic Review 52:527–550.

Hsu, Wen-Tai and Hongliang Zhang. 2012. The fundamental law of highway congestion: Evidence
  from national expressways in Japan. Working paper, Department of Economics, The National
  University of Singapore.

Hummels, David. 1999. Towards a geography of trade costs. GTAP Working Paper No. 17.

Jedwab, Remi and Alexander Moradi. 2013. Transportation technology and economic change: Evi-
  dence from colonial railroads and city growth in Africa. Processed, George Washington University.

Knight, Brian. 2002. Endogenous federal grants and crowd-out of state government spending: The-
  ory and evidence from the federal highway aid program. American Economic Review 92(1):71–92.

Krugman, Paul R. 1991. Increasing returns and economic geography. Journal of Political Economy
  99(3).

Limão, Nuno and Anthony J. Venables. 2001. Infrastructure, geographical disadvantage, transport
  costs and trade. World Bank Economic Review 15(3):451–479.

Lucas, Robert E., Jr. and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg. 2002. On the internal structure of cities. Economet-
  rica 70(4):1445–1476.


                                                   47
Martincus, Christian Volpe, Jerónimo Carballo, and Ana Cusolito. 2012. Routes, exports, and em-
  ployment in developing countries: Following the trace of the Inca roads. Processed, World Bank.

Maystadt, Jean-Francois and Gilles Duranton. 2014. The development push of refugees : Evidence
  from Tanzania. Processed, Wharton.

McFadden, Daniel. 1974. The measurement of urban travel demand. Journal of Public Economics
  3:303–328.

Michaels, Guy. 2008. The effect of trade on the demand for skill - Evidence from the Interstate High-
  way System. Review of Economics and Statistics 90(4):683–701.

Michaels, Guy, Ferdinand Rauch, and Stephen J. Redding. 2012. Urbanization and structural trans-
  formation. Quarterly Journal of Economics 127:535–586.

Mills, Edwin S. 1967. An aggregative model of resource allocation in a metropolitan area. American
  Economic Review (Papers and Proceedings) 57(2):197–210.

Moses, Leon N. 1958. Location and the theory of production. Quarterly Journal of Economics 72(2):259–
  272.

Moses, Leon N. and Harold F. Williamson. 1963. Value of time, choice of mode, and the subsidy issue
  in urban transportation. Journal of Political Economy 71(3):247–264.

Muth, Richard F. 1969. Cities and housing. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Natural Resources Canada. 2012. Comprehensive energy use database table 8:         GHG   emissions by
  transportation mode. www.oee.nrcan.gc.ca. Accessed: 2013-06-03.

Neumark, David and Helen Simpson. 2014. Place-based policies. In Gilles Duranton, William
  Strange, and Vernon Henderson (eds.) Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics, Volume 5. Am-
  sterdam: Elsevier North-Holland.

North American Transportation Statistics. 2012a.            Table 5-2:   Domestic freight activity.
  www.nats.sct.gob.mx. Accessed: 2013-05-23.

North American Transportation Statistics. 2012b. Table 7-1: International merchandise trade by
  mode. www.nats.sct.gob.mx. Accessed: 2013-06-03.

North American Transportation Statistics. 2012c. Table 2-3: Employment in transportation and re-
  lated industries. www.nats.sct.gob.mx. Accessed: 2013-05-23.

North American Transportation Statistics. 2012d. Table 4-2: Greenhouse gas emissions by transporta-
  tion sector. www.nats.sct.gob.mx. Accessed: 2013-06-03.




                                                  48
OECD Stat Extracts. 2012. National accounts: Table 5, final consumption expenditure of households.
  www.stats.oecd.org. Accessed: 2013-06-08.

Office of National Statistics. 2009. Labour force survey: 11.6 time taken to travel to work by work-
  place. www.ons.gov.uk. Accessed: 2013-06-08.

Parry, Ian W. H., Margaret Walls, and Winston Harrington. 2007. Automobile externalities and poli-
  cies. Journal of Economic Literature 45(2):373–399.

Ramondo, Natalia, Andres Rodriguez-Clare, and Milagro Saborio. 2012. Scale effects and productiv-
  ity: Does country size matter? Processed, University of California at Berkeley.

Redding, Stephen. 2012. Goods trade, factor mobility and welfare. NBER Working Paper.

Redding, Stephen and Daniel Sturm. 2008. The costs of remoteness: Evidence from German division
  and reunification. American Economic Review 98(5):1766–1797.

Redding, Stephen and Anthony J. Venables. 2004. Economic geography and international inequality.
  Journal of International Economics 62(1):63–82.

Redding, Stephen J., Daniel M. Sturm, and Nikolaus Wolf. 2011. History and industry location:
  Evidence from German airports. Review of Economics and Statistics 93(3):814–831.

Rossi-Hansberg, Esteban. 2004. Optimal urban land use and zoning. Review of Economic Dynamics
  7:69–106.

Sarvimäki, Matti, Roope Uusitalo, and Markus Jäntti. 2010. The long-term effects of forced migration.
  Processed, Aalto University.

Schafer, Andreas. 2000. Regularities in travel demand: An international perspective. Journal of Trans-
  portation and Statistics 3:1–31.

Sheard, Nicholas. 2014. Airports and urban sectoral employment. Journal of Urban Economics 80:133–
  152.

Small, Kenneth A. and Erik T. Verhoef. 2007. The economics of urban transportation. New York (NY):
  Routledge.

Statistics Canada. 2010. Commuting to work: Results of the 2010 general social survey, table 1.
  www.statcan.gc.ca. Accessed: 2013-06-03.

Statistics Canada. 2012. Cansim: Table 384-0041, detailed household final consumption expenditure.
  www.statcan.gc.ca. Accessed: 2013-06-03.

Storeygard, Adam. 2012. Farther on down the road: transport costs, trade and urban growth in
  Sub-Saharan Africa. Working paper, Tufts University.

                                                    49
Thierry Mayer, Florian Mayneris and Loriane Py. 2013. The impact of urban enterprise zones on
  establishments’ location decisions: Evidence from French ZFUs. CEPR Discussion Paper 9074.

Turcotte, Martin. 2005. The time it takes to get to work and back: Table 1. www.publications.gc.ca.
  Accessed: 2013-06-03.




                                                50
                   .1
                   .08
                   .06
                   .04
                   .02




                                             1850                                1900                     1950                   2000
                                                                                              year

                                                                         Transportation share of national income   Without Air



Figure 1: Share of Transport Sector in U . S . GDP. Notes: Source is Department of Commerce (since 1929),
and Historical Statistics of the U.S. (Martin Series) before then.
                                                             .2
                 Railroad revenue dollar per ton-mile (real)
                       .05        .1     0     .15




                                                                  1880                                                           2010
                                                                                               Year



Figure 2: The Costs of Railroad Transportation over Time. Notes: Source is Historical Statistics of the
U . S . (until 1970), 1994, Bureau of Transportation Statistics Annual Reports 1994 and 2002.




                                                                                             51
                                .4
                 Freight revenue per ton-mile
                   .1         .20       .3




                                                1960      1970            1980               1990        2000
                                                                          Year

                                                                    Rail                 Truck
                                                                    Pipe



Figure 3: Revenue per Ton Mile (All Modes). Notes: Source is Bureau of Transportation Statistics Annual
Reports.
                                2000
                 Billions of freight ton-mile
                  500        1000
                                0       1500




                                                1960   1970      1980             1990           2000   2010
                                                                           year

                                                                   Rail                  Truck
                                                                   Pipe                  Water
                                                                   Air



Figure 4: Ton Miles of Freight over Time. Notes: Source is Bureau of Transportation Statistics Annual
Reports




                                                                        52
                                           Canada domestic frieght activity                                                                                    China domestic frieght activity




                                                                                                                                15000
                1000
 Billions of tonne-kilometres




                                                                                                                Billions of tonne-kilometres
                                                                                                                                    10000
               500




                                                                                                                    5000
                0




                                                                                                                                0
                                1990        1995              2000            2005                 2010                                              1980            1990                    2000             2010
                                                              Year                                                                                                             Year
Source: North American Transportation Statistics (2012a)                                                       Source: China Data Online (2010)
                                                US domestic frieght activity                                                                                  Mexico domestic frieght activity




                                                                                                                                300
                6000
 Billions of tonne-kilometres




                                                                                                                Billions of tonne-kilometres
                                                                                                                                      200
                   4000




                                                                                                                     100
   2000         0




                                                                                                                                0




                                1960     1970          1980          1990          2000           2010                                            1990        1995            2000            2005          2010
                                                              Year                                                                                                             Year
Source: Bureau of Transportation Statistics (2012a)                                                            Source: North American Transportation Statistics (2012a)
                                                Italy domestic frieght activity                                                                              Lithuania domestic frieght activity
                200




                                                                                                                                             20
                                                                                                                Billions of tonne-kilometres
 Billions of tonne-kilometres
               100




                                                                                                                         10
                0




                                                                                                                                0




                                1985     1990         1995           2000      2005              2010                                             2002      2004       2006           2008           2010     2012
                                                              Year                                                                                                             Year
Source: Eurostat (2010)                                                                                        Source: Eurostat (2010)
                                                UK domestic frieght activity
                300
 Billions of tonne-kilometres
      100       0      200




                                  1955   1965         1975      1985        1995          2005
                                                              Year
Source: Eurostat (2010)


                                                 Figure 5: Ton km of freight by year and mode for several countries.




                                                                                                          53
           Figure 6: A simple hypothetical sample.



Residual                            Treated
                                                y+d+a
y




                        y-d
                              Untreated




                              54
                                     Total   Ship %   Air %   Truck %    Rail %
                    Austria          279       13       8        70         7
                    Belgium          750       26       14       44         2
                    Bulgaria          48       38       4        50         7
                    Canada           798       19       11       47        12
                    Cyprus            10       83       16        0
                    Czechrepublic    194        2        5       82         9
                    Denmark          186       24       8        11         0
                    Estonia           24       34       4        34        10
                    EU 27           10261      29       12       32         2
                    Finland          169       69       15       12         4
                    France          1105       25       11        9         0
                    Germany         2231       27       14       37         3
                    Greece           106       57       7        33         1
                    Hungary          164        1       10       75         9
                    Ireland          198       45       31       11         0
                    Italy           1003       40        9       36         3
                    Latvia            21       18       3        45        14
                    Lithuania         38       29        3       56        12
                    Mexico           554       24       6        56         8
                    Netherlands      995       27        9       39         1
                    Poland           259       17       3        55         9
                    Portugal         119       37       7        52         0
                    Romania          101       25       2        13         3
                    Slovakia          96       13       4        60        12
                    Slovenia          56       16        3       64         4
                    Spain            615       45       7        44         2
                    Sweden           313       25       10       15         1
                    UK
                    US               3116      45       25       18         4

Table 1: Shares of total international trade by country and mode. Total trade for European countries
are in Billions of Euros, the others are in Billions of $US. Sources: North American Transportation
Statistics (2012b), Eurostat (2012).




                                                55
              Country Year Total emp. All Trans % Air % Rail % Truck % Ship %
              Canada 2002          13           3.56        .44    .28    1.29    .09
              Mexico 2003          35           5.75        .06    .04    2.75    .03
              US     2003         130           3.22        .41    .17    1.02    .04

Table 2: Employment in for hire transport as share of total employment. Total employment is in mil-
lion of people, all others are percentage of total. Sources: North American Transportation Statistics
(2012c), Bureau of Transportation Statistics (2012b).




                                         1980-4 1990-4 2005-9 2010-2
                          Austria                             35
                          Belgium                             41
                          Canada                       54     59     63   52
                          Denmark                             38
                          Finland                             41
                          France                              36
                          Germany                             42
                          Greece                              32
                          Ireland                             36
                          Italy                               30
                          Luxembourg                          35
                          Netherlands                         47
                          Portugal                            29
                          Spain                               38
                          Sweden                              38
                           UK                                 37     53
                           US              43          45     51          50

Table 3: Roundtrip commute times in minutes, by country and year. Sources: Statistics Canada
(2010), Turcotte (2005), Eurofound (2000), Office of National Statistics (2009), Census Bureau (2009).




                                                   56
                                       1990-4 1995-9 2000-4 2005-9 2010-2
                       Austria                   15     14      16
                       Belgium           10      10     13      12
                       Bulgaria                         23      12
                       Canada                                   15      14
                       China(rural)      1       3       6      10      10
                       China(urban)      1       5       9              14
                       Croatia                                  13
                       Cyprus                           23      16
                       Czechrepublic                    26      19
                       Denmark                   12     11      10
                       Estonia                          13      16
                       Finland                   12     14      13
                       France            15      13     13      13
                       Germany           11      13     12      13
                       Greece            12      12     14      12
                       Hungary                          25      23
                       Ireland                   14     14       9
                       Italy             14      15     15      12
                       Latvia                           15      19
                       Lithuania                        17      15
                       Luxembourg        12      14     15      16
                       Macedonia                                16
                       Malta                            19      25
                       Mexico                                           21
                       Netherlands       9       9      11      11
                       Norway                                   13
                       Poland                           19      13
                       Portugal          27      23     21      15
                       Romania                          17      12
                       Slovakia                         24      15
                       Slovenia                         26      21
                       Spain             14      14     15      12
                       Sweden                    11     10      12
                       Turkey                                   16
                       EU 27                                    13
                       UK                                               14
                       US                                       18      16

Table 4: Percentage of household expenditure on all modes of transportation by year and coun-
try. Sources:Statistics Canada (2012), China Data Online (2011), Eurostat (2009), OECD Stat Extracts
(2012), Bureau of Labour Statistics (2012).




                                                57
              Country Total Mt CO2e Transport % Rail % Truck % Ship % Air %
              Canada         561           32        1.32   24.34    1.69   3.14
              Mexico         456           35         .42   32.53     .57   1.43
              UK            529            29        .87    25.81    2.38   7.24
              US            5829           33        .89    27.72     .95   2.96

Table 5: 2007 Carbon dioxide emissions from transportation and shares by mode. Sources: Natural
Resources Canada (2012), North American Transportation Statistics (2012d), Department for Trans-
port (2012).




                                                58
