                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              PUNISHMENT AND DETERRENCE:
                              EVIDENCE FROM DRUNK DRIVING

                                           Benjamin Hansen

                                         Working Paper 20243
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w20243


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2014




Special thanks to Jason Lindo, Glen Waddell, Phil Cook, Tom Dee, Ben Cowan, Brigham Frandsen,
Lars Lefgren, Daniel Rees, Emily Owens, Devin Pope, Kevin Schnepel, and Peter Siminski for helpful
insights. I also thank participants at the IZA Risky Behaviors Conference, Conference on Empirical
Legal Studies, NBER Summer Institute and Trans-Atlantic Economics of Crime Conferences, and
to participants at seminars at BYU, Cornell, the University of Hawaii, and WSU for valuable comments
which improved the quality of the paper. I am also grateful to Lucy Hackett and Cole Sutera who provided
outstanding research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Benjamin Hansen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Punishment and Deterrence: Evidence from Drunk Driving
Benjamin Hansen
NBER Working Paper No. 20243
June 2014
JEL No. I18,I28,K14,K42

                                             ABSTRACT

Traditional economic models of criminal behavior have straightforward predictions: raising the expected
cost of crime via apprehension probabilities or punishments decreases crime. I test the effect of harsher
punishments on deterring driving under the influence (DUI). In this setting, punishments are determined
by strict rules on Blood Alcohol Content (BAC) and previous offenses. Regression discontinuity derived
estimates suggest that having a BAC above the DUI threshold reduces recidivism by up to 2 percentage
points (17 percent). Likewise having a BAC over the aggravated DUI threshold reduces recidivism
by an additional percentage point (9 percent). The results suggest that recent recommendations to lower
the BAC limit to .05 would save relatively few lives, while increasing marginal punishments and sanctions
monotonically along the BAC distribution would more effectively deter the drunk drivers most likely
to be involved in fatal crashes.


Benjamin Hansen
Department of Economics
1285 University of Oregon
Eugene, OR 97403
and NBER
bchansen@uoregon.edu
1         Introduction

Since the National Highway Tra¢ c and Safety Administrative began recording fatal tra¢ c

accident data in 1975, drunk driving was a factor in 585,136 tra¢ c fatalities.1 Over a

similar time period, 725,347 murders occurred in the United States. The similarity of the

magnitudes of both of these causes of death suggests that drunk driving’s external costs

may actually be close to those associated with murder.2 However, given that drunk driving

is a very di¤erent crime than murder and often closely linked with addiction and substance

abuse, what we know about the deterability of murderers may not apply for drunk drivers. So

while many states have passed laws punishing drunk driving, understanding the deterability

of drunk drivers is crucial in determining the appropriate combination of enforcement and

punishment that can maximize social welfare.

        In his seminal work that modeled criminal behavior, Becker (1968) suggests that crimi-

nals commit crimes rationally when the expected bene…ts of the crime outweigh the expected

costs. Moreover, he also concluded that they may be deterred from criminality with the ap-

propriate mixture of punishments and enforcement. Along those lines, recent evidence sug-

gests that individuals who break the law, ranging from violent and property crime o¤enders

(Levitt, 1997; McCrary, 2005; Evans and Owens, 2007; and Chal…n and McCrary, 2011) to

drivers exceeding the speed limit (DeAngelo and Hansen, 2014), respond to increased en-

forcement by committing fewer crimes. However, several factors complicate testing the e¤ect

of punishment severity on crime. First and foremost, the severity of punishment is normally

determined, at least in part, by the severity of the o¤ense. Thus naive comparisons of of-
    1
    Through the end of 2012.
    2
    Futhermore, for every fatal accident, dozens of non-fatal accidents occur with substantial injuries and
property damage.


                                                    1
fenders with harsh and mild punishments would arrive at biased estimates due to omitted

variables.

   This paper o¤ers quasi-experimental evidence concerning the e¤ects that punishment

severity has on the commission of future crimes. Taking advantage of administrative records

on 512,964 DUI stops from the state of Washington (WA), I exploit discrete thresholds

that determine both the current as well as potential future punishments for drunk drivers.

Speci…cally, in WA a blood alcohol content (BAC) measured above 0.08 is considered a

DUI while a BAC above 0.15 is considered an aggravated DUI, or a DUI that results in

higher …nes, increased jail time, and a longer license suspension period. Importantly, the

statutory future penalties increase for each DUI received, regardless of whether the previous

o¤ense was an ordinary DUI or aggravated DUI. The quanti…able nature of BAC, use of

thresholds to determine punishment severity, and the inability of either drivers or police to

manipulate BAC allows for a unique quasi-experiment to test whether harsher punishments

and sanctions deter drunk driving.

   The estimated e¤ects suggest that having BAC above either the DUI or aggravated

DUI threshold reduces recidivism. I also further investigate several competing mechanisms

including deterrence, incapacitation, and rehabilitation. Broadly, the results suggest that

harsher punishments and sanctions reduce future drunk driving. As the National Tra¢ c

Safety Board (NTSB) recently recommended lowering the BAC limit from .08 to .05, the

estimated deterrence elasticities from this paper have strong implications for the potential

merits of such a change, in addition to other alternative policy changes such as increasing

punishments more steeply or continuously along the BAC distribution.

   The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides background on drunk driving and

                                             2
recidivism. Section 3 reviews the econometric methods and data sources used in the esti-

mation. Section 4 presents the main estimates and discusses competing mechanisms which

may explain the results. Section 5 concludes.




2         Background

2.1        Drunk Driving

Shortly after the introduction of automobiles, drunk driving emerged as a serious public

health issue. In e¤orts to combat drunk driving, states introduced laws criminalizing driving

under the in‡uence (DUI).3 Identifying the impairment of drivers was initially di¢ cult, as

police o¢ cers relied mainly on …eld sobriety tests and their own personal experience. In

1956, the …rst breathalyzers were created, establishing an objective and reasonably accurate

method of measuring BAC in a relatively noninvasive manner. Their relatively low cost and

objective nature took the burden o¤ of police in proving a driver was under the in‡uence of

alcohol, and instead placed the burden on the accused to establish their innocence.

        Because of the relative ease of measuring BAC through breathalyzers, many states

adopted laws stipulating strict thresholds for DUI. Initially the thresholds were generous

by today’s standards, with a BAC level of at least 0.15 needed to establish impairment.

Gradually states tightened the standards, with 0.10 becoming a focal point for DUI during

the 1980’s, until 0.08 became the quasi-uniform standard in the late 1990’s and early 2000’s.

Prior research investigating the adoption of lower BAC limits suggests that lowering the BAC
    3
    Some states use terminology other than DUI which has nearly identical legal interpretations including
DWI (driving while intoxicated), OUI (operating under the in‡uence), OMVI (operating a motor vehicle
while intoxicated), DUII (driving under the in‡uence of intoxicants), or DWUI (driving while under the
in‡uence).

                                                   3
limit from .10 to .08 has reduced tra¢ c fatalities by up to 7.2 percent, typically via panel

data models or event studies (Apsler et al. 1999; Dee, 2001). At the same time, more severe

restrictions were placed on underage drinkers, with many states adopting “Zero-Tolerance”

laws that automatically stripped the license of any underage driver with BAC exceeding low

thresholds normally ranging from 0.00 to 0.02.4 Given the di¤erent threshold relevant for

young drivers, this paper restricts attention to those above the legal drinking age.

       At the same time that states were lowering the BAC level needed for a DUI, most states

also instituted “Aggravated DUI’s” with additional punishments given to individuals with

BAC at extremely dangerous levels. As of today, 42 of the 50 states maintain enhanced or

aggravated DUI penalties for BAC above thresholds ranging from 0.15 to 0.20.5 In addition,

most states maintain “Implied Consent”laws which stipulate that the refusal to take a BAC

test is punished identically to those found guilty of drunk driving. These laws motivate the

majority of drivers to admit to BAC tests when asked.6

       Washington’s laws are similar to those enacted in the rest of the United States. Since

January 1, 1999, for individuals above the legal drinking age, a BAC over 0.08 has been

considered a DUI while a BAC above a 0.15 has been an aggravated DUI.7 The average
   4
      See Carpenter (2003) for a thorough review of zero-tolerance laws and their e¤ects on youth risky
behavior.
    5
      Some states including Washington also enforce enhanced or aggravated penalties if children are present
in the car. Based on calculations from the FARS from 1999-2007, 5.6 percent of drunk drivers in fatal
accidents also have children in their car. Given this, any reduced form estimates I obtain examining the .15
threshold could be in‡ated by dividing by .944.
    6
      In WA, 16.7 percent of drivers refuse to take a BAC test. Given there is no measurement of BAC, these
refusals are not part of the estimation sample, but I do allow being pulled over and refusing to take a test to
be included in recidivism. Additionally in examining the histogram and density of BAC no discontinuities
are evident, suggesting that drivers are not able to perfectly predict their BAC prior to refusing a test.
    7
      In addition, the presence of a minor in the car increases the o¤ense to aggravated DUI even if the BAC
is betwen 0.08 and 0.15. The zero-tolerance policy in Washington considers a BAC of 0.02 to be su¢ cient
for DUI for individuals under the legal drinking age. Commercial drivers also face stricter standards, with
a BAC of 0.04 being su¢ cient to indicate impairment.




                                                      4
penalties from today based on previous o¤enses and BAC are laid out in Table 1. As noted

earlier, those found guilty face more severe expected punishments if convicted again in the

future. However, the punishments for repeat o¤enses are identical for o¤enders who initially

had a regular or aggravated DUI. Holding the number of repeat o¤enses constant, having a

BAC over either .08 or .15 increases current punishments. In addition, Washington’s drunk

drivers share similar demographics with the rest of the United States. Based on demographics

from the FARS for Washington, 75.3 of drunk drivers are male, are on average 40.2 years

old, and have a BAC of 16.4. For the rest of the United States, 73.8 percent of drunk drivers

are male, are on average 40.8 years old, and have a BAC of 16.2.



2.2    Criminal Activity and Punishment Severity

Many criminals return to committing crimes again within a few years of being released from

incarceration for their original crime. For this reason, criminologists and economists alike

have long studied the determinants of recidivism in addition to overall rates of criminal

activity. Some studies have found results consistent with traditional Beckerian models of

crime such as Helland and Tabarrok (2007), who …nd lower recidivism rates among convicts

facing life in prison if convicted of a third strike in California, or Abrams (2011), who

…nds lower crime rates in states which enhanced punishments for committing crimes with a

…rearm. Additionally, Drago et. al (2009) utilize an exogenous shock in expected time in

prison to study the deterrent e¤ect of prison sentence length on crime. However in some

situations criminals seem undeterred by higher punishments, with Lee and McCrary (2009)

…nding that youth respond little to the large change in penalties which occurs upon reaching



                                             5
18 years of age. Lastly, greater punishments in the form of harsher imprisonment conditions

lead to increases in recidivism rather than decreasing it (Chen and Shapiro, 2007; Drago

et. al, 2011). Given that the deterrent e¤ect of punishments and sanctions has varied

in the previous literature across di¤erent populations or measures of punishment, previous

estimates of the deterability of o¤enders may not inform the deterability of drunk drivers.

This is particularly true given the “blue collar”nature of drunk driving.

    The variety of estimates linking punishment severity and criminal activity, ranging from

negative to null to positive, could arise for several reasons. For instance, more severe con-

ditions or time in prison may have criminogenic e¤ects either through peer e¤ects or the

depreciation rate of human capital. Furthermore, for most crimes increased punishments

translate into longer prison sentences which mechanically change the age of an individual

at the time of release. As such, the age of an individual may directly a¤ect the trade-o¤s

an individual faces when choosing between crime and traditional labor supply. These com-

plications prevent the separation of deterrent and demographic e¤ects in nearly all criminal

justice settings.8

    Punishments and sanctions for drunk driving lack many of the challenges normally present

in testing the deterrent e¤ect of punishments. First and foremost, being stopped for drunk

driving is a purely reactive process wherein a police o¢ cer notices suspicious behavior (weav-

ing, slow or exceptionally fast driving, driving with the lights o¤, etc.) and stops the potential

o¤ender. In other circumstances, police often choose who to investigate based on previous

o¤enses or convictions. In addition, by using DUI tests (and refusals) to measure recidivism,
   8
     Even if a study were to randomnly assign sentence length to o¤enders; this will by de…nition cause
criminals to be older at the time of release. In order to identify the speci…c deterrent e¤ect of a punishment,
the punishment would have to leave age, among other factors, unchanged.



                                                      6
other issues or biases concerning the point at which one should measure recidivism (arrest,

charge, or conviction) are avoided. Lastly, the punishments for a DUI are largely …nes, short

spells in jail or other restrictions on driving, which allows the identi…cation of the deter-

rent e¤ects of more severe punishments without all of the demographic complications which

normally accompany a longer prison sentences for other crimes.

        As outlined in Table 1, the statutory punishments for DUI are based primarily on two

factors: BAC and prior o¤enses. For each subsequent DUI expected punishments for future

crimes increase. In addition, a su¢ ciently high BAC results in enhanced punishments for

the current o¤ense. These discrete changes in punishments which arise based on BAC are

what I use to test the degree to which punishments and sanctions deter drunk driving.




3         Data and Methods

In this study, I take advantage of administrative records on 512,964 DUI BAC tests in the

state of Washington from 1995 to 2011. After January 1, 1999, Washington applied a .08

threshold for determining a DUI, and a .15 threshold for an aggravated DUI. Given the

BAC thresholds are constant after 1999, I utilize data from 1999-2007 to analyze the causal

e¤ect of having a BAC above either the .08 or .15 threshold on recidivism within four years

of the original BAC test. For a suspected o¤ender tested on 1/1/1999, the period from

1/2/1999 to 1/1/2003 is used to identify recidivism, while an o¤ender tested on 12/31/2007

could potentially recidivate in the 1/1/2008 to 12/31/2011 window.9 Several examples of
    9
    Later on in this paper we also considering varying windows which range from 10 days to 2,200 days. It
also includes additional years of drunk driving tests from 2012 and 2013 for o¤enders stopped in 2006 and
2007.




                                                   7
the timing of testing and recidivism are outlined in Figure 1. As noted earlier, this paper

restricts attention to those above the legal drinking age given that di¤erent cuto¤s apply

to those under 21. The speci…c cuto¤s for DUI and Aggravated DUI allow the usage of a

regression discontinuity design (Thistlethwaite and Campbell, 1960; Hahn, Todd, and Van

der Klaauw, 2002) to test the e¤ect of punishment severity on recidivism.

       In order for a regression discontinuity approach to deliver consistent estimates several

assumptions must be met. Su¢ cient conditions include the continuity of the underlying

conditional regression and distribution functions (Imbens and Lemieux, 2008). In short,

these assumptions imply that both the unobservables and observables are expected to remain

unchanged across the threshold with only treatment status (or the probability of treatment)

changing.

       The ability of drunk drivers to accurately discern their level of impairment prior to

driving or being pulled over is of principal concern, because in that case they would be able

to manipulate which side of a threshold their BAC would fall (McCrary, 2008).10 Indeed

both the decision of how much to drink and the subsequent decision to drive drunk are

endogenous. To establish identi…cation in this case, it must be assumed that it is locally

random if a driver has a BAC either just below or just above the BAC thresholds. In other

words, the underlying assumption is that some drunk drivers are randomly lucky, having a

BAC barely below one the threshold, while other drunk drivers are randomly unlucky and

have a BAC barely above the threshold.

       There are a number of reasons why this assumption is likely reasonable. The …rst is
  10
    Indeed, websites such as http://bloodalcoholcalculator.org/ attempt to help potential drunk drivers
estimate their level of impairment based upon their gender, height, weight, alcohol consumed, and time
spent drinking. Also several apps are available for various smart phones.



                                                  8
the level of accuracy to which the BAC is recorded in WA state; 3 digits on a scale from 0

to 1. Second, many factors such as the speed of alcohol consumption, food intake, hydra-

tion, activity, and metabolism are di¢ cult to measure, making any BAC calculation based

on consumption and physical characteristics a rough approximation. Third, although per-

sonal breathalyzers have recently become available for individuals to purchase, they utilize a

portable technology which is far more volatile than the o¢ cial breathalyzers used to assess

guilt.11 Fourth, even though the breathalyzers measure BAC with a high degree of precision,

randomness does occur in the measurement of BAC, with each stop requiring two measures

of BAC be taken independently of one another. The correlation between the two measures

is .99, and on average the di¤erence is 0.0008, with the inter-quartile range of di¤erences

ranging from -.003 to .004.12 I utilize the minimum of the two variables as the running

variable in the analysis, as the minimum determines guilt regarding DUI or aggravated DUI.

       Figure 2 contains a histogram displaying the number of observations in each measured

BAC level from 1999-2007.13 While McCrary (2008) suggests several methods to determine

the optimal bin width for analysis (which would be necessary if BAC was reported in a truly

continuous manner), in this scenario I instead rely on the original BAC bins determined

by the implicit rounding from the breathalyzer. Indeed, the distribution of BAC shows

little evidence of endogenous sorting to one side of either of the thresholds studied. The

McCrary test implies p-values of .59 and .38 respectively at the .08 and .15 thresholds.
  11
      The breathalyzers used to assess guilt in WA utilize a combination of infra-red spectroscopy and an
electro-chemical cell technology while portable breath test utilize only fuel-cell based technology which trades
accuracy in exchange for portability. The various portable breathalyzers available for individual purchase
contain several warning labels outlining their relative volatility.
   12
      The histogram of distribution of the di¤erence between the two variables is presented in Appendix Figure
1.
   13
      Appendix Figure 2 presents a histogram zoomed at the .08 and .15 thresholds, also showing little evidence
of any sorting at either threshold.



                                                       9
Frandsen (2013) recently o¤ered an alternative density test based on a local approximation

to a binomial distribution. He suggests his test may o¤er improvements both in consistency

and …nite sample performance when the data are discrete or rounded. That test estimates a

p-value of .795 at.08, and .886 at .15, again revealing no evidence of manipulation. Likewise,

the histogram also shows little evidence of non-random heaping, which can also create bias

in regression discontinuity designs (Barreca et. al, 2011).

       For the regression models, I utilize a local linear regression discontinuity design to esti-

mate the e¤ect of having a BAC above the DUI or aggravated DUI threshold on recidivism,

with the slopes allowed to change at the discontinuities, as shown in Equation 1. The main

results are based on a local-linear regression discontinuity design with a rectangular kernel,

while the sensitivity of the results are tested (…nding little to no major di¤erences) using

local linear models with other kernels or higher order polynomials.14 An indicator for either

a DUI or aggravated DUI indicates respectively whether the BAC falls above the .08 or

.15 thresholds. In the regression models the BAC variable is rescaled around the relevant

threshold, either .08 or .15, Xi is a vector of controls, and yi is a measure of recidivism.



                        yi = Xi0 +       1 DU Ii   +   2 BACi   +    3 BACi     DU Ii + ui                        (1)


       In the regression discontinuity models, all observations are clustered at the …nest bin at

which BAC is measured, .001.15 This captures potential autocorrelation between individuals
  14
      The higher order polynomials o¤er little improvement in model …t, and there is relatively little empirical
value to expanding to larger bandwidths due to primarily two issues. First, a larger bandwidth eventually
would result in the joint modeling of both punishment regimes overlapping in the regressions. Second, the
vast majority (around 90 percent) of the observations fall in the BAC range of .03 to .20, and expanding
the bandwidth to include observations from greater BAC ranges does relatively little to increase the sample
size.
   15
      I also employed clusters at several other levels, including the individual level, the police jurisdiction level,


                                                         10
which have similar BAC levels. The standard errors also implicitly adjust for heteroskedas-

ticity which is important because the regression models estimated are linear probability

models because of the discrete nature of recidivism, and therefore by construction su¤er

from heteroskedasticity.

    Further evidence of the legitimacy of the assumptions underlying regression discontinuity

in this context is outlined in Table 2. The columns of Table 2 contain summary statistics

for various segments of the BAC distribution. These include driver characteristics which are

predictive of drunk driving including age, gender, and race. Furthermore, a BAC test is the

joint intersection of behavior arousing the suspicion of a police o¢ cer and the o¢ cer choosing

to act on the suspicion. Given I have the universe of o¢ cial breath tests conducted by the

Washington State Police, the data include cases where the police o¢ cer notices a suspect’s

driving, cases where o¢ cers stop someone for a broken taillight and smell alcohol, randomized

stops and cases involving tra¢ c accidents. To determine whether police endogenously test

people around the thresholds, I also examine the three primary signals police have ex-ante

to assess an individual’s potential guilt: prior BAC tests, the portable breath test value,

and the presence of an accident. Furthermore, if accidents changed discontinuously at the

threshold, we might also be concerned that the recidivism rates might change due to other

punishments not related to drunk driving, or non-random attrition from the sample.16

    Those with higher BAC levels are more likely to recidivate, face higher chances of being

involved in accident at the time of the BAC exam, and are more likely to have prior DUI’s.

However, when comparing individuals within relatively small distances to the thresholds
county and year level,and county-year and month level, and obtained results which were in essence almost
numerically indistinguishable from clustering at the BAC level, and were also signi…cant at the 1 percent
level.
  16
     An example being if the driver dies or is impaired from future driving due to incapacitating injuries.


                                                    11
for DUI and aggravated DUI the di¤erences diminish substantially and all but disappear

if we compare only .001 to each side of the thresholds. The only di¤erence evident in

simple summary statistics is a slight di¤erence in age at the .15 threshold, and age is a

trait with a substantial gradient over the BAC distribution. This initial evidence based

on summary statistics provides evidence supporting the legitimacy of the RD design. The

strati…ed summary statistics also suggest the advantage the regression discontinuity design

brings to this setting, as it o¤ers substantial power by allowing the inclusion of observations

reasonably close to the thresholds even if such observation are not exactly on each side of the

threshold.17 By estimating local linear models that control for the relationship between BAC

and recidivism, unbiased estimates can be obtained even in the presence of characteristics

which have a substantial gradient, which is the case for age, prior drunk driving, and the

presence of an accident.

       Table 3 contains estimates of the e¤ect of having a BAC over the DUI and aggravated

DUI thresholds on predetermined characteristics which should be una¤ected by BAC thresh-

olds, employing the same regression model as equation 1, with the control variables utilized

as the dependent variable. The regression models estimated are local linear models as de-

scribed above, and employ a bandwidth of .05 and a rectangular kernel for weighting. That

bandwidth is su¢ ciently large to o¤er considerable power without the two thresholds over-

lapping. It also utilizes roughly 90 percent of the available sample. For each of the driver

demographic demographics and the sources of police ex-ante information I fail to reject the

null that the predetermined characteristics are unrelated to the BAC cuto¤s for DUI and
  17
    For instance, going to the bin to the right of .151 to .152, the recidivism rate falls to .11. For any bin,
there is a chance of …nite sample anomolies, and the RD smoothes out any such di¤erences.




                                                      12
aggravated DUI. The lack of signi…cance in the regression coe¢ cients is also supported by

graphical scatterplots in Figure 3.

    Figure 3 presents scatterplots of predetermined characteristics and corresponding …tted

regression lines (in black) which should remain unchanged across the punishment thresholds

if o¤enders or police are unable to manipulate the running variable. Demographic factors

such as age, race (de…ned by white vs. non-white) and gender are stable across the DUI

punishment thresholds. Likewise key sources of information that could drive the police to

administer a breath test including the BAC measured at a portable breath-test (if taken),

the presence of an accident at the scene, and the number of prior stops (occasions which

resulted in a breath test or test refusal) are also unchanged. The stability of predetermined

characteristics gives additional credibility that the regression discontinuity can deliver unbi-

ased estimates in this scenario as it suggests neither the impaired driver or police o¢ cer is

able to manipulate testing on either side of the .08 or .15 thresholds.




4     Results

Having a BAC above the either .08 or .15 thresholds is associated with a combination of

di¤erent treatments. This includes potentially higher …nes, more time in jail, a longer license

suspension, home monitoring and/or probation (see Table 1). In addition, judges may man-

date other sanctions including receiving an alcohol addiction assessment, receiving treatment

for alcohol abuse, attending a victims panel, or attending Alcoholics Anonymous. Separate

from the courts, the Department of Licensing in WA takes administrative action to automat-

ically suspend or revoke the license of an individual, adhering strictly to BAC in their initial


                                              13
suspension or revocation decision. The suspension begins automatically.18 For an individual

to prematurely end a license suspension they must obtain an ignition interlock license, which

requires that the person pay to install and maintain an ignition interlock device on their car

throughout their suspension or revocation period.19 It would be empirically impossible to

separate this combination of treatments all of which potentially shift when a BAC is over

either threshold. Instead, I …rst examine the reduced form e¤ect of having a BAC over the

.08 and .15 thresholds on future drunk driving, and later I explore the degree to which these

other potential mechanisms shift at both the .08 and .15 thresholds. As such, this approach

answers a fundamental policy question: do BAC limits as currently administered reduce

future drunk driving?

       Initially, I estimate the e¤ect of having a BAC over the DUI or aggravated DUI threshold

on recidivism within four years of the initial tra¢ c stop, capturing the medium run e¤ect of

punishment on the likelihood of recidivism. This window was chosen as it allows a su¢ cient

time period for an individual to potentially recidivate after their license suspension or revo-

cation has ended (although recidivism during a suspension is both possible and empirically

quite common). The window is later varied to examine recidivism rates within windows rang-

ing from 10 days to 2,200 days in order to verify if punishment leads to long run changes in

behavior or incapacitation –potentially because of license suspension or revocation (Owens,

2009; Buonanno and Raphael, 2011).20 Recidivism is an indicator which takes on the value
  18
     The only exceptions to this automatic process are allowed if an individual pays $375 for a hearing,
temporarily delaying the suspension. http://www.dol.wa.gov/driverslicense/hearingsrequest.html
  19
     It costs roughly $100 obtain the ignition interlock license and $20 a month to maintain the ignition
interlock device. In addition, they also have to pay additional SR-22 insurance while utilizing the ignition
interlock license. http://www.dol.wa.gov/driverslicense/iil.html
  20
     For these expanded recidivism windows I also include additional BAC test records from 2012 and 2013
to allow for drunk drivers in 2006 and 2007 to have a 6 year recidivism window.




                                                    14
of 0 if they are not pulled over under suspicion of drunk driving, and takes on a value of 1 if

they are subjected to a test or refuse a test by a police o¢ cer within 4 years of the original

o¤ense.

       In Figure 4, a scatterplot of recidivism rates for all o¤enders highlights the stark changes

in recidivism which occur at the .08 and .15 thresholds. The black lines represent the …tted

regressions in the intervals .03 to .079, .08 to .15 and .15 to .20. There is a notable drop

in recidivism at both the .08 and .15 thresholds. The substantial decrease in recidivism is

initial evidence that the increase in punishments and sanctions at the thresholds is e¤ective in

reducing future drunk driving. The …rst panel contains the recidivism rates for all suspected

drunk drivers. The second panel contains recidivism rates for the suspected o¤enders which

have no prior tests. These suspected o¤enders have less experience and face lower expected

punishments. The third panel contains recidivism rates for suspected o¤enders with at

least one prior test, a subset that have both more experience and face higher expected

punishments. Across each panel, having a BAC over the .08 and .15 legal limits is associated

with lower recidivism rates.



4.1       Punishment and Recidivism

Table 4 reports the estimated e¤ect of having BAC over the DUI threshold for all drivers,

those with no prior tests, as well as those with at least one prior test.21 The estimates are

presented both with and without additional controls, which consist of indicators for gender,

race, age …xed e¤ects, prior o¤enses, county …xed e¤ects, and year …xed e¤ects. Panel A
  21
    Those with a prior breath test refusal are also included in the group with a prior breath test as legally
they are guilty based on refusing the breath test, and theoretically, those who refuse a breath test are
disproportionately likely to have higher BAC.



                                                     15
includes estimates with a bandwidth of .05, while Panel B presents estimates derived with a

smaller bandwidth of .025, both using a rectangular kernel for weighting.22 Having a BAC

above the .08 threshold decreases recidivism by 2 percentage points during a four year follow-

up window and is statistically signi…cant at the 1 percent level. This e¤ect is consistent across

both bandwidths and with the presence or omission of controls. Those with no prior tests

are also less likely to recidivate when they have a BAC over the DUI threshold, as are those

with prior tests. Importantly, those with prior tests are estimated to reduce their recidivism

by a larger margin. This could be because the expected penalties are much higher if they

are caught drunk driving again, or because their baseline recidivism rates are higher. If the

two sets of estimates from Panel A and Panel B are averaged and divided by the relevant

average recidivism rate to the left of the threshold, all suspects, those with no prior tests

and those with at least one prior test have recidivism rates which fall respectively by 17.0,

15.5, and 25.2 percent.23

       Table 5 presents the estimated e¤ect of having a BAC above the aggravated DUI threshold

on recidivism within 4 years of the initial stop. Once again, estimates are presented both

with and without controls. Likewise, Panel A utilizes a bandwidth of .05 while Panel B uses

a bandwidth of .025, and all regressions using a rectangular kernel for weighting. Having

a BAC above the aggravated DUI threshold reduces recidivism for all potential o¤enders

by 1.1 percentage points, for those with no prior tests by 0.9 percentage points, and those

with prior tests by 1.9 percentage points. Given the baseline recidivism rates, these point

estimates respectively translate into 8.9, 8.2, and 10.6 percent decreases in recidivism. Once
  22
    Institutional constraints prevent the examination of a larger bandwidth as it would include the aggravated
DUI cuto¤.
 23
    This assumes equal weighting of the estimates.



                                                     16
again, the estimates are robust to the inclusion or exclusion of additional controls, and the

choice of bandwidth has little e¤ect on the magnitude of the estimates. Smaller bandwidths

decrease precision slightly, which is to be expected given the decrease in the sample size.

   The issue of bandwidth choice is explored more fully in Figure 5. For every possible

bandwidth from .005 to .068, the estimated e¤ect of having a BAC above the DUI or ag-

gravated DUI threshold is presented along with the 95% con…dence interval. Controls are

utilized in each regression and a rectangular kernel is used for weighting. The point estimates

are relatively stable across nearly all bandwidths. Except for particularly small bandwidths,

generally those less .02, the estimates are also statistically signi…cant (at least at the 95%

level). The stability of the estimates across various bandwidths suggests that the linear

speci…cation is a reasonable choice for modeling the e¤ect of BAC on recidivism.



4.2    Heterogeneity of Recidivism

In the previous estimates, recidivism is de…ned rather simply as whether a driver submits

to or refuses a test within 4 years. The rich nature of the administrative records on the

DUI stops allows a more detailed analysis of the behavioral changes. Most importantly,

recidivating at higher BAC levels is far more dangerous than at lower levels. In addition,

recidivating at lower levels of BAC could be evidence that police are more stringently testing

those that previously had a BAC above .08 or .15. In addition, more severe punishments

can have unintended consequences such as increasing the severity of o¤enses committed for

particular subgroups, as illustrated by three strikes laws (Iyengar, 2007). To address these

concerns, the previous indicator for recidivism is split into four mutually exclusive categories:



                                               17
if the BAC falls in [0,.079], the BAC is in [.080,.15], the BAC is [.151,1], or if the driver refuses

the BAC test. These separate indicators o¤er an approach to measure the severity of the

o¤ense. An alternative …fth indicator that also represents the severity of the o¤ense indicates

whether or not a subsequent accident occurred (which also involved BAC testing).

   Table 6 presents the e¤ects of having BAC above the DUI threshold on the more dis-

aggregated de…nitions of recidivism. Panels A, B, and C present results respectively for all

potential o¤enders, those with no prior tests, and those with at least 1 prior test. All regres-

sions are weighted using a rectangular kernel and have a bandwidth of .05. For the entire

population of suspected drunk drivers, having a BAC above the .08 threshold results in a

decreased likelihood of being stopped and having a BAC in any of the recidivism categories.

The probability e¤ects are largest for the BAC range from .08 to .15. This is also the range

with the largest probability mass (see Figure 2). In addition, having a BAC over the DUI

threshold reduces the likelihood of being involved in a future accident. The results suggest

having a BAC over the DUI threshold results in either less drunk driving or more attentive

drunk driving, to the point that they are not getting in accidents or exhibiting the normal

signs of impairment, either of which is consistent with deterrence.

   In Panels B and C, subtle di¤erences emerge in the estimates for those with no prior

tests and those with at least 1 prior test. First and foremost, those with at least 1 prior test

have a large and signi…cant reduction in the probability of being in a subsequent accident

involving alcohol. This speaks to the public health bene…ts o¤ered by increased punishments.

Both groups consistently show reductions in recidivating at all BAC levels although a few of

the estimates are not statistically signi…cant. Also, the point estimates suggest those with

at least 1 prior test are less likely be pulled over and refuse a breath test, although these

                                                 18
estimates are borderline insigni…cant. This could be because the more experienced o¤enders

are aware of the higher punishments associated with refusing a BAC test.

   Table 7 presents estimates for the e¤ect of having a BAC above the aggravated DUI

thresholds on the probability of speci…c recidivism outcomes, similar to Table 6. Once again

the regressions are weighted using a rectangular kernel and bandwidth of .05. The estimates

suggest that having a BAC above the aggravated DUI threshold decreases the likelihood of

recidivating in all of the BAC content categories. When comparing the e¤ects of having a

BAC above the aggravated DUI threshold for those with no prior tests and those with at

least 1 previous test, the main di¤erence in the e¤ects lies with refusals. Drivers with prior

DUI stops are less likely to be pulled over again and refuse to take a BAC test while those

with no prior DUI stops experience no change in their probability of refusing a test. This

again could be due to di¤erences in the experience of o¤enders, with o¤enders with prior

DUI stops having better information about the higher punishments associated with refusing

a BAC test.

   In summary, the estimates indicate that drivers with BAC over the .08 recidivate less,

as do drivers with BAC over the .15 threshold. Having a BAC over either the .08 or .15

thresholds is associated with a decrease in future accidents particularly among o¤enders with

prior DUI stops. In the subsequent section I discuss potential …rst-stages and three possible

mechanisms: incapacitation, rehabilitation, and deterrence.




                                             19
4.3       Mechanisms

4.3.1      Potential First Stages


As discussed earlier, numerous potential …rst stages exist due to the myriad of sanctions

and punishments potential o¤enders can receive both in court and out of court. I linked the

breath test data with a centrally maintained registry of WA courts which account for over 95

percent of the jurisdictions in WA. These data contain information on …nes paid, jail-time

served, parole, home monitoring, court-ordered license suspensions, alcohol screenings and

other treatments mandated by the court.

       Table 8 contains estimates of the e¤ect of having a BAC over the legal limits on court

punishments, sanctions and treatments. All regression models are local linear regressions

using a rectangular kernel, include the same previous controls and use a bandwidth of .05.

Panel A reports estimates for the .08 threshold while Panel B reports estimates for the .15

threshold. Having a BAC over the .08 threshold is associated with an increase in essentially

all of the potential sanctions an individual could receive. The table also contains relevant

means and medians for the sanctions to allow easy calculations of elasticities. The plot

of the sanctions is presented in Figure 6, as is the estimated percentage change for each

sanction at both the .08 and .15 thresholds. At the .08 threshold jail time increases by

roughly 44 percent while …nes increase by 32 percent. Additionally, other sanctions such as

alcohol addiction assessment, attending a victims panel, and alcohol treatment all increase

signi…cantly. At the .15 threshold jail time increases by 8 percent and …nes increase 9 percent,

while court ordered license suspension length increase by 35 percent.24 Interestingly, alcohol
  24
    Both jail time and …nes exhibit signi…cant skewness, evident by the di¤erences in the means and medians.
Utilizing a Quantile RD Treatment E¤ects estimator, I estimate that jail-time increases by 65 percent at the


                                                    20
assessments decreases by roughly 1 percentage point, while alcohol abuse treatment increases

by an essentially o¤setting amount.

    It’s worth noting that despite the intricate data maintained by the courts in WA, certain

aspects of the sanctions at the .08 and .15 thresholds cannot be empirically analyzed. For

instance, at either threshold, the original charges likely re‡ected higher …nes or time in jail

according to WA statutes and BAC that prosecuting attorneys may have held or reduced

in order to motivate the dependent to plead guilty. Even the threat of higher punishments

is a treatment individuals received upon having a BAC over either of the legal thresholds.

Likewise, the WA Department of Licensing operates independently of the courts and au-

tomatically suspends or revokes the license of an individual after the original breath test.

Furthermore, the Department of Licensing imposes their sanctions even if the court …nds a

reason to dismiss the underlying charges. Notably the license suspension is 90 days with a

breath test over .08 (for an individual’s …rst o¤ense) and an individual receives a revocation

of 365 days with a BAC over .15 (resulting in a 400 percent increase in the licensure removal

period), as laid out in Table 1.


4.3.2    Incapacitation


Given that license suspension and revocation are fundamental sanctions associated with the

two BAC limits, I explore recidivism windows in a more granular basis. This addresses

several fundamental issues. First, it allows a more detailed inspection of the e¤ect of pun-

ishments on the hazard function of reo¤ending. Second, it provides evidence on whether
median and 80 at the 75 percentile, both signi…cant at the 1 percent level, while the estimate e¤ect shrinks
to essentially zero and is statistically insigni…cant at higher quantiles. This suggests that for the majority
of o¤enders punishments are increasing even more substantially than mean comparisons reveal.



                                                     21
the previous estimates concerning the e¤ectiveness of punishment are driven by long run

changes in behavior, or short-run changes due to incapacitation (see Donohue and Levitt,

2001; Owens, 2009; Buonanno and Raphael, 2013). Lastly, it provides additional sensi-

tivity analyses regarding the magnitude and statistical signi…cance of the e¤ects estimated

in the previous section. All regressions are estimated using local linear regressions with a

bandwidth of .05 and rectangular kernel weighting.

       Identi…cation of incapacitation e¤ects are somewhat di¤erent in the context of drunk

driving. Normally, incapacitation is de…ned by the complete inability to commit crimes due

to serving time in prison. Drunk drivers receive relatively short incarceration sentences, with

jail-time ranging from 24 hours to at most a few months depending on BAC and previous

o¤enses, which results in little pure incapacitation. In addition, licenses are either suspended

or revoked for a period of time following the o¤ense.25 Whether this constitutes incapaci-

tation is debatable. Individuals may opt for a restricted license with an ignition interlock

license. In that sense, suspended or restricted licenses are more similar to being on parole

because recidivism is still possible even if licenses are suspended or revoked. Importantly

and regardless, this analysis will also allow the detection of any abrupt changes that result

because of license suspension or revocation.

       Figure 7 presents the estimated probability e¤ects (with con…dence intervals) and semi-

elasticities for every potential time window from 10 days to 2200 days, both for drivers with

no prior-tests and those with at least one prior test. Consistently, the e¤ect of having a BAC

above the DUI threshold grows in absolute magnitude as the window increases in size for both
  25
   The di¤erence between suspension and revocation lies in whether the individual needs to pass a license
exam to have their license reinstated.




                                                   22
types of o¤enders. Scaling the point estimates by the baseline probability of recidivism yields

a semi-elasticity, or a percentage measure that refers how a discrete change in a regressor

relates to a percentage change in an outcome variable.26 Over the …rst two years having a

BAC above the DUI threshold decreases recidivism by 30 percent for all potential o¤enders.

As the recidivism window expands to 2200 days (6 years), the long-run e¤ects of having a

BAC over the DUI threshold decreases in absolute magnitude to 10 percent for those with

no prior tests and to 20 percent for those with at least one prior test. This more intricate

analysis of recidivism suggests that the punishment associated with DUI’s leads to both

short-term and long-term reductions in recidivism, and more accurately reveals the changes

in the cumulative hazard function of recidivism.

      The e¤ects of having a BAC above the aggravated DUI threshold in recidivism windows

ranging from 10 to 2200 days are explored in Figure 8. Similar regressions are employed,

once again using rectangular kernels for weighting. For aggravated DUI’s, point estimates

are initially close to zero before growing consistently negative as the recidivism window

expands. In the longer windows (those over 1200 days) the estimates become statistically

signi…cant. Likewise, the semi-elasticities hover around zero, but in the long term the semi-

elasticities for both groups converge towards -.1. This suggests that enhanced punishments

from aggravated DUI’s do not appear to o¤er strong additional deterrence in the short run

above ordinary DUI punishments and sanctions. However, in the long run, having a BAC

above the aggravated DUI threshold decreases recidivism by an additional 10 percent. This

is consistent with drunk drivers exhibiting long-run changes in their behavior, rather than
 26
      Appendix Figure 3 presents the baseline probability across windows for …rst-time and repeat o¤enders.




                                                     23
changes related to incapacitation due to a suspended license or time in jail.27


4.3.3      Rehabilitation


Another important channel that might reduce future drunk driving is rehabilitation. Indeed

many sanctions imposed by the court relate to alcohol increase considerably at the .08 thresh-

old, including attending a victims panel, taking an alcohol abuse assessment, and receiving

alcohol treatment.28 These requirements might reduce drunk driving solely by reducing fu-

ture alcohol consumption or altering the preferences or beliefs of drunk drivers, causing them

to consider the external cost of drunk driving. Notably at the .15 threshold court-ordered

treatments do not change signi…cantly, with the exception being a slight increase in alcohol

treatment which o¤sets a decline in alcohol abuse assessments.

       To further test if alcohol abuse is shifting at either threshold I estimate whether future

incidents of domestic violence, assaults, and other crimes in which the suspect is tested for

alcohol decrease at the .08 and .15 thresholds. I utilize econometric models identical to those

in the previous sections, with the point estimates reported in Table 9.29 Overall, the results

do not provide strong evidence that these other crimes decrease in response to having a BAC

over either the .08 or .15 thresholds. While this does completely rule out rehabilitation, it
  27
     An alternative approach would be to consider the e¤ect of having a BAC over the thresholds on recidivism
in adjacent time periods, better capturing the e¤ect on the hazard function, rather than examining the
cumulative hazard function. In appendix Table 1, I investigate this alternative approach, focusing on the
probability of recidivating in the …rst 90 days, 91 to 365 days, 366 to 730 days, and 731 to 1460 days.
The …rst panel reports estimates of the e¤ect of having a BAC over the .08 threshold. The results largely
correspond with Figure 7 and Figure 8. Although the hazard is estimated to decline everywhere, it declines
the most in the …rst year. Likewise, while the hazard function is estimated to decline everywhere for those
with a BAC over the .15 threshold, the decline is the largest and most statistically signi…cant for the latest
period.
  28
     In addition, the slope of recidivism kinks at .08 which could be due to the change in the slope of the
prescription of these court order prescriptions at .08. See Card, etc.
  29
     The Washington breath test registry also contains tests from other arrests in which suspects were tested
for alcohol.



                                                     24
also fails to provide evidence supporting that potential mechanism.


4.3.4   Deterrence and Speci…c Deterrence


The approach in this paper utilizes individuals who happen to have the bad luck of having

a BAC just barely over either the DUI or aggravated DUI threshold. As such, it o¤ers

a method of assessing the deterrent e¤ect of DUI punishments and sanctions, given that

statutory punishments increase with each o¤ense, as shown in Table 1. If we give equal

weight to all sanctions, on average future punishments increase by roughly 97 percent (based

on mid-point measures of percentage changes). If drunk drivers made their drunk driving

decisions in a purely Beckerian fashion, then this would imply a deterrence elasticity of -.22.

   Having a BAC over the .15 threshold increases current punishments and sanctions, but

doesn’t have an e¤ect on statutory sanctions. Therefore a reduction in recidivism could

be consistent with what criminologists call “speci…c deterrence”, or the deterrent e¤ect of

receiving a punishment. In economics, this type of behavior could be consistent with models

of bounded rationality, learning due to incomplete information, or perhaps salience (see

Akerlof and Yeller, 1985; Tversky and Kahneman, 1986; Sargent, 1993; and Chetty et al.

2009). Given that …nes, jail-time, alcohol treatments, and license suspension increase by 74

percent on average at the .15 threshold, this would suggest a speci…c deterrence elasticity of

-.12.

   Furthermore, having a BAC over the .08 threshold potentially has its own speci…c deter-

rent e¤ect in addition to increasing expected future punishments. Average punishments and

sanctions increase by 71 percent at .08. Due to the combination of treatments received by

those with BACs over the .08 threshold, we can’t empirically separate if speci…c deterrence

                                              25
or deterrence is driving the reduction in criminality. If we were to assume drivers at the .08

threshold have the same speci…c deterrence elasticity as those at the .15 threshold, then the

deterrence elasticity at .08 diminishes to -.11.



4.4    Robustness

In this section I investigate a series of robustness tests including alternative methods of

de…ning prior drunk driving experience, tests on the sensitivity of the estimates to excluding

observations near the thresholds (also referred to a “donut RD”), and testing the stability

of conviction probabilities at the .15 threshold.

   Figure 9 presents estimated coe¢ cients across three di¤erent ways of de…ning prior expe-

rience with drunk driving. The …rst is whether an individual has a prior test, the approach

used throughout the previous analyses. This approach may be reasonable as even being tested

by the police could result in minor …nes (for reckless driving or negligent driving) even if the

BAC does not exceed the .08 level, and police o¢ cers may inform suspected drunk drivers

of potential punishments and sanctions regardless of their measured BAC. The second ap-

proach measures whether an individual has a prior BAC over .08 (or a refusal). This might

also be seen as reasonable as it measures whether an individual previously exceeded the legal

threshold, which determines both court and licensing sanctions and punishments. The …nal

measures whether an individual has a prior conviction based on the WA court records. This

approach could also be seen as reasonable as it measures prior convictions rather than prior

BAC, and also can extended further back, as the breath test records begin in 1995 while the

court data begin in 1989. All of these approaches of de…ning prior drunk driving behavior



                                              26
can be seen as reasonable, and they all produce point estimates and con…dence intervals

which are nearly indistinguishable from each other.30

       Another concern could be that police or judges treat suspected o¤enders di¤erently near

the threshold. If that is the case, the previous estimates may understate the true reductions

in repeat drunk driving associated with having a BAC over the punishment and sanction

thresholds. One approach to deal with this sort of concern is to estimate BAC with a kernel

that drops the observations near the threshold entirely, also called a “donut RD” (Barreca

et al. 2011). I estimate identical models to those in Table 4, excluding observations near

the thresholds. To fully investigate the sensitivity of the results, I drop …rst the observation

at the threshold and expand the observations dropped .001 BAC in each direction until I

drop observations from -.005 to .005 relative to the threshold in question. The estimates and

con…dence intervals are plotted in Figure 10. The point estimates and con…dence intervals

are essentially identical to the main speci…cations. This gives additional evidence supporting

the locally random nature of BAC near the threshold and of the discrete change in sanctions

and punishments that suspected drunk drivers experience at the threshold.31

       In Figure 11, I investigate the e¤ect of having a BAC above the aggravated DUI threshold
  30
     The structure of punishments of in Washington also suggest 3rd time and 4th o¤enders would face even
higher punishments when having BAC over the legal thresholds. There are only 1,359 o¤enders with 2 BAC
tests in my sample, and 273 o¤enders with 3 or more. While the main results hold up for those sub-groups,
the sample sizes are too small to have su¢ cient power for examining heterogeneous reductions in the hazard
functions.
  31
     Another potential concern could be non-random attrition from the sample due to moving out of state.
Incentives for this are minimized as WA and 44 other states (including CA, ID, OR and nearly all states in
the West) participate in the the Interstate Driver’s License Consortium of 45. This group of states share
information on drunk driving records across geographic boundaries which reduces incentives to move out of
state due to having BAC over a legal threshold. Likewise, I reestimated the models for both interior counties
and border counties (where moving might be easier), and I found the point estimates were respectively -.024
and -.014 at the DUI threshold, and -.0103, and -.0101 at the aggravated DUI threshold. If the results were
driven by out-of-state movers, the point estimates should be larger in absolute value for border counties,
which is not the case. This gives additional credibility to the integrity of the research design.




                                                     27
on eventual court outcomes. If more severe charges associated with aggravated DUI increase

the likelihood that an individual is convicted, then the reductions in recidivism for having

a BAC above the aggravated DUI threshold could be due to a rational economic response

(as expected future punishment would be shifting, as punishments depend on the number

of previous convictions). To investigate this, I link the BAC results with the centralized

database of court records in WA that account for over 95 percent of court cases. As shown in

Figure 11, the probability of dismissal, a not guilty verdict, or the sum the two, is essentially

unchanged across the threshold (with regression discontinuity estimated point estimates

(standard errors) that are respectively .006 (.018), -.014. (.017) and -.009 (.020). This is

evidence that changes in conviction probabilities at the .15 threshold are not driving the

reduction in recidivism.32




5      Conclusion

Alcohol abuse continues to be a major public health problem in the United States (Carpenter

and Dobkin, 2010). In dollar values, the externality associated with each incident of drunk

driving may be as high as $8,000 (Levitt and Porter, 2001). This paper o¤ers evidence

concerning the e¤ectiveness of punishments and sanctions as deterrents to recidivism among

drunk drivers, …nding evidence that having a BAC above either .08 DUI threshold or the .15

aggravated DUI is associated with reduced recidivism both in the short and long term. This

would suggest that the sanctions and …nes imposed at current BAC thresholds are e¤ective
  32
    The fact that not everyone charged with drunk driving is convicted could imply that we should in‡ate the
point estimates by the fraction convicted. However, simply being charged with a crime also conveys informa-
tion about the potential penalties, and to in‡ate the reduced form by the …rst stage would assume that only
the conviction deters drunk driving. Furthermore, license suspension and revocation occur administratively
and automatically independent of the courts.


                                                    28
in reducing future drunk driving. The estimates imply deterrence elasticities around -.23 and

speci…c deterrence elasticities as large as -.12. Importantly, the identi…cation strategy does

not estimate the full deterring e¤ect of the laws, as the presence of more severe punishments

may also deter those who would have otherwise been …rst-time drunk drivers from ever being

tested.

   More broadly, the …ndings of this paper also contribute to understanding the foresight

– and hindsight – of criminals. Having a BAC above the DUI threshold decreases the

likelihood of recidivism, consistent with the predictions of a rational model of criminality

as a DUI increases the expected cost of future criminality. However, having a BAC over

the aggravated DUI threshold also decreases the likelihood of recidivism. In neoclassical

models, he or she would consider the marginal BAC over the aggravated BAC threshold

bad luck and realize that the higher penalty on this occasion is a sunk cost. However, the

signi…cant decrease in recidivism evident in drunk drivers with BAC over the .15 threshold

which is consistent with a range of models in economics including punishment salience,

incomplete information and learning, bounded rationality, and rehabilitation (which can

be thought of altering preferences or information). Notably, this …nding is consistent with

other recent research in criminology (Anwar and Loughran, 2011) and business management

(Haselhun, Pope and Schweitzer, forthcoming). For instance, while substantial resources

are spent informing the public of the .08 threshold, information regarding the higher .15

threshold could have additional deterrent e¤ects and the drivers with highest BAC’s are

those responsible for the greatest number of fatalities.

   Lastly, given the recent recommendations of the NTSB to lower the BAC threshold from

.05 to .08, the estimates from this paper suggest that such a change would save at most

                                              29
120 to 200 lives. This would amount to roughly a 1 percent reduction in the number of

fatal accidents involving alcohol, and notably would be 1/4 of the estimates advanced by the

NTSB in their recommendation. The NTSB suggested fatalities would fall by 500-800, and

there are roughly 800 fatalities per year with BAC from .05 to .07.

      There are other viable policies in addition to lowering the BAC limit. Increasing marginal

punishments more sharply along the BAC distribution would cause potential drunk drivers

to internalize the external costs of drunk driving especially at higher levels of BAC where the

external risks are the greatest, which has the potential to save many more lives than lowering

the current BAC limit. Figure 12 plots average statutory …nes in the United States across the

BAC distribution.33 While current sanctions impose a myriad of punishments, …nes are the

sanction easiest to compare across jurisdictions and in constructing optimal punishments,

…nes are also preferred to sanctions which drain public resources (Becker,1968). The statu-

tory minimum …nes increase, due to the jumps in punishments at di¤erent thresholds across

the various states, but not at the compounding rate at which fatality risks increase. Optimal

sanctions would utilize punishments and sanctions whose distribution mirrored the increase

in fatality risks and social costs evident across the BAC distribution. If setting punishments

continuously along the BAC distribution is politically infeasible, numerous thresholds could

be used similar to sanction structures for speeding (10 MPH, 20 MPH, 30 MPH, 40 MPH,

etc.) – rather than only two. Furthermore, public safety o¢ cials could also potentially

deter more drunk driving by better informing drunk drivers of the increased punishments

that already exists at higher BAC thresholds with targeted advertisements regarding the

aggravated DUI threshold.

 33
      Based on Zador et al. (2000) and the author’s calculations.


                                                     30
References
 [1] Abrams, D. 2012. “Estimating the Deterrent E¤ect of Incarceration Using Sentence
     Enhancements.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, Vol. 4, No. 4, pp.
     32-56.

 [2] Akerlof, G. and J. Yeller. 1985. “Can Small Deviations from Rationality Make Signi…cant
     Di¤erences to Economic Equilibria?” American Economic Review, Vol. 75, No. 4, pp.
     708-720.

 [3] Anwar, S. and T. Loughran. 2011. “Testing a Bayesian Learning Theory Amongst Se-
     rious Juvenile O¤enders.”Criminology, Vol. 49, No. 3, pp. 667-698.

 [4] Apsler, R., Char, A.R., Harding, W.M., & Klein, TM. 1999. “The e¤ects of 0.08 BAC
     laws.”Washington, DC: National Highway Tra¢ c Safety Administration.

 [5] Barreca, A., J. Lindo, and G. Waddell. 2011. “Heaping-Induced Bias in Regression-
     Discontinuity Design.”NBER Working Paper, No. 17408.

 [6] Becker, G. 1968. “Crime and Punishment: An Economic Approach.” The Journal of
     Political Economy. Vol. 76, pp. 169-217.

 [7] Buonanno, P. S. Raphael. 2013. “Incarceration and Incapacitation: Evidence from the
     2006 Italian Collective Pardon.”American Economic Review. Vol. 103, No. 6, pp. 2437-
     65

 [8] Carpenter, C. 2004. “How do Zero Tolerance Drunk Driving Laws Work?" The Journal
     of Health Economics. Vol. 23, No. 1, pp. 61-83.

 [9] Carpenter, C. and C. Dobkin. 2009. “The E¤ect of Alcohol Consumption on Mortal-
     ity: Regression Discontinuity Evidence from the Minimum Drinking Age.” American
     Economics Journal - Applied Economics. Vol. 1, No. 1, pp. 164-182.

[10] Carpenter, C. and C. Dobkin. 2010. “The Minimum Legal Drinking Age and Public
     Health.”Journal of Economic Perspectives. Vol. 25, No. 2, pp. 133-156.

[11] Carpenter, C. and C. Dobkin. 2010. “The Drinking Age, Alcohol Consumption and
     Crime.”Working Paper.

[12] Chen, M. and J. Shapiro. 2007. “Do Harsher Prison Conditions Reduce Recidivism: a
     Discontinuity Based Approach.” American Law and Economics Review. Vol. 9, No. 1,
     pp. 1-29.

[13] Chetty, R., A. Looney, and K. Kroft. 2009. “Salience and Taxation: Theory and Evi-
     dence.”American Economic Review, Vol. 99. No.4, pp.1145-1177.

[14] DeAngelo, G. and B. Hansen. 2014. “Life and Death in the Fast Lane: Police Enforce-
     ment and Tra¢ c Fatalities.”American Economic Journal: Economic Policy. Vol. 6. pp.
     231-57.

                                            31
[15] Dee, T. 2001. “Does Setting Limits Save Lives? The Case for .08 BAC Laws.”Journal
     of Policy Analysis and Management. Vol. 20 , No. 1, pp. 111-128.

[16] Dononhue, J. and S. Levitt. 2001. “The Impact of Race on Policing and Arrests.”Journal
     of Law and Economics. Vol. 44, No. 2, pp. 367-394.

[17] Drago, F., R. Galbiati, and P. Vertova. 2009. “The Deterrent E¤ects of Prison: Evidence
     from a Natural Experiment.”Journal of Political Economy. Vol. 117, No. 2, pp. 254-280.

[18] Drago, P., R. Galbiati and P. Vertova. 2011. “Prison Conditions and Recidivism.”Amer-
     ican Law and Economics Review. Vol. 13, No. 1, pp. 103-130

[19] Evans, W. and E. Owens. 2007. “COPS and Crime.”Journal of Public Economics. Vol.
     91, No.1-2 , pp. 181-201.

[20] Imbens, G. and T. Lemieux. 2008. “Waiting for Life to Arrive: Regression Discontinuity
     Designs: A Guide to Practice.”Journal of Econometrics. Vol. 142, No. 2, pp. 615-635.

[21] Hahn, J., P. Todd, and W. Van der Klaauw. 2003 “Identi…cation and Treatment E¤ect
     with A Regression Discontinuity Design.”Econometrica, Vol. 69, No. 1, pp. 201-209.

[22] Helland, E. and A. Tabarrok. 2007. “Does Three Strikes Deter? a Nonparametric Solu-
     tion.”Journal of Human Resources. Vol. 42 ,No. 2, pp.

[23] Haselhun, M., D. Pope and M. Schweitzer. Forthcoming. “How Personal Experience
     with a Fine In‡uences Behavior.”Management Science.

[24] Iyengar, R. 2007. “I’d Rather be Hanged for a Sheep than for a Lamb: The Unintended
     Consequences of ‘Three-Strikes’Law”. Working paper.

[25] Kessler, D. and S. Levitt. 1999. “Using Sentence Enhancements to Distinguish between
     Deterrence and Incapacitation.”Journal of Law and Economics. Vol. 42, pp. 343-63.

[26] Lee, D. and D. Card. 2008. “Regression Discontinuity Design Inference with Speci…ca-
     tion Error.”Journal of Econometrics. Vol. 142, pp. 655-674.

[27] Lee, D. and J. McCrary. 2009. “The Deterrence E¤ects of Prison. Dynamic Theory and
     Evidence.”Working Paper.

[28] Levitt, S. 1997. “Using Electoral Cycles in Police Hiring to Estimate the E¤ect of Police
     on Crime.”The American Economic Review. Vol. 87, No. 3, pp. 270-290.

[29] Levitt, S. and Kessler. 1999.

[30] Levitt, S. and J. Porter. 2001. “How Dangerous Are Drinking Drivers?” Journal of
     Political Economy. Vol. 109, No. 6, pp. 1198-1237.

[31] McCrary, J. 2002. “Using Electoral Cycles in Police Hiring to Estimate the E¤ect of
     Police on Crime: A Comment.” The American Economic Review. Vol. 92, No. 4, pp.
     1236-1243.

                                             32
[32] McCrary, J. 2008. “Manipulation of the Running Variable in Regression Discontinuity
     Design: A Density Test.”Journal of Econometrics. Vol. 142, No. 2, pp. 698-714.

[33] Owens, E. 2009. “More Time, Less Crime: Estimated the Incapacitation E¤ects of
     Sentence Length.”Journal of Law and Economics. Vol. 52, No. 3, pp. 551-579.

[34] Sargent, T. 1993. “Bounded Rationality in Macroeconomics.”Oxford: Clarendon Press.

[35] Tversky, A. and D. Kahneman. 1986. “Rational Choice and the Framing of Decisions.”
     Journal of Business. Vol. 59, No. 4, pp. S251-S278.

[36] Thistlethwaite, D., Campbell, D. 1960. “Regression-Discontinuity Analysis: An Alter-
     native to the Ex-Post Facto Experiment.” Journal of Educational Psychology. Vol. 51,
     pp. 309–317.

[37] Yu, Jiang. 2000. “Punishment and Alcohol Problems Recidivism Among Drinking-
     Driving O¤enders.”Journal of Criminal Justice. Vol. 28. pp. 261-270.

[38] Yu, Jiang, P. Evans, and L. Clark. 2006. “Alcohol Addiction and Perceived Sanction
     Risks: Deterring Drinking Drivers.”Journal of Criminal Justice. Vol. 34, pp. 65-74.

[39] Zador, P., S. Krawchuk, and R. Voas. 2000. “Alcohol-Related Relative Risk of Driver
     Fatalities and Driver Involvement in Fatal Crashes in Relation to Driver Age and Gen-
     der: An Update Using 1996 Data.” Journal of Studies on Alcohol and Drugs. Vol. 61,
     No. 3, pp. 387-395.




                                           33
6      Figures and Tables
               Figure 1: Timeline of BAC Measurement and Recidivism Window




    This …gure contains a timeline illustrating the sample construction and examples of
    test dates and potential recidivism windows.


                                        Figure 2: BAC Distribution
                                               BAC Histogram
                             2000
                             1500
                        Frequency
                           1000
                             500
                             0




                                    0     .1         .2           .3          .4
                                                      BAC


                     This …gure contains the histogram of the BAC distribution.
                     Bin width is .001. The black lines are thresholds at .08 and .15
                     No manipulation is evident at either threshold.




                                                    34
                                      Figure 3: BAC and Characteristics
                         Accident at Scene                            Male                                         Age




    .25




                                                                                                   38
                                                          .82
    .2




                                                                                                   37
                                                          .8
    .15




                                                                                                   36
                                                          .78
                                                          .76




                                                                                                   35
    .1
    .05




                                                          .74




                                                                                                   34
                           .05    .1       .15       .2         .05    .1       .15           .2         .05       .1        .15         .2
                                   BAC                                  BAC                                         BAC

                                 Fitted      Accident                  Fitted         Male                          Fitted         Age



                                 White                          Prior Offenses                                 PBT Result




                                                          .25
    .9




                                                                                                   .2
    .8 .82 .84 .86 .88




                                                                                                   .15
                                                          .2
                                                          .15




                                                                                                   .1
                                                                                                   .05
                                                          .1
                           .05    .1       .15       .2         .05    .1       .15           .2         .05       .1        .15         .2
                                   BAC                                  BAC                                         BAC

                                  Fitted         White                 Fitted         Prior                      Fitted      PBT Result




This …gure contains scatterplots of BAC demonstrating the stability of
the predetermined characteristics along the BAC distribution.
Bin width is .002.




                                                                      35
                               Figure 4: BAC and Recidivism

                                     All Offenders




    .08 .1 .12 .14 .16
                         .05            .1                   .15    .2
                                             BAC

                                         Fitted        Recidivism



                                First-Time Offenders
    .12 .14
    .1
    .08




                         .05            .1                   .15    .2
                                             BAC

                                         Fitted        Recidivism



                                  Repeat Offenders
    .3
    .2
    .1




                         .05            .1                   .15    .2
                                             BAC

                                         Fitted        Recidivism



This …gure contains a scatterplots of BAC distribution and recidivism.
At both the thresholds a notable decline in reo¤ending is evident.
Bin width is .002.




                                                  36
                     Figure 5: Bandwidth Choice Sensitivity
          Bandwidth Choice and Estimated Effects
           DUI: Discontinuity at .08                            Agg. DUI: Discontinuity at .15




                                                                .01
   .01
   0




                                                                0
   -.01




                                                                -.01
   -.02




                                                                -.02
   -.03
   -.04




                                                                -.03
          0   .01   .02    .03   .04   .05     .06   .07               0   .01   .02    .03   .04   .05     .06   .07
                          bandwidth                                                    bandwidth

                    Est. Effect              95% Conf.                           Est. Effect              95% Conf.




This …gures presents the main estimates across variety bandwidths,
demonstrating their robustness.




                                                           37
                                                 Figure 6: Potential First Stages
                                                            Panel A
                              Fine Paid                                                Jail                                        Probation                              Probation Length
     1200                                                    30                                                       1                                       1400

     1000                                                    25                                                     .75                                       1200
      800                                                    20
                                                                                                                     .5                                       1000
      600                                                    15

                                                             10                                                     .25                                            800
      400

      200                                                     5                                                       0                                            600
                 .05            .1         .15      .2                .05        .1           .15         .2              .05        .1         .15      .2                .05      .1         .15   .2
                                     bac                                               bac                                                bac                                            bac


                      Victim s Panel                                         Alc. Assess                                        Alc. Treatment                                           AA
        1                                                         1                                                   1                                             1

     .75                                                    .75                                                     .75                                           .75

       .5                                                     .5                                                     .5                                            .5

     .25                                                    .25                                                     .25                                           .25

        0                                                         0                                                   0                                             0
             .05               .1          .15      .2                .05        .1           .15         .2              .05        .1         .15      .2              .05       .1          .15   .2
                                     bac                                               bac                                                bac                                            bac


                              Monitor                                    Court Ordered                                    Suspension Length
        1                                                               Lic. Suspens ion                            450
                                                            .06
                                                                                                                    400
     .75
                                                            .05
                                                                                                                    350
       .5                                                   .04
                                                                                                                    300
                                                            .03
     .25
                                                            .02                                                     250

        0                                                   .01                                                     200
             .05               .1          .15      .2                .05        .1           .15         .2               .05       .1         .15      .2
                                     bac                                               bac                                                bac




                                                                                                    Panel B
      Percentage Increase in Court Punishments
                                                                                               .08 Threshold
         ne -.5 0 .5 1
          Percentage Effect




                                                                                                                                                             AA
                                           il
                                      Ja




                                                                                                                                                                                                 r
                                                                                                                                                                                              ito
                                                      n
      Fi




                                                                                                                      ss




                                                                                                                                                          on
                                                    io



                                                                 th




                                                                                                                                                                               h
                                                                                       l




                                                                                                                                                                                            on
                                                                                                                      t
                                                                                    ne




                                                                                                                                                                             gt
                                                                                                                   en
                                                  at




                                                                                                                   se
                                                               ng




                                                                                                                                                        si




                                                                                                                                                                                           M
                                                                                                                                                                           en
                                                                                  Pa
                                               ob




                                                                                                                                                      en
                                                                                                                 tm
                                                                                                     As
                                                             Le




                                                                                                                                                                  .L
                                             Pr




                                                                                                                                                    sp
                                                                                                               ea
                                                                                   s



                                                                                                    c.
                                                              .



                                                                                 im
                                                           ob




                                                                                                                                                                sp
                                                                                                                                                  Su
                                                                                                            Tr
                                                                                                Al
                                                                               ct
                                                         Pr




                                                                                                                                                              Su
                                                                                                         c.
                                                                            Vi




                                                                                                               Al




                                                                                               .15 Threshold
         ne -.5 0 .5 1
          Percentage Effect




                                                                                                                                                             AA
                                           il
                                      Ja




                                                                                                                                                                                                 r
                                                                                                                                                                                              ito
                                                      n
      Fi




                                                                                                          ss




                                                                                                                                                          on
                                                    io



                                                                 th




                                                                                                                                                                               h
                                                                                       l




                                                                                                                           t




                                                                                                                                                                                            on
                                                                                    ne




                                                                                                                         en




                                                                                                                                                                             gt
                                                  at




                                                                                                         se
                                                               ng




                                                                                                                                                        si




                                                                                                                                                                                           M
                                                                                                                                                                           en
                                                                                  Pa
                                               ob




                                                                                                                                                      en
                                                                                                                       tm
                                                                                                     As
                                                             Le




                                                                                                                                                                  .L
                                             Pr




                                                                                                                                                    sp
                                                                                                                     ea
                                                                                   s



                                                                                                    c.
                                                              .



                                                                                 im
                                                           ob




                                                                                                                                                                sp
                                                                                                                                                  Su
                                                                                                                  Tr
                                                                                                Al
                                                                               ct
                                                         Pr




                                                                                                                                                              Su
                                                                                                               c.
                                                                            Vi




                                                                                                               Al




This …gure displays potential …rst stages driven by changes in sanctions
and punishments at the .08 and .15 thresholds.




                                                                                                           38
                                   Figure 7: Recidivism Windows for .08 Threshold

                                       Estimated Effects on Recidivism, Varying Windows
                                                                                    No Prior Tests
                                            Estimated Prob. Effect                                                             Estimated Elasticity




                                                                                                        .1
          0




                                                                                            -.5 -.4 -.3 -.2 -.1 0
          -.03 -.02 -.01




                                                                                                   Est. Elasticity
                                   0      500            1000         1500          2000
                                                Recividism Window, in Days

                                           Est. Effect              95% Low Bound                                    0   500            1000        1500    2000
                                                                                                                               Recidivism Window, in Days



                                                                             At Least 1 Prior Test
                                            Estimated Prob. Effect                                                             Estimated Elasticity
          -.08-.06-.04-.02 0 .02




                                                                                                        .1
                                                                                            -.5 -.4 -.3 -.2 -.1 0
                                                                                                   Est. Elasticity
                                   0      500            1000         1500          2000
                                                Recividism Window, in Days

                                           Est. Effect              95% Low Bound
                                                                                                                     0   500            1000        1500    2000
                                                                                                                               Recidivism Window, in Days




This …gure presents the estimated e¤ect of having BAC over the .08 limit across
various time windows ranging from 10 days to 2200 days.


         Figure 8: Recidivism Windows for the .15 Threshold

                                       Estimated Effects on Recidivism, Varying Windows
                                                                                    No Prior Tests
                                            Estimated Prob. Effect                                                             Estimated Elasticity
          -.015-.01-.005 0 .005




                                                                                                        .1 0
                                                                                             Est. Elasticity
                                                                                            -.2    -.1




                                   0      500            1000         1500          2000
                                                                                                        -.3




                                                Recividism Window, in Days

                                           Est. Effect              95% Low Bound                                    0   500            1000        1500    2000
                                                                                                                               Recidivism Window, in Days



                                                                             At Least 1 Prior Test
                                            Estimated Prob. Effect                                                             Estimated Elasticity
          .02




                                                                                                        .1
          0




                                                                                                          0
                                                                                            Est. Elasticity
          -.06 -.04 -.02




                                                                                            -.2 -.1     -.3




                                   0      500            1000         1500          2000
                                                Recividism Window, in Days

                                           Est. Effect              95% Low Bound
                                                                                                                     0   500            1000        1500    2000
                                                                                                                               Recidivism Window, in Days




This …gures presents the estimated e¤ect of having BAC over the .15 limit across
various time windows ranging from 10 days to 2200 days.




                                                                                           39
Figure 9: Robustness of Prior Experience Measures
                     Heterogeneous Effects by Prior Experience
                 Effect of BAC>=.08 Threshold                 Effect of BAC>=.15 Threshold




          0




                                                       0
          -.02




                                                       -.02
           b_




                                                        b_
        -.04




                                                     -.04
          -.06




                                                       -.06
                               es -.08




                                                                            es -.08
                                   v.




                                                                               v.
                                  08




                                                                                8
                                    t




                                                                                t
                                   ts




                                                                               ts
                                    .




                                                                               v.
                                 08




                                                                              08
                                 nv


                                 es




                                                                             es
                                                                             .0


                                                                            on
                               on




                                                                            on
                                .




                              =.




                                                                           =.
                             rT




                                                                          rT
                               o
                             >=




                                                                          >=
                            rT




                                                                         rT
                           rC




                                                                        rC
                           rC




                                                                        rC
                            t>




                                                                         t>
                           ts




                                                                        ts
                          io




                                                                       io
                        es




                                                                     es
                         io




                                                                      io
                        io




                                                                     io
                       io




                                                                    io
                      es




                      Pr




                                                                   es




                                                                   Pr
                     Pr




                                                                  Pr
                     rT




                                                                  rT
                     Pr




                                                                  Pr
                     Pr




                                                                  Pr
                   rT




                                                                rT
                   t1




                                                                t1
   No




                                                No
                  io




                                                               io
                 t1




                                                              t1
                   o




                                                                o
                 io




                                                              io
               as




                                                            as
                N




                                                             N
               Pr




                                                            Pr
              Pr




                                                           Pr
              as




                                                           as
             Le




                                                          Le
            t1




                                                         t1
           Le




                                                        Le
         o




                                                      o
          At




                                                       At
        N




                                                     N
         as




                                                      as
        At




                                                     At
       Le




                                                    Le
    At




                                                 At
This …gure demonstrates the stability of the main …ndings
across various de…nitions of prior o¤ender experience.


                      Figure 10: Judicial Outcomes




This …gure highlights the stability of conviction and dismissal
probabilities at the .15 threshold.



                                                40
                                             Figure 11
               Donut Size and Estimated Effects
          DUI: Discontinuity at .08                   Agg. DUI: Discontinuity at .15




   0




                                                          0
   -.01




                                                          -.01
   -.02




                                                          -.02
   -.03




                                                          -.03
   -.04




                                                          -.04
          0   .001     .002    .003   .004    .005               0   .001    .002    .003   .004    .005
                      Donut Width                                           Donut Width

                  Est. Ef f ect        95% Conf .                       Est. Ef f ect        95% Conf .




Figure 11 explores the sensitivity of the results to excluding
observations near the thresholds via a “donut” RD. Exclusion
of observations near the threshold has practically no e¤ect on
the precision or magnitude of the estimates.




                                                     41
                                 Figure 12
               Punishments vs. Risks Across BAC Distribution
                                                    Fatality Risk and BAC




                 150
                 100
        Risk
                 50
                 0




                                     0        .05           .1          .15   .2    .25
                                                                  BAC



                                         Average Statutory Fines and BAC
                       600     400
          Average Statutory Fines
               200     0




                                     0        .05           .1          .15   .2   .25
                                                                  BAC


This …gure illustrates the estimated fatality risk across the BAC distribution
vs. the expected statutory …ne in the United States.




                                                                 42
              Table 1: Punishments for DUI Conviction Based on BAC
                                       1st O¤ense                  2nd O¤ense               >=3rd O¤ense
                                  DUI        Agg. DUI          DUI       Agg. DUI          DUI     Agg. DUI
BAC                             [.08,.15]      (.15,1]       >=0.08         >.15         >=0.08       >.15
Min. Penalty                    $865.50      $1,120.50      $1,120.50    $1,545.50      $1,970.50  $2,820.50
Max. Penalty                     $5,000       $5,000          $5,000       $5,000         $5,000     $5,000
Min. Jail Time                 24 Hours      48 Hours        30 Days      45 Days        90 Days   150 Days
Min. Home Release              14 Days*      28 Days*       60 Days**    90 Days**     120 Days** 150 Days
License Susp./Revok. Period 90 Days+ 365 Days++             2 Years++ 900 Days++        3 Years++ 4 Years++
SR-22 Insurance                    Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes            Yes        Yes
This table outlines the Washington statutes on sanctions   and punishments depending   on the BAC measured.
* In lieu of Jail Time. ** Mandatory. + .Suspension. ++    Revocation.




                                                  43
                                                     Table 2: Summary Statistics
                      I         II          III       IV         V            VI            VII          VIII         IX       X        XI      XII
     BAC Range      [0,1]    [0,.08) [.08,.15] (.15,1]      [.074,.079]   [.080,.085]   [.145,.150]   [.151,.156]   [.079]   [.081]   [.149]   [.151]
          Driver Demographics
     Age            35.5      36.0         34.5      36.4      34.9            34.3        35.3            34.9     34.3     33.8     35.2     34.4
     [t-test]       N/A            [-18.4]      [37.7]                [-2.4]                      [-1.5]               [-1.11]           [-2.04]

     Male            .792      .785     .796     .788          .792            .788        .785            .776     .781    .796      .809    .806
     [t-test]        N/A          [3.6]      [4.6]                    [-0.4]                      [-1.4]               [0.88]            [0.26]

     White           .862      .843      .857      .872        .852            .850        .866            .878     .852     .866     .868    .867
     [t-test]        N/A           [5.6]      [10.0]                  [0.3]                       [2.0]                 [-1.2]           [0.13]

         Police Ex-Ante Information
     Accident        .149     .115       .112      .199        .089            .088        .145            .151     .088     .086     .146     .136
     [t-test]        N/A          [-2.0]      [56.6]                  [-0.2]                      [0.6]                [-0.18]           [-0.94]

     Prior Tests     .190      .188       .161     .223        .139            .148        .170            .193     .143     .132     .171    .184




44
     [t-test]        N/A          [-8.61]      [30.6]                 [0.74]                      [2.76]                [-.74]           [0.88]

     PBT Test        .132      .081      .118                  .090            .092        .143            .147     .091    .093      .146     .147
     [t-test]                    [104.2]      [183.2]                 [4.29]                      [4.15]               [0.74]             [.55]

          Outcomes
     Recidivism      .120      .117       .110      .132       .113            .097        .122            .109     .103     .084     .125    .125
     [t-test]                      [-3.2]      [15.6]                 [-2.8]                      [-2.0]               [-1.45]           [0.22]

     Obs.          229,400 25,515 108,690 95,195           4,572         4,596         6,798        6,431       959   1,089 1,687 1,575
     This table contains summary statistics for various BAC ranges. t-statistics testing for the di¤erences of means are reported in [].
                                   Table 3
                         DUI/AGG DUI and Characteristics
                                    Driver Demographic                          Police Ex-Ante
                                        Characteristics                          Information
Characteristics                    Male    White        Age             Acc.     Prior         PBT
 P anel A : DU I Threshold
DU I                               .007     .002      –.165      -.004      0.039                -.0007
                                  [1.33]   [0.39]     [-.99]    [-1.08]     [0.55]               [-1.26]
Mean (at .079)                      .79
Controls                            No       No         No         No         No                   No
Obs:                            95,111     95,111    95,111     95,111     95,111                60,485
  P anel B : Agg DU I Threshold
AGG DU I                          -.001    0.003       .049       .003      0.008                .0002
                                 [-1.23]   [0.99]     [0.40]     [0.71]     [1.31]                [.20]
Mean (at .149)
Controls                            No       No         No         No         No                   No
Obs:                            146,626 146,626 146,626 146,626 146,626                          76,153
This table contains estimates of the e¤ect of having BAC above the legal thresholds
on predetermined characteristics. Panel A focuses on the estimated e¤ect of BAC
above the DUI threshold, while Panel B focuses the Aggravated DUI threshold.
All regressions have a bandwidth of .05 and use a rectangular kernel for weighting.
*, **, and *** indicate signi…cance at the 10, 5, and 1 % levels, [] contains estimated      t-statistics.




             Table 4: BAC Over DUI Threshold and Recidivism
                I             II             III                IV                V                VI
            All Suspected O¤enders                 No Prior Tests              At Least One Prior Stop
 P anel A : BAC 2 [:03; :13]
DU I      -.020***    -.021***            -.016***         -.017***            -.053***      -.053***
            [-4.68]     [-5.00]            [-3.92]          [-4.21]             [-3.48]        [-3.50]

Mean               .103                                 .093                              .172
Controls     No           Yes                No                 Yes              No               Yes
Obs:       95,111       95,111             82,626              82,626          12,485            12,485
 P anel B : BAC 2 [:055; :105]
DU I      -.019***    -.019***            -.017***         -.018***            -.037**       -.038**
           [-3.83]      [-4.02]            [-3.67]           [3.80]             [2.01]        [2.07]

Mean                    .103                            .093                           .172
Controls       No              Yes            No              Yes             No             Yes
Obs:         49,396           49,396        43,070           43,070          6,326          6,326
This table contains estimates of the e¤ect of having BAC above the DUI threshold on
recidivism for all drivers, those with no prior test, and drivers with at least one prior test.
Panel A contains estimates with a bandwidth of .05 while Panel B has a bandwidth of .025,
with all regressions utilizing a rectangular kernel for weighting. Controls include indicators for
county, year, race, gender, and age of the o¤ender.
 *, **, and *** indicate signi…cance at the 10, 5, and 1 % levels, [] contains estimated t-statistics.




                                                   45
        Table 5: BAC Over Agg. DUI Threshold and Recidivism
                 I              II               III          IV           V               VI
             All Suspected O¤enders            No Prior Stops               At Least One Prior Test
 P anel A : BAC 2 [:10; :20]
Agg DU I    -.011***     -.010***           -.009** -.009**          -.021**             -0.022**
              [-3.17]      [-3.05]           [-2.19]      [-2.10]     [-2.04]             [-2.15]
Mean                  .125                           .118                             .165
Controls        No           Yes               No           Yes            No               Yes
Obs:        146,426       146,626           124,192 124,192              22,234           22,234
 P anel B : BAC 2 [:125; :175]
Agg DU I     -.011**     -0.011**              -.010*     -.010*          -.017           -.019
              [-2.29]      [-2.25]             [-1.70]    [-1.65]        [-1.17]         [-1.34]

Mean                      .125                      .118                         .165
Controls         No             Yes            No        Yes        No                 Yes
Obs:           78,622          78,622        66,541     66,541    12,081             12,081
This table contains estimates of the e¤ect of having BAC above the DUI threshold on
recidivism for all drivers, those with no prior test, and drivers with at least one prior test.
Panel A contains estimates with a bandwidth of .05 while Panel B has a bandwidth of .025,
with all regressions utilizing a rectangular kernel for weighting. Controls include indicators for
county, year, race, gender, and age of the o¤ender.
*, **, and *** indicate signi…cance at the 10, 5, and 1 % levels, [] contains estimated t-statistics.


                        Table 6: BAC Over DUI Threshold
                            Recidivism Heterogeneity
                                                              Recidivism Outcomes
Recidivism BAC Range              [.08,.15]        (.15,.1]    [0,.08) Refusal            Accident
 P anel A : All Suspected Of f enders
DU I                              -.0153**         -.007**     -.004*        .001          -.003**
                                   [-4.02]          [-2.37]    [-1.69]      [0.18]          [2.04]

Mean                                   .0625        .031        .016         .023           .008
Controls                                Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes            Yes
Obs.                                  95,111       95,111      95,111       95,111         95,111
P anel B : N o Prior Stops
DU I                                 -.0148***     -.007**      -.003        .004           -.002
                                       [-3.90]      [-2.16]    [-1.54]      [1.57]         [-1.15]

Mean                                  .061          .028        .021         .041           0.00
Controls                              Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes            Yes
Obs.                                82,626         82,626      82,626       82,626         82,626
 P anel C : At least One Prior Stop
DU I                                -.021*          -.010       -.009       -0.016        -.0128**
                                    [-1.92]        [-1.28]     [-1.36]      [-1.63]         [2.51]

Mean                                  .058        .056      .014      .049             .018
Controls                              Yes         Yes       Yes       Yes              Yes
Obs.                                 12,485      12,485 12,485 12,485                 12,485
This table contains estimates of the e¤ect of having BAC above DUI threshold on
5 types of recidivism. Panel A contains estimates for all drivers, Panel B contains estimates
for those no prior tests Panel C contains estimates for those with at least one prior test. .
All regressions are estimated with a bandwidth of .05 and use a rectangular kernel for weighting.
Controls include indicators for county, year, race, gender, and age of the o¤ender.
*, **, and *** indicate signi…cance at the 10, 5, and 1 % levels, [] contains estimated t-statistics.

                                                   46
                     Table 7: BAC Over Agg. DUI Threshold
                             Recidivism Heterogeneity
                                                           Recidivism type
Recidivism BAC Range              [.08,.15]     (.15,.1]   [0,.08)   Refusal          Accident
 P anel A : All Suspected Of f enders
AGG DU I                           -.005**      -.004*     -.003***     -.001            -.006
                                    [-2.35]     [-1.80]      [-3.06]   [-0.75]          [-0.52]

Mean                                 .053        .056       .014         .049           .019
Controls                               Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes             Yes
Obs.                                 146,626    146,626    146,626     146,626         146,626
P anel B : No Prior Stops
AGG DU I                             -.005**     -.004       -.006      .0005            -.004
                                      [-2.34]   [-1.63]     [-1.21]     [0.25]          [-0.29]

Mean                              .052            .053       .015        .040           .018
Controls                              Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes             Yes
Obs.                               124,912      124,912    124,912     124,912         124,912
 P anel C : At Least One Prior Stop
AGG DU I                             -.004       -.004      -.002      -.014**          -0.002
                                    [-0.55]     [-0.57]     [-.80]      [-2.06]         [-0.58]

Mean                                 .071         .071       .001       .076             .023
Controls                               Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes               Yes
Obs.                                  22,234     22,234     22,234     22,234           22,234
This table contains estimates of the e¤ect of having BAC above the aggravated DUI threshold
 on 5 types of recidivism. Panel A contains estimates for all drivers, Panel B contains estimates
 for those with no prior tests, and Panel C contains estimates for those with at least one prior test.
All regressions are estimated with a bandwidth of .05 and use a rectangular kernel for weighting.
Controls include indicators for county, year, race, gender, and age of the o¤ender.
*, **, and *** indicate signi…cance at the 10, 5, and 1 % levels, [] contains estimated t-statistics.




                                                 47
                                      Table 8
                               Potential First Stages
                 Panel A: Court-Ordered Punishments and Sanctions
                          Fine              Jail       Probation     Prob. Length       Hom e M on.     Court Susp.      Susp. Length

                                           P anel A : C ourt-O rdered San ction s and P un ishm en ts
   DUI                 159.7***           3.84***      .081***        66.67***           .042***          .008***              -28.3
                        [6.73]             [6.80]       [8.41]         [4.38]              [9.91]          [4.71]             [-0.69]
   M ean (at.079)       523.5               8.61          .25           768.1               .19             .011                241
   M edian (at .079)     425                  0            0             730                 0                0                 90

   Agg. DUI              73.5**           1.40***         .001               25.9*          .005           -.001              78.8***
                         [2.52]            [2.46]        [0.39]              [3.53]        [1.87]         [-0.67]              [4.93]
   M ean (at .149)       918.8              19.4           .36                1256           .20           .056                246.2
   M edian (at .149)      662                 1             1                 1095            0              0                   90

                                     P anel B : Alcohol-Related C ourt-O rdered Treatm ents
                          Victim s Panel             Alcohol Assess.          Alc. Treatm ent                         AA
   DUI                        .17***                     .14***                    .002**                            .001
                             [10.45]                     [10.15]                    [6.64]                          [2.92]
   M ean (at.079)               .58                        .43                       .12                              .01
   M edian (at .079)             1                          0                         0                                0

   Agg. DUI                       .001                            -.008***                .007**                      .002
                                  [.01]                             [2.23]                 [1.99]                     [.22]
   M ean (at .149)                 .67                               .53                    .21                       .030
   M edian (at .149)                1                                 1                      0                          0
   This table contains estim ates of the change in court-ordered sanctions at the .08 and .15 thresholds.
   Panel A contains court-ordered punishm ents and sanctions, while Panel B refers to court-ordered
   alcohol and drug abuse treatm ents and screening.
   All regression m odels are lo cal linear regressions with a bandwidth of .05 and use a rectangular kernel.
   Controls include indicators for county, year, race, gender, and age of the o¤ender.
   *, **, and *** indicate signi…cance at the 10, 5, and 1 % levels, [] contains estim ated t-statistics.




                                     Table 9
                       DUI/AGG DUI Thresholds and Other Crimes
Characteristics                             Assault        Domestic Violence          Other Crimes            All Other Crimes
 P anel A : DU I Threshold
DU I                                          .0001                 .00001                 -.0006                       -.0005
                                              [0.56]                 [0.30]                [-1.37]                      [0.55]

Mean                         .0002                                  .00005                  .001                        .002
Controls                      Yes                                     Yes                   Yes                         Yes
Obs:                        95,111                                  95,111                 95,111                      95,111
 P anel B : Agg DU I Threshold
AGG DU I                    -.0001                                  -.0001                 0.0003                      0.0002
                            [-0.65]                                 [-0.11]                [0.75]                      [0.54]

Mean                             .0002            .0003               .0016                  .002
Controls                          Yes              Yes                 yes                   Yes
Obs:                            146,626         146,626             146,626                146,626
This table contains regression discontinuity based estimates on the e¤ect of having BAC above the DUI
threshold on future o¤ending in other crimes involving alcohol tests. Panel A focuses on the e¤ect
of BAC above the DUI threshold, while Panel B focuses the Aggravated DUI threshold.
Controls include indicators for county, year, race, gender, and age of the o¤ender.
All regressions have a bandwidth of .05 and use a rectangular kernel for weighting.
*, **, and *** indicate signi…cance at the 10, 5, and 1 % levels, [] contains estimated t-statistics.




                                                                        48
                                                                       Appendix Figure 1




                                       2.0e+04
                                       1.5e+04
                                   Frequency
                                    1.0e+04
                                       5000
                                       0




                                                 -.1          -.05                  0            .05         .1
                                                                                   diff


                             This …gure illustrates the di¤erence in the two BAC samples taken.


                                                                       Appendix Figure 2

                                   Observation Counts at Thresholds
                                                                           .08 Threshold
       500 1000 1500 2000
        Frequency
                0




                             .05                        .06          .07           .08     .09         .1         .11
                                                                                  BAC


                                                                           .15 Threshold
       500 1000 1500 2000
        Frequency
                0




                            .12                        .13       .14               .15     .16         .17        .18
                                                                                  BAC



This …gure illustrates the histogram of observations zoomed in at the threshold, demonstrating the
continuity of the running variable.




                                                                                49
                                                                   Appendix Figure 2




                      2.0e+04
                      1.5e+04
          Frequency
           1.0e+04    5000
                      0




                                    -.1                    -.05                     0                                          .05                    .1
                                                                                   diff


        This …gure illustrates the di¤erence in the two BAC samples taken.


                                                                   Appendix Figure 3

                    Average Recivisim                                                                    Average Recivisim
           First Time Agg. DUI Offenders                                                            Repeat Agg. DUI Offenders
                                                                                         0 .05 .1 .15 .2 .25
                              .15
           Average Recidivism




                                                                                       Average Recidivism
             0    .05    .1




                                     0      500     1000     1500   2000   2500                                0      500     1000     1500   2000   2500
                                         Recidivism Window, in Days                                                Recidivism Window, in Days


                                         Average Recivisim                                                       Average Recivisim
                                    First Time DUI Offenders                                                   Repeat DUI Offenders
                       .15




                                                                                                  .2
                                                                                         0 .05 .1 .15
           Average Recidivism




                                                                                       Average Recidivism
             0    .05     .1




                                     0      500     1000     1500   2000   2500                                0      500     1000     1500   2000   2500
                                         Recidivism Window, in Days                                                Recidivism Window, in Days



This …gure illustrates the cumulative probability of recidivism for varying time windows.




                                                                                  50
                          Appendix Table 1
              DUI/AGG DUI Thresholds and Recidivism Hazards
  Characteristics                       0-90 Days        90-365 Days     365-730 Days          730-1460 Days
   P anel A : DU I Threshold
  DU I                              -.003*       -.0074**         -.004*               -.004**
                                    [-1.93]        [-3.41]        [-1.78]               [-1.97]
  Mean                               .014           .025            .031                 .041
  Controls                            Yes            Yes            Yes                   Yes
  Obs:                              95,111        95,111          95,111               95,111
    P anel B : Agg DU I Threshold
  AGG DU I                          -.0002          -.001         -.0007               -.005**
                                    [-0.24]        [-0.74]         [-.45]               [-2.20]
  Mean                               .014           .023            .026                 .054
  Controls                            Yes            Yes             No                   No
  Obs:                             146,626        146,626        146,626              146,626
  This table contains regression discontinuity based estimates on the e¤ect of having BAC above
  the DUI threshold on recidivism in time windows to illustrate e¤ects on the hazard function.
  Panel A focuses on the estimated e¤ect of BAC above the DUI threshold, while Panel B focuses
  on the estimated e¤ect of BAC above the aggravated DUI threshold.
  Controls include indicators for county, year, race, gender, and age of the o¤ender.
  All regressions have a bandwidth of .05 and use a rectangular kernel for weighting.
  *, **, and *** indicate signi…cance at the 10, 5, and 1 % levels, [] contains estimated t-statistics.

                     Appendix Table 2: DUI/AGG DUI Receipt
                                      DUI                                   AGG DUI
  Characteristics           I           II         III        IV            V              VI
  DU I [AGG DU I]       -.021*** -0.013** -.020*** -0.010*** -0.012**                   -0.010*
                         [-5.00]     [-2.57]     [3.00]     [3.05]       [-2.45]         [-1.64]
  P olynomial Order         1           2           3          1            2               3
  Controls                 Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes             Yes
  Obs:                   95,111      95,111     95,111     146,626      146,626         146,626
  This table explores the sensitivity of the main estimates to the order of the polynomial
  Controls include indicators for county, year, race, gender, and age of the o¤ender.
  *, **, and *** indicate signi…cance at the 10, 5, and 1 % levels, [] contains estimated t-statistics.




                   Appendix Table 3: DUI/AGG DUI Recidivism
                                            DUI                                           AGG DUI
Characteristics        I           II             III        IV           I          II        III           IV
  P anel A : Bandwidth = :05
DU I [AGG DU I]    -.015***     -.016***      -.017***    -.018***    -0.010***   -0.010***   -.010***    -.010***
                    [-3.57]       [-3.73]      [-4.03]      [-4.21]     [-2.78]     [-2.73]    [-2.96]      [-2.90]
Kernel             Triangle     Triangle      Gaussian    Gaussian     Triangle    Triangle   Gaussian    Gaussian
Controls              No            Yes          No           Yes         No          Yes        No           Yes
Obs:                95,111       95,111        95,111      95,111      146,626     146,626    146,626      146,626
  P anel B : Bandwidth = :025
DU I [AGG DU I]    -.014***     -.015***      -.016***    -0.17***     -.010**    -.010**      -.010**     -.009**
                    [-2.92]       [-3.05]      [-3.15]     [-3.20]      [-2.15]    [-2.15]      [-2.11]     [-2.10]
Kernel             Triangle     Triangle      Gaussian    Gaussian     Triangle   Triangle    Gaussian    Gaussian
Controls              No            Yes          No          Yes          No         Yes          No          Yes
Obs:                49,396       49,396        49,396      49,396       78,622     78,622       78,622      78,622
This table explores the sensitivity of the main estimates to the type of kernel used for weighting.
Panel A presents estimates using a bandwidth of .05, while Panel B has estimates with a
bandwidth of .025. Controls include indicators for county, year, race, gender, and age of the o¤ender.
*, **, and *** indicate signi…cance at the 10, 5, and 1 % levels, [] contains estimated t-statistics.



                                                           51
