NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TRYING TO UNDERSTAND THE PPPS IN ICP2011:
WHY ARE THE RESULTS SO DIFFERENT?
Angus Deaton
Bettina Aten
Working Paper 20244
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20244
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2014

We are grateful to Orley Ashenfelter, Grant Cameron, Erwin Diewert, Bill Easterly, Rob Feenstra,
Nada Hamadeh, Alan Heston, Robert Inklaar, Michel Mouyelo-Katoula, Paul McCarthy, Prasada Rao,
Marko Rissanen, Marcel Timmer, and Fred Vogel for help, comments and suggestions. The views
expressed in this paper are solely those of the authors and not necessarily those of the U.S. Bureau
of Economic Analysis, the U.S. Department of Commerce, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
Both Aten and Deaton are consultants to the International Comparison Program (ICP); Aten as a member
of the Computation Task Force, and Deaton as a member of the Technical Advisory Group. The research
reported in this paper was not funded by the ICP. The data used in the paper are either from the World
Development Indicators or can be accessed via application to the ICP; for details see
http://siteresources.worldbank.org/ICPINT/Resources/270056-1255977254560/
121120_ICPDataAccessPrinciples&Procedures.pdf
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Angus Deaton and Bettina Aten. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Trying to Understand the PPPs in ICP2011: Why are the Results so Different?
Angus Deaton and Bettina Aten
NBER Working Paper No. 20244
June 2014, Revised April 2015
JEL No. E01,F00,O11,O47
ABSTRACT
Purchasing power parity exchange rates, or PPPs, are price indexes that summarize prices in each country
relative to a numeraire country, typically the United States. These numbers are used to compare living
standards across countries, by academics in studies of economic growth, particularly through the Penn
World Table, and in some cases, to allocate resources. The International Comparison Program (ICP)
collects the detailed prices on which these indexes are based on an irregular basis. In 2014, the ICP
published PPPs from the 2011 round that are sharply different from those that were expected from
extrapolation of the previous round, ICP 2005. These discrepancies will eventually have important
implications for the Penn World Table, and for international comparisons of living standards. The
world according to ICP 2011 looks markedly more equal than calculated from ICP 2005. This paper
investigates why this happened. We identify a likely source of the problem in the way that the regions
of the ICP were linked in 2005. We use two different methods for measuring the size of the effect.
Both suggest that the 2005 PPPs for consumption for countries in Asia (excluding Japan), Western
Asia, and Africa were overstated relative to the US by between 18 to 26 percent.
Angus Deaton
361 Wallace Hall
Woodrow Wilson School
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544-1013
and NBER
deaton@princeton.edu
Bettina Aten
Bureau of Economic Analysis
1441 L Street, N.W.
Washington, DC 20230
Bettina.Aten@bea.gov

1.	  Introduction	  
	  
Purchasing	  power	  parity	  exchange	  rates,	  PPPs,	  are	  international	  multilateral	  price	  
indexes	  that	  measure,	  for	  the	  various	  components	  of	  GDP,	  the	  amount	  of	  local	  cur-­‐
rency	  required	  to	  purchase	  the	  same	  real	  amount	  in	  that	  country	  relative	  to	  a	  nu-­‐
meraire,	  which	  is	  typically	  the	  United	  States.	  Non-­‐traded	  goods	  are	  typically	  cheaper	  
in	  poorer	  economies,	  so	  that	  PPPs	  are	  typically	  lower	  than	  exchange	  rates	  for	  poor	  
countries,	  and	  are	  more	  so	  the	  poorer	  the	  country:	  for	  example,	  in	  2011	  the	  market	  
exchange	  rate	  for	  India	  was	  46.7	  rupees	  to	  the	  dollar,	  while	  the	  PPP	  exchange	  rate	  
for	  consumption	  was	  15.0	  rupees	  to	  the	  dollar.	  PPP-­‐adjusted	  national	  accounts	  ap-­‐
pear	  in	  several	  widely	  used	  data	  sets,	  such	  as	  the	  Penn	  World	  Table	  and	  the	  World	  
Development	  Indicators.	  The	  European	  Union	  uses	  PPP-­‐adjusted	  accounts	  for	  redis-­‐
tributive	  purposes,	  while	  adjusted	  GDP	  numbers	  enter	  into	  the	  IMF	  quota	  formulas.	  
The	  World	  Bank	  uses	  PPP	  exchange	  rates	  to	  calculate	  global	  poverty	  estimates.	  The	  
burgeoning	  interest	  in	  global	  income	  inequality	  also	  requires	  such	  numbers.	  
	  

The	  PPP	  indexes	  are	  based	  on	  thousands	  of	  prices	  collected	  in	  nearly	  200	  

countries.	  The	  work	  is	  done	  by	  the	  International	  Comparison	  Program	  (ICP),	  which	  
has	  collected	  prices	  in	  a	  series	  of	  benchmark	  years,	  the	  latest	  of	  which	  are	  2005	  and	  
2011.	  A	  summary	  of	  the	  results	  of	  the	  2011	  round	  was	  published	  in	  April	  2014,	  
World	  Bank	  (2014);	  the	  report	  tabulates	  purchasing	  power	  parity	  exchange	  rates	  
for	  the	  main	  aggregates	  of	  GDP	  for	  199	  economies.	  Until	  the	  publication	  of	  these	  re-­‐
sults,	  the	  World	  Bank	  in	  its	  World	  Development	  Indicators	  provided	  extrapolated	  
PPP	  exchange	  rates;	  for	  most	  countries,	  these	  were	  based	  on	  the	  2005	  round	  of	  the	  
ICP,	  updated	  using	  relative	  inflation	  rates	  for	  each	  country.	  The	  new	  estimates	  for	  

	  

2	  

2011	  from	  ICP	  2011	  are	  quite	  different	  from	  these	  extrapolations.	  In	  particular,	  
most	  poor	  countries	  of	  the	  world	  are	  estimated	  to	  be	  larger	  relative	  to	  the	  US	  and	  
other	  rich	  countries	  than	  was	  estimated	  from	  the	  extrapolations.	  This	  aspect	  of	  the	  
results	  has	  attracted	  a	  good	  deal	  of	  attention,	  particularly	  the	  fact	  that	  the	  aggregate	  
Chinese	  economy	  is	  much	  closer	  to	  the	  US	  than	  previously	  estimated,	  and	  also	  that	  
the	  Indian	  economy	  is	  now	  estimated	  to	  be	  larger	  than	  the	  Japanese	  economy.	  The	  
new	  results	  also	  sharply	  reduce	  previous	  estimates	  of	  international	  inequality.	  
	  

The	  PPPs	  for	  individual	  consumption	  by	  households,	  like	  the	  PPPs	  for	  GDP,	  

have	  been	  revised	  downwards,	  so	  that	  estimated	  consumption	  levels	  outside	  the	  
rich	  countries	  are	  now	  higher	  than	  previously	  estimated.	  As	  was	  immediately	  noted	  
by	  several	  commentators,	  Dykstra,	  Kenney,	  and	  Sandefur	  (2014),	  and	  Chandy	  and	  
Kharas	  (2014),	  these	  consumption	  PPPs	  are	  the	  relevant	  ones	  for	  the	  calculation	  of	  
global	  poverty	  rates,	  which	  are	  likely	  to	  be	  deeply	  affected.	  If	  the	  global	  poverty	  line	  
is	  held	  fixed	  in	  real	  2005	  US	  dollars,	  for	  example	  at	  $1.25	  as	  currently	  used	  by	  the	  
World	  Bank,	  its	  local	  value	  in	  poor	  country	  currencies	  will	  now	  be	  lower,	  so	  that	  
there	  will	  be	  fewer	  people	  living	  below	  it.	  These	  calculations	  show	  very	  large	  de-­‐
clines	  in	  estimated	  poverty	  rates	  for	  2010—which	  is	  the	  last	  year	  covered	  by	  the	  
World	  Bank’s	  poverty	  calculator.	  Chandy	  and	  Kharas	  calculate	  that	  the	  number	  of	  
people	  living	  below	  $1.25	  in	  2010	  has	  fallen	  from	  1,215	  million	  using	  the	  PPPs	  ex-­‐
trapolated	  from	  ICP	  2005,	  to	  571	  million	  using	  the	  new	  PPPs	  back	  cast	  from	  2011	  to	  
2010.	  Poverty	  in	  India	  falls	  by	  more	  than	  300	  million	  people.	  These	  are	  estimates	  by	  
outside	  commentators	  not	  the	  World	  Bank,	  and	  are	  conditional	  on	  the	  line	  being	  
held	  at	  $1.25	  at	  2005	  prices.	  

	  

3	  

	  

The	  new	  revisions	  will	  ultimately	  work	  their	  way	  into	  the	  Penn	  World	  Table,	  

PWT,	  which	  will	  not	  only	  be	  updated,	  but	  will	  likely	  see	  substantial	  revision	  of	  past	  
years.	  Much	  more	  modest	  revisions	  of	  the	  PWT	  have,	  in	  the	  past,	  changed	  the	  con-­‐
clusions	  of	  academic	  studies	  based	  on	  them,	  Johnson,	  Larson,	  Papageorgiou	  and	  
Subramanian	  (2013),	  so	  that	  it	  is	  important	  that	  researchers	  understand	  the	  origins	  
of	  the	  current	  revisions.	  This	  paper	  aims	  to	  provide	  a	  non-­‐specialist	  account,	  while	  
presenting	  an	  analysis	  in	  support	  of	  out	  conclusions.	  	  	  
	  

The	  2011	  round	  of	  the	  ICP	  contained	  many	  methodological	  improvements	  

over	  ICP	  2005	  but	  even	  in	  the	  absence	  of	  methodological	  changes,	  the	  results	  from	  a	  
new	  round	  will	  not	  be	  identical	  to	  those	  extrapolated	  from	  an	  earlier	  round.	  Extrap-­‐
olation	  is	  at	  best	  a	  short	  cut	  to	  the	  collection	  of	  new	  benchmark	  data.	  Even	  so,	  it	  re-­‐
mains	  unclear	  exactly	  why	  the	  2011	  results	  are	  quite	  so	  different	  from	  the	  extrapo-­‐
lations	  and,	  without	  such	  an	  understanding,	  there	  will	  be	  continuing	  questions	  
about	  whether	  the	  new	  results	  really	  are	  better	  than	  the	  old,	  and	  whether	  it	  is	  safe	  
to	  use	  them.	  	  
	  

The	  2011	  ICP	  was	  not	  the	  first	  time	  that	  a	  new	  round	  of	  the	  ICP	  brought	  large	  

changes	  to	  PPPs	  and	  to	  poverty	  counts.	  ICP	  2005	  saw	  large	  increases	  in	  poor-­‐
country	  PPPs	  relative	  to	  the	  US	  compared	  with	  those	  that	  had	  been	  previously	  ex-­‐
trapolated	  from	  the	  1993/95	  round.	  These	  changes	  caused	  a	  sharp	  upward	  revision	  
of	  the	  number	  of	  poor	  people	  below	  any	  global	  line	  that	  is	  denominated	  and	  held	  
fixed	  in	  real	  US	  dollars.	  There	  were	  also	  upward	  revisions	  in	  1993/95	  compared	  
with	  the	  previous	  round	  in	  1985;	  these	  also	  had	  large	  effects	  on	  the	  poverty	  calcula-­‐
tions,	  Deaton	  (2001).	  	  When	  we	  think	  about	  what	  happened	  in	  2011,	  we	  must	  keep	  

	  

4	  

this	  previous	  history	  in	  mind.	  In	  particular,	  if	  ICP	  2011	  is	  inconsistent	  with	  ICP	  
2005,	  the	  problems	  could	  come	  from	  either	  ICP	  2005	  or	  ICP	  2011,	  or	  both.	  
	  

In	  this	  paper,	  we	  focus	  on	  the	  PPPs	  for	  individual	  household	  consumption	  

that	  are	  used	  to	  compare	  living	  standards	  between	  different	  countries.	  This	  narrow-­‐
ing	  of	  focus	  also	  simplifies	  the	  discussion	  by	  taking	  off	  the	  table	  some	  (although	  not	  
all)	  of	  the	  most	  difficult	  (“comparison	  resistant”)	  items,	  such	  as	  construction	  or	  gov-­‐
ernment	  services,	  as	  well	  as	  the	  trade-­‐balance,	  which	  is	  treated	  differently	  in	  ICP	  
from	  national	  accounts,	  and	  so	  predictably	  causes	  discrepancies	  between	  ICP	  esti-­‐
mates	  of	  GDP	  and	  extrapolations	  based	  on	  national	  accounts,	  McCarthy	  (2011).	  A	  
more	  ambitious	  treatment	  that	  recalculates	  ICP	  2005	  using	  ICP	  2011	  methodology,	  
and	  treats	  all	  of	  GDP	  is	  Inklaar	  and	  Prasada	  Rao	  (2015).	  	  
	  

In	  section	  2,	  we	  document	  the	  changes	  in	  the	  consumption	  PPPs	  in	  2011	  and	  

look	  back	  on	  the	  corresponding	  changes	  in	  2005.	  These	  calculations	  demonstrate	  
that,	  to	  an	  extent,	  the	  ICP	  2011	  undid	  some	  of	  the	  changes	  that	  happened	  in	  the	  ICP	  
2005.	  In	  section	  3,	  we	  discuss	  three	  possible	  explanations	  for	  the	  conflict	  between	  
extrapolations	  and	  actuals,	  two	  general,	  and	  one	  specific.	  The	  first	  general	  point	  is	  
that	  extrapolation	  cannot	  be	  expected	  to	  match	  actual	  changes,	  essentially	  because	  
the	  ICP	  is	  based	  on	  international	  multilateral	  price	  indexes	  that	  are	  different	  from	  
the	  national	  price	  indexes	  that	  are	  used	  for	  extrapolation.	  The	  second	  general	  point	  
is	  that	  PPPs	  have	  large,	  but	  largely	  unrecognized,	  standard	  errors,	  so	  that	  at	  least	  
some	  of	  the	  changes	  with	  each	  round	  likely	  reflect	  random	  measurement	  error.	  Fi-­‐
nally,	  and	  more	  specifically,	  we	  check	  whether	  there	  is	  evidence	  that	  there	  is	  a	  prob-­‐
lem	  with	  the	  national	  prices	  indexes	  used	  for	  extrapolation.	  	  

	  

5	  

	  

In	  section	  4,	  we	  document	  our	  ultimately	  preferred	  explanation,	  which	  is	  the	  

change	  in	  the	  way	  that	  the	  regions	  were	  linked	  in	  2011.	  The	  ICP	  is	  organized	  on	  a	  
regional	  basis,	  with	  each	  region	  calculating	  a	  set	  of	  within-­‐region	  PPPs.	  In	  order	  to	  
get	  a	  world	  table,	  these	  regions	  have	  to	  be	  linked.	  In	  2005,	  this	  was	  done	  using	  a	  
“ring”	  of	  eighteen	  countries,	  distributed	  over	  the	  regions,	  for	  whom	  there	  was	  a	  sep-­‐
arate	  ICP	  exercise.	  The	  PPPs	  for	  those	  countries	  from	  the	  ring	  comparison	  were	  then	  
used	  to	  calculate	  four	  regional	  price	  indexes	  that	  scaled	  the	  regional	  PPPs	  to	  give	  
global	  PPPs.	  At	  the	  time	  of	  the	  2005	  ICP,	  there	  were	  concerns	  about	  the	  implementa-­‐
tion	  of	  the	  ring	  method—for	  example,	  some	  of	  the	  within-­‐region	  ring	  comparisons	  
were	  inconsistent	  with	  the	  same	  comparisons	  from	  the	  main	  ICP,	  and	  some	  items	  on	  
the	  ring	  list	  were	  difficult	  to	  price	  in	  some	  of	  the	  ring	  countries.	  In	  consequence,	  the	  
ring	  method	  was	  not	  used	  in	  2011.	  Instead,	  a	  global	  core	  list	  was	  developed,	  and	  all	  
countries	  priced	  (country-­‐specific	  subsets	  of)	  the	  items	  on	  the	  list	  together	  with	  lo-­‐
cal	  items	  that	  were	  specific	  to	  the	  region.	  The	  overlaps	  in	  the	  global	  list	  allowed	  all	  
the	  calculations	  to	  come	  from	  a	  single	  set	  of	  data,	  and	  all	  countries	  in	  all	  regions	  
contributed	  to	  the	  regional	  linking	  in	  a	  symmetric	  way.	  	  
	  

Deaton	  (2010)	  suggested	  that	  the	  ring	  in	  ICP	  2005	  may	  have	  contributed	  to	  

over-­‐pricing	  in	  poor	  countries	  relative	  to	  rich	  countries,	  so	  that	  it	  is	  possible	  that	  
ICP	  2011,	  with	  its	  global	  core	  list,	  undid	  this	  overpricing.	  We	  provide	  some	  evidence	  
from	  the	  ring	  countries	  that	  is	  consistent	  with	  this	  hypothesis.	  If	  this	  is	  correct,	  the	  
main	  problem	  lies	  with	  ICP	  2005,	  not	  ICP	  2011.	  Our	  estimates	  suggest	  that	  countries	  
in	  the	  African,	  Asian,	  and	  Western	  Asian	  region	  of	  the	  ICP	  had	  consumption	  PPPs	  
that	  were	  overestimated	  by	  18	  to	  26	  percent	  in	  2005.	  	  

	  

6	  

	  

Section	  4	  also	  provides	  an	  alternative	  approach	  based	  on	  an	  examination	  of	  

the	  relationship	  between	  price	  levels	  and	  per	  capita	  consumption.	  According	  to	  the	  
Balassa-­‐Samuelson	  theorem,	  price	  levels—the	  ratios	  of	  PPPs	  to	  exchange	  rates—are	  
higher	  in	  richer	  countries	  and	  rise	  as	  countries	  become	  richer.	  Ravallion	  (2012)	  
suggested	  that	  the	  relationship	  between	  price	  levels	  and	  per	  capita	  consumption	  is	  
stable	  enough	  to	  use	  for	  extrapolation	  and	  gives	  a	  better	  fit	  than	  CPI	  extrapolation,	  a	  
finding	  challenged	  by	  Inklaar	  (2013).	  Here,	  we	  use	  the	  relationship	  for	  a	  different	  
purpose,	  to	  assess	  whether	  price	  levels	  in	  2005	  were	  systematically	  overstated.	  This	  
method	  is	  far	  from	  ideal	  if	  only	  because	  the	  Balassa-­‐Samuelson	  effect	  is	  unlikely	  to	  
operate	  uniformly	  across	  just	  two	  rounds,	  and	  because	  fluctuations	  in	  exchange	  
rates	  move	  PLIs	  around	  in	  a	  way	  that	  can	  obscure	  the	  relationship	  except	  in	  the	  long	  
run.	  Even	  so,	  our	  estimates	  from	  this	  method	  are	  consistent	  with	  those	  from	  exami-­‐
nation	  of	  the	  ring,	  and	  suggest	  an	  overestimation	  of	  around	  18	  percent	  in	  Africa,	  
Asia,	  and	  Western	  Asia	  in	  ICP	  2005.	  
	  

Our	  results	  provide	  a	  plausible	  story	  for	  the	  conflict	  between	  the	  2005	  and	  

2011	  ICP	  benchmarks	  (as	  well	  as	  for	  the	  conflict	  between	  the	  1993/96	  and	  2005	  
benchmarks),	  but	  the	  evidence	  is	  far	  from	  conclusive.	  There	  are	  many	  other	  changes	  
from	  ICP	  2005	  to	  ICP	  2011	  that	  the	  ring	  hypothesis	  does	  not	  explain;	  given	  the	  many	  
other	  things	  that	  changed,	  that	  is	  not	  in	  itself	  surprising.	  Even	  so,	  we	  note	  that	  the	  
results	  for	  consumption	  in	  Inklaar	  and	  Prasada	  (2015),	  who	  use	  yet	  another	  method	  
to	  check	  for	  ring	  price	  overstatement,	  come	  to	  estimates	  that	  are	  close	  to	  those	  in	  
this	  paper.	  
	  

	  

7	  

2.	  Explanations	  
To	  understand	  what	  happened	  in	  ICP	  2011	  we	  must	  go	  back	  to	  ICP	  2005,	  and	  how	  
those	  earlier	  data	  differed	  from	  the	  extrapolations	  based	  on	  the	  previous	  (1993/95)	  
round.	  Figure	  1	  plots	  the	  ratio	  of	  the	  “new”	  (i.e.	  ICP	  2005	  PPP)	  to	  “old”	  (i.e.	  extrapo-­‐
lated	  from	  1993/95)	  PPPs	  for	  individual	  household	  consumption	  in	  2005	  against	  
the	  logarithm	  of	  per	  capita	  GDP	  in	  2005	  international	  prices.	  All	  data	  relate	  to	  2005	  
and	  the	  GDP	  figures	  are	  those	  taken	  from	  the	  report	  of	  the	  2005	  round	  of	  the	  ICP.	  
We	  include	  countries	  (such	  as	  China	  and	  India)	  that	  were	  not	  part	  of	  ICP	  1993/95	  
and	  whose	  PPPs	  were	  imputed	  in	  that	  round.	  Given	  that	  the	  imputations	  in	  1993/95	  
were	  in	  line	  with	  benchmarked	  countries	  and	  typically	  estimated	  from	  the	  relation-­‐
ship	  between	  PPPs	  and	  per	  capita	  GDP	  for	  the	  benchmarks,	  Figure	  1	  looks	  similar	  if	  
we	  only	  use	  countries	  present	  in	  both	  benchmarks	  
The	  immediate	  feature	  of	  Figure	  1	  is	  that	  the	  2005	  revisions	  were	  mostly	  
upward,	  i.e.	  the	  ratios	  are	  greater	  than	  one.	  The	  countries	  on	  the	  right	  that	  have	  a	  
ratio	  of	  close	  to	  one	  are	  the	  Eurostat-­‐OECD	  countries,	  who	  publish	  annual	  numbers,	  
and	  therefore	  see	  only	  minimal	  revisions	  at	  new	  rounds	  of	  the	  ICP;	  we	  return	  to	  the	  
Eurostat-­‐OECD	  case	  below.	  Among	  the	  other	  countries,	  there	  is	  a	  pronounced	  nega-­‐
tive	  slope,	  so	  that	  the	  lower	  was	  per	  capita	  GDP,	  the	  larger	  the	  upward	  revision	  in	  
the	  consumption	  PPP.	  Relative	  to	  the	  US,	  poor	  countries	  got	  poorer	  or,	  equivalently,	  
relative	  to	  most	  of	  the	  world,	  the	  US	  and	  other	  rich	  countries	  got	  richer;	  for	  example,	  
if	  India	  has	  been	  the	  numeraire,	  and	  PPPs	  calculated	  in	  local	  currency	  per	  rupee,	  the	  
line	  would	  have	  sloped	  upward	  to	  the	  right.	  Either	  way,	  the	  2005	  ICPs	  made	  the	  
world	  distribution	  of	  income	  more	  unequal	  compared	  with	  extrapolations	  from	  the	  

	  

8	  

previous	  round.	  Some	  of	  the	  revisions	  are	  very	  large,	  mostly	  in	  sub-­‐Saharan	  Africa,	  
but	  there	  were	  also	  upward	  revisions	  in	  Asia,	  including	  factors	  of	  2.6	  for	  Philippines,	  
2.3	  for	  China,	  2.1	  for	  Indonesia,	  1.9	  for	  Nepal,	  and	  1.4	  for	  India	  and	  for	  Bangladesh.	  	  
	  

When	  the	  2005	  results	  were	  published,	  these	  revisions	  were	  noted,	  but	  at	  the	  

time,	  there	  seemed	  no	  pressing	  need	  to	  explain	  them.	  ICP	  2005	  had	  introduced	  
many	  methodological	  improvements	  compared	  with	  previous	  rounds,	  some	  of	  
which	  were	  expected	  to	  cause	  large	  revisions,	  especially	  given	  the	  widespread	  con-­‐
cern	  about	  the	  quality	  of	  ICP	  1993/95,	  see	  Ryten	  (1998).	  Many	  new	  countries	  had	  
been	  surveyed	  for	  the	  first	  time	  in	  2005,	  including	  many	  in	  sub-­‐Saharan	  Africa	  
where	  the	  largest	  revisions	  had	  taken	  place.	  China	  officially	  participated	  in	  the	  ICP	  
for	  the	  first	  time	  in	  2005	  and	  India	  did	  not	  participate	  between	  1978	  and	  2005.	  It	  
was	  therefore	  reasonable	  to	  conclude	  that	  the	  new	  results	  were	  simply	  better,	  and	  
that	  the	  revisions	  were	  largely	  a	  consequence	  of	  the	  poor	  quality	  of	  ICP	  1993/95.	  	  
	  

Figure	  2	  replicates	  Figure	  1,	  but	  compares	  ICP	  2011	  with	  extrapolations	  

based	  on	  ICP	  2005;	  again	  the	  Eurostat-­‐OECD	  numbers	  come	  from	  the	  annual	  pro-­‐
gram	  and	  are	  not	  extrapolated.	  	  It	  shows	  the	  ratio	  of	  consumption	  PPPs	  from	  ICP	  
2011	  to	  the	  extrapolations	  for	  2011,	  plotted	  against	  per	  capita	  GDP	  in	  2011	  interna-­‐
tional	  prices.	  Figure	  2	  is	  to	  a	  limited	  extent	  the	  opposite	  of	  Figure	  1.	  The	  ratios	  of	  
new	  to	  old	  are	  now	  mostly	  less	  than	  one	  instead	  of	  greater	  than	  one.	  Just	  as	  coun-­‐
tries	  got	  poorer	  relative	  to	  previous	  calculations	  in	  the	  2005	  round,	  they	  got	  richer	  
in	  the	  2011	  round.	  Even	  so,	  the	  pronounced	  negative	  slope	  in	  Figure	  1	  does	  not	  turn	  
into	  a	  positive	  slope	  in	  Figure	  2.	  But	  the	  graph	  is	  somewhat	  misleading	  because	  it	  
includes,	  on	  the	  bottom	  right,	  a	  number	  of	  wealthy	  non-­‐OECD	  countries,	  most	  of	  

	  

9	  

which	  are	  oil	  producers	  and	  whose	  per	  capita	  GDP	  levels	  are	  thereby	  inflated	  rela-­‐
tive	  to	  consumption.	  If	  those	  countries	  are	  excluded,	  the	  positive	  slope	  is	  apparent.	  
As	  we	  shall	  see	  in	  section	  3	  below,	  perhaps	  the	  most	  important	  methodological	  im-­‐
provement	  in	  2011	  over	  2005	  is	  capable	  of	  explaining	  these	  results,	  not	  country	  by	  
country,	  but	  for	  regions	  as	  a	  whole.	  	  
If	  we	  compare	  the	  log	  ratios	  of	  extrapolated	  to	  actual	  in	  2005	  and	  2011,	  the	  
correlation	  is	  –0.39,	  which	  is	  entirely	  driven	  by	  the	  comparison	  between	  the	  Euro-­‐
stat-­‐OECD	  countries	  and	  the	  rest	  of	  the	  world.	  ICP	  2011	  reversed	  some	  of	  the	  in-­‐
crease	  in	  inequality	  between	  poor	  and	  rich	  regions	  in	  ICP	  2005,	  but	  it	  did	  not	  re-­‐
verse	  the	  2005	  changes	  on	  a	  country-­‐by-­‐country	  basis.	  Recall	  that	  ICP	  1993/95	  was	  
a	  weak	  round,	  with	  many	  imputations,	  so	  that	  many	  of	  the	  2005	  ratios	  come	  from	  
problems	  with	  that	  earlier	  round	  and,	  as	  we	  shall	  see,	  the	  variance	  of	  the	  ratios	  was	  
much	  lower	  in	  2011	  than	  in	  2005.	  
Table	  1	  shows	  the	  revisions	  for	  each	  of	  the	  ICP	  regions,	  again	  covering	  only	  
those	  countries	  that	  were	  covered	  in	  both	  rounds.	  The	  revisions	  in	  2005	  relative	  to	  
extrapolations	  were	  very	  large,	  particularly	  in	  Africa,	  though	  all	  of	  the	  rest	  of	  the	  
world	  had	  higher	  PPPs	  relative	  to	  the	  rich	  countries.	  These	  changes	  made	  the	  world	  
distribution	  of	  consumption	  appear	  to	  be	  radically	  more	  unequal.	  Depending	  on	  the	  
region,	  about	  40	  percent	  of	  those	  increases	  were	  undone	  in	  2011,	  though	  in	  West-­‐
ern	  Asia,	  the	  downward	  revision	  in	  2011	  was	  larger	  than	  the	  upward	  revision	  in	  
2005.	  The	  reduction	  in	  Africa	  in	  2011	  undid	  much	  less	  of	  the	  2005	  increase	  than	  
was	  the	  case	  in	  India,	  so	  that,	  just	  as	  the	  ICP	  2005	  “Asianized”	  poverty,	  the	  ICP	  2011	  
will	  “Africanize”	  it,	  at	  least	  if	  no	  offsetting	  changes	  are	  made	  to	  the	  global	  poverty	  

	  

10	  

line;	  this	  effect	  is	  amplified	  by	  the	  fact	  that	  there	  are	  many	  more	  people	  close	  to	  the	  
(or	  any	  plausible)	  global	  poverty	  line	  in	  South	  Asia	  than	  is	  the	  case	  in	  Africa.	  
	  

Table	  1	  also	  shows	  the	  standard	  deviations	  of	  the	  log	  ratios	  of	  extrapolations	  

to	  actuals.	  Apart	  from	  the	  CIS—among	  which	  there	  are	  many	  special	  problems—
there	  is	  a	  marked	  reduction	  in	  within	  regional	  dispersion	  in	  2011	  compared	  with	  
2005.	  This	  is	  what	  we	  would	  expect	  from	  the	  fact	  that	  the	  methodology	  and	  country	  
coverage	  was	  much	  more	  stable	  between	  2005	  and	  2011	  than	  before	  2005.	  A	  much	  
larger	  share	  of	  the	  changes	  between	  2005	  and	  2011	  comes	  from	  between	  regional	  
revisions	  than	  from	  within	  regional	  revisions.	  This	  does	  not	  tell	  us	  which	  of	  2005	  
and	  2011	  is	  correct,	  only	  that,	  within	  the	  regions,	  they	  have	  more	  in	  common	  than	  
with	  previous	  rounds.	  The	  finding	  is	  also	  consistent	  with	  our	  hypothesis	  that	  the	  
main	  reason	  for	  the	  differences	  between	  2005	  and	  2011	  is	  to	  do	  with	  the	  way	  that	  
the	  regions	  were	  linked.	  	  
	  
3.	  Why	  are	  new	  ICPs	  not	  consistent	  with	  extrapolations?	  
3.1	  Spatial	  and	  temporal	  price	  inconsistency	  in	  general	  
It	  has	  long	  been	  known	  that	  spatial	  and	  temporal	  price	  indexes	  cannot	  be	  consistent	  
with	  one	  another	  even	  under	  ideal	  conditions,	  with	  perfect	  measurement.	  There	  are	  
also	  many	  practical	  considerations	  that	  can	  widen	  the	  gap,	  see	  McCarthy	  (2012)	  for	  
a	  recent	  summary	  and	  cites	  to	  the	  literature.	  Indeed,	  if	  extrapolations	  were	  consist-­‐
ently	  accurate,	  there	  would	  be	  no	  need	  for	  the	  ICP	  at	  all.	  Extrapolations,	  although	  
intuitively	  attractive,	  cannot	  be	  expected	  to	  reproduce	  the	  numbers	  that	  come	  out	  of	  
an	  ICP	  benchmarking	  exercise.	  

	  

11	  

The	  PPPs	  from	  the	  International	  Comparison	  Program	  are	  multilateral	  price	  
indexes,	  in	  which	  the	  PPP	  for	  each	  country	  within	  a	  region	  depends	  on	  price	  rela-­‐
tives	  and	  weights	  from	  all	  of	  the	  countries	  in	  the	  system.	  The	  difference	  between	  
multilateral	  and	  bilateral	  price	  indexes	  is	  present	  even	  when	  there	  are	  only	  two	  
countries,	  and	  this	  simplest	  of	  cases	  can	  be	  used	  to	  illustrate	  the	  issues	  involved.	  
	  

When	  the	  World	  Bank	  estimates	  a	  PPP	  by	  extrapolation,	  it	  starts	  from	  a	  base-­‐

line	  consumption	  PPP,	  for	  example	  from	  ICP	  2005,	  and	  then	  updates	  using	  consum-­‐
er	  price	  indexes.	  If	  the	  PPP	  for	  India	  in	  USD	  were	  20,	  say,	  and	  if	  CPI	  inflation	  in	  both	  
countries	  were	  the	  same,	  the	  extrapolated	  PPP	  would	  remain	  at	  20.	  If	  Indian	  CPI	  in-­‐
flation	  were	  higher	  than	  CPI	  inflation	  in	  the	  US,	  the	  extrapolated	  figure	  would	  be	  
higher	  than	  20,	  and	  if	  the	  Indian	  inflation	  were	  lower	  than	  inflation	  in	  the	  US,	  it	  
would	  be	  lower	  than	  20.	  Of	  course,	  domestic	  CPIs	  use	  only	  local	  prices	  and	  local	  
weights,	  whereas	  the	  PPP,	  when	  it	  is	  calculated	  by	  the	  ICP,	  will	  combine	  weights	  for	  
both	  India	  and	  the	  US	  in	  calculating	  a	  PPP	  between	  them.	  Multilateral	  price	  indexes	  
start	  from	  bilateral	  indexes	  between	  pairs	  of	  countries,	  and	  if	  those	  bilateral	  indexes	  
are	  to	  satisfy	  minimal	  properties,	  for	  example,	  that	  the	  Indian	  to	  US	  PPP	  must	  be	  the	  
reciprocal	  of	  the	  US	  to	  Indian	  PPP,	  then	  they	  must	  use	  weights	  from	  both	  countries.	  
As	  a	  result,	  the	  change	  in	  the	  PPPs	  by	  extrapolation	  will	  be	  different	  from	  the	  chang-­‐
es	  from	  one	  ICP	  to	  the	  next.	  
	  

In	  the	  two-­‐country	  case,	  with	  countries	  1	  and	  2,	  one	  simple	  formula	  for	  the	  

relative	  change	  in	  CPI	  in	  2	  relative	  to	  1	  is	  	  
	  

d ln P2 − d ln P1 = s2′ d ln p2 − s1′ d ln p1 	  

	  

12	  

(1)	  	  

where	   P2 	  and	   P1 	  are	  the	  two	  country	  price	  indexes,	   p2 	  and	   p1 	  are	  the	  underlying	  
vectors	  of	  prices	  of	  goods	  and	  services,	  and	   s2 	  and	   s1 	  are	  the	  two	  corresponding	  
vectors	  of	  weights	  or	  budget	  shares.	  The	  PPP	  for	  2	  in	  terms	  of	  1,	  by	  contrast,	  uses	  
weights	  for	  both	  countries,	  so	  if	  we	  use	  a	  Törnqvist	  index,	  we	  have	  	  
	  

ln PPP2 = 0.5(s2 + s1 )′(ln p2 − ln p1 ) 	  	  

(2)	  

If	  we	  combine	  these	  two	  to	  see	  what	  happens	  over	  time,	  we	  have,	  ignoring	  changes	  
in	  weights,	  
	  

d ln PPP2 = (d ln P2 − d ln P1 ) − 0.5(s2 − s1 )′(d ln p2 + d ln p1 ) 	  	  

(3)	  

The	  last	  term	  is	  the	  discrepancy	  between	  the	  extrapolation,	  which	  is	  the	  first	  term	  
on	  the	  right,	  and	  the	  change	  in	  the	  PPP	  on	  the	  left	  hand	  side.	  Its	  magnitude	  will	  de-­‐
pend	  on	  the	  changes	  in	  the	  underlying	  relative	  prices,	  as	  well	  as	  differences	  in	  the	  
consumption	  patterns	  in	  the	  two	  countries.	  The	  discrepancy	  is	  zero	  if	  there	  are	  no	  
relative	  price	  changes	  in	  either	  country,	  if	  the	  structures	  of	  spending	  are	  the	  same,	  
or	  if	  the	  differences	  in	  spending	  structures	  are	  uncorrelated	  with	  average	  changes	  in	  
relative	  prices.	  For	  countries	  with	  very	  different	  patterns	  of	  consumption,	  or	  with	  
different	  structures	  of	  domestic	  inflation,	  the	  discrepancy	  could	  be	  large.	  For	  exam-­‐
ple,	  if	  the	  relative	  price	  of	  food	  rises	  around	  the	  world—as	  was	  the	  case	  from	  2005	  
to	  2011—the	  change	  in	  the	  benchmark	  PPPs	  for	  a	  poor	  country	  relative	  to	  a	  rich	  
country	  is	  predicted	  by	  equation	  (3)	  to	  be	  less	  than	  the	  extrapolated	  value.	  This	  line	  
of	  enquiry	  is	  worth	  pursuing	  further,	  but	  calculations	  by	  the	  ICP	  team	  suggest	  that	  
the	  effect	  was	  not	  large	  relative	  to	  the	  extrapolation	  discrepancies	  discussed	  here;	  
calculations	  by	  Inklaar	  and	  Timmer	  (2013)	  for	  the	  Eurostat-­‐OECD	  countries	  show	  

	  

13	  

that,	  even	  in	  countries	  with	  strong	  statistical	  offices,	  the	  discrepancies	  are	  much	  
larger	  than	  can	  be	  explained	  by	  equation	  (3).	  
These	  results	  assume	  that	  the	  prices	  measured	  in	  the	  CPI	  are	  identical	  to	  the	  
prices	  measured	  in	  the	  ICP,	  which	  is	  far	  from	  being	  the	  case.	  Cross-­‐country	  indexes	  
must	  match	  goods	  that	  are	  (a)	  identical	  in	  both	  locations,	  (b)	  reasonably	  commonly	  
consumed	  in	  both	  places,	  so	  that	  the	  comparison	  lists	  for	  the	  ICP	  are	  usually	  differ-­‐
ent	  from	  the	  comparison	  lists	  of	  the	  CPI.	  	  Once	  again,	  it	  is	  hard	  to	  assess	  what	  this	  
would	  contribute	  to	  the	  discrepancies.	  	  
3.2	  Quality	  of	  local	  CPIs,	  and	  the	  increase	  in	  food	  prices	  
Another	  concern	  is	  the	  quality	  of	  domestic	  CPI	  indexes,	  which	  varies	  considerably	  
across	  countries;	  common	  problems	  are	  outdated	  weights,	  political	  interference	  in	  a	  
very	  visible	  indicator,	  or	  a	  coverage	  that	  may	  be	  restricted	  to	  urban	  consumers,	  or	  
even	  only	  to	  those	  who	  live	  in	  the	  capital	  city.	  CPIs	  are	  also	  relevant	  when	  thinking	  
about	  why	  price	  level	  indexes	  (PLIs)	  differ	  between	  poor	  and	  rich	  countries,	  and	  
how	  PLIs	  can	  be	  expected	  to	  change	  over	  time.	  CPIs	  cover	  all	  prices,	  including	  both	  
traded	  and	  untraded	  goods,	  as	  opposed	  to	  exchange	  rates	  which	  are	  determined	  by	  
flows	  of	  traded	  goods;	  indeed,	  the	  fact	  that	  exchange	  rates	  do	  not	  reflect	  the	  prices	  
of	  untraded	  goods	  is	  the	  principal	  reason	  for	  collecting	  PPP	  data	  in	  the	  first	  place.	  As	  
countries	  get	  richer,	  and	  wages	  rise,	  the	  price	  of	  untraded	  goods,	  which	  are	  initially	  
much	  lower	  than	  in	  poor	  than	  in	  rich	  countries,	  will	  rise	  and,	  unless	  obscured	  by	  
changes	  in	  the	  exchange	  rate,	  the	  PLI	  will	  rise	  too,	  as	  all	  prices	  converge	  to	  world	  
prices,	  see	  Obstfeld	  and	  Rogoff	  (1996,	  pp.	  210–4)	  for	  a	  textbook	  account.	  Because	  
the	  CPI	  covers	  both	  traded	  and	  untraded	  goods,	  and	  provided	  it	  is	  correctly	  meas-­‐

	  

14	  

ured,	  it	  will	  automatically	  rise	  relative	  to	  the	  exchange	  rate	  as	  the	  country	  grows	  
richer.	  Ravallion	  (2012)	  calls	  this	  the	  dynamic	  Penn	  effect	  in	  a	  reference	  to	  the	  orig-­‐
inal	  Penn	  effect,	  by	  which	  poorer	  countries	  have	  lower	  prices	  relative	  to	  their	  ex-­‐
change	  rates.	  If	  the	  CPI	  is	  correctly	  measured,	  extrapolation	  forward	  from	  a	  previ-­‐
ous	  PPP	  should	  automatically	  capture	  any	  such	  effect,	  at	  least	  up	  to	  the	  other	  reser-­‐
vations	  already	  discussed	  in	  this	  section.	  In	  the	  absence	  of	  problems	  with	  CPIs,	  the	  
existence	  of	  a	  dynamic	  Penn	  effect	  does	  not	  invalidate	  the	  forward	  extrapolation	  of	  
PPPs	  using	  CPIs.	  
	  

Between	  2005	  and	  2011,	  there	  was	  a	  large	  worldwide	  increase	  in	  the	  relative	  

price	  of	  food	  in	  world	  markets;	  the	  FAO	  food	  price	  index	  doubled	  in	  nominal	  terms	  
from	  2005	  to	  2011,	  and	  rose	  by	  50	  percent	  in	  relative	  terms.	  In	  countries	  whose	  CPI	  
weights	  are	  outdated,	  the	  share	  of	  food	  in	  the	  index	  will	  be	  too	  high—provided	  the	  
country	  is	  growing	  and	  the	  food	  share	  falling—and	  the	  measured	  CPI	  growth	  will	  be	  
too	  high.	  Because	  the	  extrapolation	  is	  done	  using	  CPIs,	  and	  if,	  as	  is	  plausible,	  CPI	  
weights	  are	  more	  likely	  to	  be	  current	  in	  rich	  countries,	  the	  extrapolation	  would	  lead	  
to	  consumption	  PPPs	  that	  are	  too	  high	  for	  poor	  countries	  relative	  to	  rich	  countries,	  
which	  would	  be	  revealed	  at	  the	  time	  of	  a	  new	  PPP.	  
	  

One	  way	  of	  assessing	  this	  possibility	  is	  to	  compare	  inflation	  rates	  from	  CPIs	  

with	  inflation	  rates	  from	  the	  implicit	  price	  deflators	  of	  consumers’	  expenditure	  in	  
the	  national	  accounts.	  This	  is	  not	  perfect,	  because	  the	  coverage	  of	  the	  CPI	  and	  con-­‐
sumption	  in	  the	  national	  accounts	  will	  not	  be	  the	  same,	  but	  the	  implicit	  price	  defla-­‐
tor—current	  price	  divided	  by	  constant	  price	  consumption—is	  a	  current	  weighted	  
Paasche	  index,	  while	  CPIs	  are	  generally	  Laspeyres	  indexes,	  so	  the	  effect	  of	  rising	  rel-­‐

	  

15	  

ative	  prices	  of	  food	  overstating	  the	  latter	  is	  likely	  to	  be	  indicated	  by	  a	  divergence	  in	  
the	  two	  rates	  of	  inflation.	  
	  

There	  are	  some	  countries	  where,	  indeed,	  CPI	  inflation	  between	  2005	  and	  

2011	  was	  considerably	  higher	  than	  inflation	  in	  the	  price	  deflator.	  India	  is	  one	  exam-­‐
ple,	  where	  CPI	  inflation	  was	  50.4	  percent	  and	  deflator	  inflation	  was	  only	  38.3	  per-­‐
cent.	  But	  this	  is	  not	  generally	  the	  case.	  Chinese	  CPI	  inflation	  was	  19.6	  percent,	  nearly	  
11	  percent	  lower	  than	  the	  30.4	  percent	  inflation	  in	  the	  deflator.	  The	  World	  Devel-­‐
opment	  Indicators	  contain	  115	  countries	  with	  both	  indexes	  and,	  of	  these,	  only	  61	  
have	  CPI	  inflation	  greater	  than	  deflator	  inflation.	  There	  are	  two	  countries,	  Nicaragua	  
and	  Mauritania,	  where	  CPI	  inflation	  exceeds	  deflator	  inflation	  by	  more	  than	  0.50,	  
and	  three	  countries,	  Venezuela,	  Tajikistan,	  and	  Tanzania	  where	  the	  deflator	  exceeds	  
CPI	  inflation	  by	  more	  than	  0.50.	  Venezuela	  is	  a	  country	  where	  the	  CPI	  may	  have	  
been	  politically	  controlled,	  while	  the	  much	  less	  visible	  implicit	  price	  deflator	  was	  
not.	  The	  remaining	  countries	  are	  shown	  in	  Figure	  3,	  which	  plots	  the	  difference	  
against	  the	  logarithm	  of	  per	  capita	  GDP	  in	  (the	  base	  year)	  2005	  in	  2005	  internation-­‐
al	  dollars.	  	  
	  

The	  Figure	  does	  not	  suggest	  that	  the	  food	  price	  story	  is	  the	  reason	  that	  ex-­‐

trapolation	  gave	  PPPs	  that	  were	  consistently	  too	  high,	  if	  only	  because	  the	  points	  are	  
not	  consistently	  above	  the	  zero	  line	  for	  the	  poorer	  countries.	  Yet	  the	  wide	  diver-­‐
gence	  between	  the	  two	  rates	  of	  inflation,	  outside	  of	  the	  rich	  countries,	  reinforces	  
concerns	  about	  the	  quality	  of	  price	  data	  in	  many	  countries.	  And	  even	  if	  these	  prob-­‐
lems	  cannot	  explain	  the	  fact	  that	  PPPs	  were	  consistently	  lower	  than	  extrapolated,	  
they	  surely	  contribute	  to	  the	  variance	  that	  is	  observed	  in	  Figure	  2	  and	  Table	  1.	  

	  

16	  

	  
	  
3.3	  Standard	  errors	  of	  PPPs	  
	  One	  issue	  that	  is	  not	  always	  given	  sufficient	  recognition	  is	  that	  PPPs	  are	  themselves	  
subject	  to	  substantial	  uncertainty	  in	  a	  world	  where	  relative	  prices	  and	  consumption	  
patterns	  differ	  substantially	  across	  countries.	  Deaton	  (2012)	  shows	  that	  the	  loga-­‐
rithm	  of	  the	  ratio	  of	  the	  Laspeyres	  to	  the	  Paasche	  index	  is	  a	  measure	  of	  uncertainty	  
about	  the	  PPP	  between	  any	  pair	  of	  countries,	  and	  derives	  formulas	  for	  uncertainty	  
in	  multilateral	  indexes.	  The	  idea	  underlying	  these	  calculations	  is	  to	  write	  the	  price	  of	  
good	  i	  in	  country	  c	  using	  the	  country-­‐product	  decomposition	  formula	  
	  

ln pic = α i + β c + ε ic 	  	  

(4)	  

where	   α i 	  is	  a	  commodity	  fixed	  effect,	   β c 	  is	  a	  country	  fixed	  effect,	  and	   ε ic 	  is	  the	  re-­‐
sidual	  from	  the	  projection	  of	  log	  price	  on	  the	  commodity	  and	  country	  factors.	  The	  
factor	   β c 	  can	  be	  thought	  of	  as	  the	  logarithm	  of	  a	  (simplistic)	  PPP	  exchange	  rate,	  
while	   α i 	  is	  the	  typical	  relative	  price	  of	  good	  i;	  a	  liter	  of	  cooking	  oil	  is	  generally	  more	  
expensive	  than	  a	  liter	  of	  milk,	  or	  a	  kilo	  of	  rice,	  and	  so	  on.	  Equation	  (4)	  would	  be	  ex-­‐
act	  in	  a	  world	  in	  which	  the	  law	  of	  one	  price	  holds	  true.	  
Standard	  errors	  are	  calculated	  by	  thinking	  of	  equation	  (4)	  as	  a	  data-­‐
generating	  mechanism,	  and	  calculating	  how	  random	  draws	  of	   ε 	  affect	  the	  ultimate	  
PPP	  formulas.	  	  The	  resulting	  relative	  standard	  errors	  are	  large,	  20	  to	  30	  percent	  for	  
US	  to	  India	  or	  China	  comparisons.	  These	  are	  derived	  for	  a	  single	  international	  exer-­‐
cise,	  and	  the	  errors	  in	  changes	  may	  be	  smaller	  if	  the	  sources	  of	  error	  are	  correlated	  
over	  time;	  indeed	  it	  is	  plausible	  that	   ε ic ' s ,	  although	  highly	  variable	  across	  countries,	  
	  

17	  

because	  relative	  prices	  vary	  from	  country	  to	  country,	  are	  relatively	  stable	  over	  time,	  
if	  goods	  that	  are	  relatively	  expensive	  or	  cheap	  in	  a	  country	  are	  persistently	  so.	  Food	  
subsidies	  in	  India	  would	  be	  one	  example.	  	  
There	  is	  much	  work	  to	  be	  done	  in	  this	  area;	  but	  what	  we	  know	  now	  suggests	  
that	  differences	  in	  relative	  prices	  across	  countries,	  and	  over	  time	  within	  countries,	  
can	  generate	  substantial	  random	  variation	  in	  calculated	  PPPs.	  	  
3.4	  Discrepancies	  in	  the	  EU-­‐OECD	  region	  
It	  is	  useful	  to	  consider	  the	  last	  row	  in	  Table	  1,	  which	  shows	  the	  discrepancies	  that	  
would	  have	  occurred	  in	  the	  Eurostat/OECD	  countries	  if,	  contrary	  to	  actual	  practice	  
which	  updates	  PPPs	  annually,	  the	  2011	  PPPs	  had	  been	  predicted	  using	  CPIs,	  as	  was	  
the	  case	  for	  the	  rest	  of	  the	  world.	  The	  average	  discrepancy	  (growth	  of	  PPP	  minus	  
growth	  of	  CPI)	  is	  –4.3	  percent	  over	  six	  years,	  or	  –0.72	  percent	  a	  year	  and	  is	  much	  
smaller	  than	  in	  any	  other	  region;	  the	  mean	  absolute	  value	  of	  the	  deviations	  is	  still	  a	  
modest	  5.7	  percent.	  As	  noted	  above,	  Inklaar	  and	  Timmer	  (2012)	  find	  that	  equation	  
(3)	  cannot	  account	  for	  the	  discrepancies,	  and	  it	  remains	  unclear	  what	  drives	  them.	  
The	  discrepancies	  are	  not	  correlated	  with	  per	  capita	  GDP,	  but	  are	  higher	  in	  places	  
where	  the	  rate	  of	  inflation	  is	  higher,	  a	  result	  that	  is	  even	  stronger	  when	  we	  look	  at	  
the	  discrepancies	  between	  PPP	  growth	  and	  the	  implicit	  price	  deflator	  of	  GDP,	  which	  
is	  used	  to	  update	  PPPs	  for	  GDP	  between	  and	  beyond	  rounds.	  High	  rates	  of	  inflation	  
tend	  to	  come	  changes	  in	  relative	  prices,	  which	  are	  the	  fuel	  for	  discrepancies	  in	  in-­‐
dexes.	  Beyond	  that,	  of	  the	  ten	  largest	  discrepancies,	  eight	  are	  in	  formerly	  communist	  
countries,	  the	  others	  being	  Turkey	  and	  (more	  surprisingly)	  Britain.	  	  

	  

18	  

These	  Eurostat-­‐OECD	  numbers	  are	  comparable	  in	  magnitude	  to	  the	  discrep-­‐
ancies	  in	  the	  United	  States	  across	  cities	  (technically	  metropolitan	  statistical	  areas)	  
between	  inflation	  measured	  from	  multilateral	  spatial	  price	  indexes	  and	  inflation	  in	  
local	  CPIs,	  Aten	  and	  Reinsdorf	  (2010).	  	  
These	  mostly	  rich	  country	  comparisons	  provide	  a	  useful	  calibration	  for	  what	  
we	  might	  expect	  for	  the	  rest	  of	  the	  world.	  Discrepancies	  in	  indexes	  are	  more	  likely	  
when	  inflation	  rates	  are	  high,	  and	  where	  patterns	  of	  consumption	  and	  relative	  pric-­‐
es	  are	  markedly	  different.	  Yet,	  with	  high	  quality	  statistical	  offices	  and	  no	  changes	  in	  
method,	  the	  results	  suggest	  that	  the	  discrepancies	  are	  typically	  small.	  The	  Eurostat-­‐
OECD	  region	  is	  a	  (favorable)	  outlier	  in	  Table	  1,	  which	  suggests	  that,	  for	  the	  other	  re-­‐
gions,	  discrepancies	  come	  from	  some	  methodological	  change	  between	  ICP2005	  and	  
ICP2011.	  
	  
4.	  Regional	  linking,	  the	  ring	  and	  the	  comparison	  between	  2005	  and	  2011	  
4.1	  Regional	  linking	  methods	  in	  2005	  and	  2011	  
One	  methodological	  difference	  between	  the	  2005	  and	  2011	  rounds	  of	  the	  ICP	  was	  
the	  way	  in	  which	  the	  regions	  were	  linked	  to	  give	  a	  full	  global	  set	  of	  international	  
PPPs.	  The	  ICP	  is	  organized	  into	  regions,	  each	  of	  which	  runs	  its	  own	  set	  of	  price	  com-­‐
parisons	  to	  calculate	  PPPs	  for	  each	  of	  the	  countries	  within	  its	  region.	  Each	  of	  these	  
regional	  ICPs	  has	  its	  own	  numeraire	  so,	  at	  this	  first	  stage,	  it	  is	  not	  possible	  to	  com-­‐
pare,	  for	  example,	  the	  United	  States,	  which	  is	  in	  the	  Eurostat/OECD	  region,	  with	  
Cameroon,	  which	  is	  in	  the	  African	  region.	  At	  a	  final	  stage,	  a	  set	  of	  price	  indexes	  is	  
calculated,	  one	  for	  each	  region,	  and	  these	  are	  used	  to	  scale	  the	  regional	  parities,	  re-­‐

	  

19	  

specting	  the	  original	  relative	  PPPs	  within	  regions,	  and	  to	  reach	  a	  full	  international	  
comparison.	  It	  is	  this	  last	  step	  that	  was	  done	  differently	  in	  2011	  from	  2005.	  Because	  
linking	  moves	  entire	  regions,	  it	  is	  an	  obvious	  place	  to	  look	  if	  we	  suspect	  that	  all	  of	  
Asia,	  or	  all	  of	  Africa,	  was	  too	  low	  or	  too	  high	  in	  one	  of	  the	  rounds.	  
	  

In	  2005,	  regional	  linking	  was	  done	  using	  eighteen	  “ring”	  countries,	  selected	  

so	  that	  there	  were	  at	  least	  two	  in	  each	  region;	  these	  are	  listed	  in	  the	  first	  column	  of	  
Table	  2.	  The	  ring	  methodology	  was	  not	  seen	  as	  ideal,	  and	  was	  developed	  as	  a	  re-­‐
sponse	  to	  a	  number	  of	  constraints	  in	  the	  2005	  round,	  some	  of	  which	  were	  not	  ap-­‐
parent	  at	  the	  planning	  stage;	  there	  was	  no	  prior	  empirical	  experience	  in	  using	  the	  
method.	  By	  the	  time	  of	  the	  linking,	  which	  comes	  at	  the	  end	  of	  the	  process,	  most	  of	  
the	  regions	  had	  completed	  their	  own	  intraregional	  PPPs,	  and	  those	  were	  respected	  
in	  the	  global	  analysis.	  For	  Eurostat/OECD,	  this	  “fixity”	  of	  within-­‐region	  PPPs	  is	  a	  
precondition	  for	  participation	  in	  the	  broader	  ICP,	  and	  in	  2005	  was	  imposed	  for	  all	  
regions.	  This	  procedure	  has	  the	  advantage	  of	  preventing	  countries	  with	  very	  weak	  
data,	  or	  that	  are	  far	  away	  from	  another	  region,	  from	  affecting	  the	  calculation	  of	  the	  
PPPs	  within	  any	  region	  to	  which	  it	  does	  not	  belong.	  The	  selection	  of	  ring	  countries	  
was	  also	  limited	  by	  the	  willingness	  of	  countries	  to	  undertake	  a	  second,	  different,	  
pricing	  exercise.	  	  
The	  ring	  worked	  through	  a	  separate	  price	  comparison	  exercise	  for	  the	  ring	  
countries	  alone,	  ignoring	  the	  rest	  of	  the	  world,	  and	  using	  a	  specially	  constructed	  list	  
of	  more	  than	  1,000	  goods	  and	  services.	  These	  PPPs	  for	  the	  eighteen	  ring	  countries	  
were	  then	  used	  to	  derive	  regional	  price	  indexes	  that	  could	  be	  used	  for	  linking.	  The	  
details	  of	  the	  method,	  and	  the	  formulas,	  are	  given	  in	  Diewert	  (2013)	  or	  in	  Deaton	  

	  

20	  

and	  Heston	  (2010).	  It	  starts	  by	  selecting	  a	  numeraire	  country	  in	  each	  region,	  and	  
then	  converting	  all	  the	  regional	  prices	  into	  the	  currency	  of	  that	  region’s	  numeraire.	  
In	  this	  way,	  each	  region	  becomes	  a	  “super-­‐country”	  to	  be	  linked	  using	  the	  regional	  
price	  indexes	  from	  the	  ring.	  After	  the	  round	  was	  complete,	  it	  was	  discovered	  that	  
the	  super-­‐country	  method	  is	  not	  invariant	  to	  the	  choice	  of	  numeraire	  country	  within	  
each	  region;	  calculations	  by	  the	  ICP	  team	  suggest	  this	  is	  not	  a	  major	  source	  of	  error,	  
but	  it	  was	  one	  factor	  in	  the	  decision	  to	  abandon	  the	  ring	  in	  2011.	  	  
When	  the	  2005	  ICP	  was	  completed	  and	  reviewed,	  a	  number	  of	  other	  prob-­‐
lems	  with	  the	  ring	  method	  became	  apparent.	  Some	  of	  the	  ring	  countries	  were	  very	  
different	  from	  one	  another,	  for	  example	  Cameroon	  and	  Japan,	  or	  Brazil	  and	  Oman,	  
making	  comparisons	  difficult,	  and	  raising	  the	  concern	  that	  the	  selection	  of	  ring	  
countries	  might	  be	  having	  a	  large	  effect	  on	  the	  PPPs	  of	  all	  countries.	  Britain	  is	  the	  
only	  representative	  of	  Western	  Europe	  (or,	  apart	  from	  Japan,	  of	  the	  OECD),	  while	  
there	  are	  four	  representatives	  in	  sub-­‐Saharan	  Africa.	  Beyond	  that,	  some	  of	  the	  with-­‐
in-­‐region	  comparisons	  from	  the	  ring	  turned	  out	  to	  be	  inconsistent	  with	  the	  compar-­‐
isons	  from	  the	  previously	  constructed	  within-­‐regional	  comparisons	  for	  the	  main	  
calculations.	  The	  latter,	  which	  used	  regional	  lists	  adapted	  to	  each	  region’s	  pattern	  of	  
consumption,	  and	  which	  covered	  all	  countries	  in	  the	  region,	  were	  almost	  certainly	  
superior	  to	  the	  ring	  comparisons,	  which	  were	  based	  on	  a	  common	  list,	  with	  some	  
items	  hard	  to	  price,	  and	  for	  only	  a	  handful	  of	  countries	  in	  the	  region.	  	  Yet	  it	  was	  only	  
these	  ring	  comparisons	  that	  determined	  the	  “tectonic”	  price	  indexes	  that	  linked	  one	  
region	  with	  another.	  

	  

21	  

Given	  these	  difficulties,	  all	  of	  which	  were	  apparent	  before	  the	  next	  round	  was	  
planned,	  ICP	  2011	  used	  a	  common	  global	  ”core”	  list,	  developed	  in	  consultation	  with	  
all	  of	  the	  regions.	  Countries	  in	  each	  region	  priced	  as	  many	  of	  the	  items	  on	  the	  list	  as	  
they	  could	  together	  with	  additional	  items	  selected	  by	  the	  region	  as	  suitable	  for	  their	  
countries.	  The	  idea	  was	  not	  for	  all	  countries	  to	  price	  all	  the	  items	  on	  the	  core	  list,	  
which	  would	  not	  be	  feasible,	  but	  to	  provide	  enough	  overlap	  so	  that,	  at	  the	  final	  link-­‐
ing	  stage,	  all	  countries	  would	  be	  involved,	  there	  would	  be	  many	  links	  across	  regions,	  
and	  the	  goods	  and	  prices	  would	  be	  the	  same	  as	  those	  that	  had	  been	  used	  in	  the	  con-­‐
struction	  of	  the	  within-­‐region	  PPPs	  at	  the	  first	  stage.	  The	  precise	  linking	  method	  in	  
2011	  is	  the	  Country	  Aggregation	  with	  Redistribution	  (CAR)	  method,	  first	  introduced	  
by	  Kravis,	  Summers,	  and	  Heston	  (1982)	  in	  the	  1980	  ICP;	  a	  brief	  description	  is	  given	  
in	  the	  Summary	  Report,	  World	  Bank	  (2014).	  The	  advantage	  of	  the	  CAR	  method	  over	  
the	  ring	  lies	  in	  its	  consistency	  with	  the	  regional	  pricing	  strategy	  and	  in	  its	  incorpora-­‐
tion	  of	  all	  countries	  into	  the	  linking	  of	  the	  regions	  so	  that	  we	  escape	  the	  dependence	  
of	  the	  all-­‐important	  regional	  linking	  factors	  on	  the	  choice	  of	  ring	  countries,	  or	  on	  the	  
selection	  of	  goods	  and	  services	  for	  the	  ring	  list.	  	  
	  
4.2	  Did	  the	  2005	  ring	  overstate	  price	  levels	  in	  poor	  countries?	  
That	  the	  ring	  method	  might	  have	  overstated	  PPPs	  in	  poor	  countries	  was	  explored	  in	  
Deaton	  (2010)	  though,	  in	  the	  absence	  of	  the	  2011	  ICP,	  there	  were	  no	  decisive	  re-­‐
sults.	  The	  ring	  list	  was	  extremely	  detailed,	  with	  a	  large	  number	  of	  items	  that	  were	  
only	  widely	  available	  in	  rich	  countries.	  Enumerators	  in	  Cameroon,	  Kenya,	  Senegal,	  
Zambia	  and	  Sri	  Lanka	  had	  to	  price	  a	  2003	  or	  2004	  vintage	  bottle	  of	  Bordeaux,	  front-­‐

	  

22	  

loading	  washing	  machines	  with	  a	  pre-­‐specified	  spin	  speed,	  and	  a	  Peugeot	  407	  with	  
air	  conditioning	  and	  climate	  control.	  Although	  all	  of	  these	  goods	  are	  traded,	  they	  are	  
not	  commonly	  purchased	  in	  poor	  countries,	  they	  are	  often	  subject	  to	  high	  taxes,	  and	  
would	  be	  high	  priced	  in	  any	  case	  because	  quantities	  are	  too	  small	  to	  overcome	  fixed	  
costs	  of	  importation	  or	  domestic	  production.	  The	  obvious	  danger	  is	  that,	  when	  such	  
items	  can	  be	  found	  at	  all,	  they	  are	  rare	  and	  expensive,	  or	  perhaps	  only	  available	  in	  
stores	  patronized	  by	  a	  small	  subset	  of	  the	  population;	  in	  the	  absence	  of	  expenditure	  
weights	  for	  items	  within	  basic	  heads	  there	  will	  be	  an	  overstatement	  of	  the	  price	  lev-­‐
el	  in	  poor	  relative	  to	  rich	  countries.	  (Basic	  heads	  are	  the	  building	  blocks	  of	  catego-­‐
ries	  of	  consumption,	  and	  are	  the	  lowest	  level	  at	  which	  expenditure	  weights	  are	  
available,	  so	  that	  the	  prices	  of	  red	  Bordeaux,	  along	  with	  other	  wine	  items,	  enter	  into	  
the	  basic	  head	  of	  wine.)	  	  
A	  second	  and	  related	  problem	  with	  ring	  pricing	  is	  what	  happens	  when	  a	  con-­‐
sumption	  category	  is	  very	  expensive	  but	  rarely	  consumed	  in	  the	  poor	  country,	  but	  
relatively	  cheap	  and	  widely	  consumed	  in	  the	  rich	  country.	  Air	  travel	  is	  an	  example	  
that	  is	  relatively	  very	  expensive	  in	  many	  African	  countries.	  It	  has	  a	  low	  budget	  share	  
in	  the	  African	  ring	  countries,	  so	  that	  its	  high	  price	  there	  has	  little	  effect	  on	  the	  over-­‐
all	  domestic	  price	  level.	  But	  when	  we	  compare	  air	  travel	  in	  Cameroon,	  say,	  with	  air	  
travel	  in	  Britain,	  say,	  the	  high	  relative	  price	  in	  Cameroon	  is	  weighted,	  not	  by	  the	  low	  
Cameroon	  share,	  but	  by	  an	  average	  of	  the	  shares	  in	  Britain	  and	  Cameroon.	  This	  
makes	  Cameroon	  look	  very	  expensive,	  even	  though	  hardly	  anyone	  there	  buys	  the	  
good,	  and	  given	  the	  small	  number	  of	  countries	  in	  the	  ring,	  this	  high	  price	  of	  Came-­‐

	  

23	  

roon	  relative	  to	  Britain	  can	  have	  a	  substantial	  effect	  on	  the	  price	  index	  for	  Africa	  rel-­‐
ative	  to	  the	  OECD.	  
Questions	  of	  item	  specification—which	  can	  be	  thought	  of	  as	  quality	  issues—
and	  of	  how	  to	  weight—are	  not	  specific	  to	  the	  ring	  method,	  but	  are	  inherent	  in	  mak-­‐
ing	  multilateral	  price	  comparisons	  across	  widely	  different	  countries.	  Yet	  it	  is	  plausi-­‐
ble	  that	  the	  2005	  ring,	  with	  its	  very	  detailed	  list	  with	  many	  rich-­‐country	  items,	  and	  
the	  limited	  number	  of	  countries,	  led	  to	  an	  overestimation	  of	  price	  levels	  in	  the	  poor-­‐
er	  countries	  in	  the	  ring,	  and	  so	  overestimated	  price	  levels	  for	  whole	  regions,	  particu-­‐
larly	  for	  Asia	  and	  for	  Africa.	  	  
We	  investigate	  the	  “ring	  overstatement	  hypothesis”	  by	  looking	  at	  how	  the	  
ring	  countries	  fared	  in	  both	  2005	  and	  2011.	  We	  calculate	  price	  levels	  for	  consump-­‐
tion	  for	  the	  ring	  countries	  using	  ICP	  data	  for	  2005	  and	  2011,	  ignoring	  all	  other	  coun-­‐
tries,	  so	  that	  we	  have	  comparable	  ring	  mini-­‐ICPs	  for	  both	  rounds;	  the	  2005	  version	  
is	  the	  same	  as	  that	  used	  to	  link	  the	  regions,	  while	  the	  2011	  version	  is	  only	  for	  the	  
purposes	  of	  this	  paper.	  We	  then	  use	  the	  two	  comparisons	  to	  calculate	  an	  ICP-­‐based	  
inflation	  rate	  from	  2005	  to	  2011	  for	  each	  ring	  country,	  which	  we	  can	  compare	  with	  
the	  inflation	  rate	  from	  the	  CPI.	  If	  the	  ring	  led	  to	  price	  overstatement	  in	  poor	  coun-­‐
tries	  in	  2005,	  the	  ICP-­‐based	  inflation	  rates	  will	  be	  systematically	  lower	  than	  CPI	  in-­‐
flation	  in	  poor	  countries,	  at	  least	  up	  to	  the	  noise	  that	  is	  apparent	  in	  Figure	  3.	  
For	  2005,	  we	  used	  the	  ring	  prices	  and	  ring	  list	  to	  calculate	  a	  set	  of	  PPPs,	  as	  if	  
the	  ring	  countries	  were	  the	  only	  countries	  in	  the	  world.	  	  In	  2011,	  we	  have	  done	  the	  
same	  thing	  with	  the	  global	  core	  list,	  but	  again	  only	  using	  information	  from	  the	  eight-­‐
een	  countries	  that	  comprised	  the	  ring	  in	  2005.	  No	  information	  from	  any	  other	  coun-­‐

	  

24	  

try	  has	  any	  effect	  on	  these	  numbers.	  For	  both	  rounds,	  we	  used	  the	  country-­‐product	  
dummy	  (CPD)	  method	  below	  the	  basic	  head	  level	  with	  weights	  reflecting	  surveyor-­‐
reported	  importance	  of	  each	  item	  (for	  2011,	  unweighted	  in	  2005),	  and	  expenditure-­‐
weighted	  CPD	  above	  it.	  Ideally,	  we	  should	  have	  liked	  to	  calculate	  price	  indexes	  in	  
local	  currency	  for	  each	  country	  and	  each	  basic	  head,	  so	  as	  to	  make	  a	  direct	  compari-­‐
son	  between	  2011	  and	  2005.	  However,	  for	  many	  basic	  heads	  there	  is	  little	  overlap	  
between	  the	  ring	  list	  in	  2005	  and	  the	  core	  list	  in	  2011,	  so	  this	  approach	  is	  not	  feasi-­‐
ble.	  
Table	  2	  lists	  the	  results.	  The	  PPPs	  and	  the	  exchange	  rates	  are	  scaled	  so	  that	  
the	  UK	  is	  the	  numeraire.	  The	  relative	  inflation	  rates	  are	  changes	  in	  the	  logs	  of	  the	  
CPIs	  from	  2005	  to	  2011	  from	  the	  World	  Development	  Indicators	  minus	  the	  corre-­‐
sponding	  inflation	  rate	  of	  the	  UK.	  We	  have	  adjusted	  the	  Estonian	  and	  Slovenian	  ex-­‐
change	  rates	  and	  PPPs	  for	  2011	  back	  to	  their	  original	  currencies	  by	  multiplying	  by	  
the	  rate	  at	  the	  time	  they	  joined	  the	  Euro.	  
If	  extrapolation	  were	  to	  work	  perfectly,	  the	  change	  in	  the	  logs	  of	  the	  PPPs	  
from	  2005	  to	  2011	  would	  be	  equal	  to	  the	  inflation	  rate	  in	  the	  last	  column.	  We	  al-­‐
ready	  know	  that	  this	  is	  not	  going	  to	  happen.	  Even	  so,	  if	  for	  some	  countries	  the	  ring	  
prices	  were	  overstated	  in	  2005,	  but	  not	  in	  2011,	  we	  would	  expect	  the	  change	  in	  the	  
PPPs	  to	  be	  systematically	  less	  than	  the	  inflation	  rate	  because,	  in	  addition	  to	  true	  in-­‐
flation,	  the	  overstatement	  would	  be	  unwinding.	  We	  think	  of	  the	  log	  change	  in	  the	  
PPP	  as	  the	  predicted	  or	  ICP-­‐based	  inflation	  rate,	  to	  be	  compared	  with	  the	  actual	  in-­‐
flation	  rate,	  and	  what	  we	  are	  looking	  for	  is	  that	  the	  ICP-­‐based	  inflation	  rate	  will	  be	  

	  

25	  

too	  low	  in	  the	  poorer	  countries	  of	  the	  ring,	  and	  approximately	  correct	  in	  the	  richer	  
countries.	  	  
The	  vertical	  axis	  of	  Figure	  4	  shows	  the	  residuals	  between	  ICP	  and	  CPI	  infla-­‐
tion	  for	  the	  ring	  countries,	  where	  the	  ICP	  inflation	  comes	  from	  the	  ring	  exercise	  in	  
2005	  and	  our	  new	  calculations	  for	  the	  ring	  countries	  only	  in	  2011.	  All	  numbers	  are	  
normalized	  relative	  to	  the	  U.K.,	  whose	  ICP	  and	  CPI	  inflations	  are	  therefore	  zero,	  as	  is	  
its	  residual.	  The	  horizontal	  axis	  is	  the	  logarithm	  of	  per	  capita	  GDP	  in	  2005	  prices	  
from	  the	  full	  ICP	  2005,	  and	  the	  scatter	  shows	  that	  the	  discrepancy	  is	  negative	  for	  the	  
poorest	  countries,	  rising	  to	  zero	  for	  Britain	  and	  the	  rich	  countries,	  as	  is	  to	  be	  ex-­‐
pected	  if	  the	  ring	  prices	  were	  too	  high	  in	  the	  poorer	  countries	  in	  the	  ring	  in	  2005,	  
but	  were	  correctly	  measured	  in	  2011.	  If	  we	  (somewhat	  arbitrarily)	  take	  Malaysia,	  
Senegal,	  Cameroon,	  Philippines,	  Oman	  (excluded	  from	  the	  graph	  for	  lack	  of	  an	  in-­‐
come	  figure),	  Jordan,	  Zambia,	  Sri	  Lanka,	  Egypt,	  and	  Kenya	  as	  the	  poor	  group,	  for	  
whom	  the	  ring	  overstatement	  was	  an	  issue,	  the	  average	  discrepancy	  for	  those	  ten	  
countries	  relative	  to	  the	  rich	  group	  is	  0.35.	  Note	  that,	  although	  South	  Africa	  (ZAF)	  
was	  in	  Africa	  and	  in	  the	  ring,	  the	  wide	  availability	  of	  rich	  country	  goods	  there	  means	  
that	  it	  should	  be	  where	  we	  see	  it,	  with	  the	  rich	  countries.	  Japan	  has	  markedly	  differ-­‐
ent	  consumption	  patterns	  than	  most	  other	  rich	  countries,	  and	  so	  it	  is	  plausible	  that	  
there	  would	  be	  some	  ring	  overstatement	  there.	  	  
We	  realize	  that	  we	  are	  reading	  a	  great	  deal	  into	  18	  data	  points.	  We	  also	  note	  
that	  there	  is	  a	  good	  deal	  of	  variation	  around	  the	  line,	  but,	  subject	  to	  country	  to	  coun-­‐
try	  variation	  in	  ring	  pricing	  in	  2005,	  country	  to	  country	  variation	  in	  the	  accuracy	  of	  
the	  CPI,	  and	  all	  the	  other	  reasons	  why	  PPPs	  are	  not	  expected	  to	  inflate	  at	  the	  same	  

	  

26	  

rate	  as	  the	  CPI,	  it	  is	  perhaps	  surprising	  that	  the	  relationship	  in	  Figure	  4	  is	  as	  strong	  
as	  it	  is.	  	  Given	  the	  questionable	  quality	  of	  the	  consumer	  price	  indexes	  in	  some	  coun-­‐
tries,	  we	  may	  be	  asking	  too	  much	  for	  the	  growth	  of	  the	  PPPs	  to	  match	  one-­‐for-­‐one	  
with	  the	  growth	  in	  the	  CPIs.	  Table	  3	  runs	  regressions	  of	  the	  change	  in	  log	  PPP	  on	  the	  
change	  in	  log	  CPI,	  without	  constraining	  the	  coefficient	  to	  be	  one.	  The	  first	  two	  col-­‐
umns	  show	  separate	  regressions	  for	  the	  two	  groups;	  the	  average	  distance	  between	  
the	  two	  lines	  is	  0.26.	  The	  last	  column	  pools	  the	  18	  countries,	  imposing	  the	  same	  
slope	  on	  both	  groups,	  and	  calculates	  the	  distance	  between	  the	  two	  lines	  as	  the	  coef-­‐
ficient	  on	  a	  dummy	  for	  the	  poor	  countries,	  which	  also	  gives	  0.26.	  A	  more	  relevant	  
number	  comes	  from	  putting	  South	  Africa	  into	  the	  poor	  group,	  given	  that	  it	  was	  part	  
of	  the	  Africa	  region	  in	  ICP	  2005.	  This	  reduces	  the	  distance	  between	  the	  lines	  to	  be	  
0.22	  (two	  regressions)	  or	  0.23	  (one	  regression,	  results	  not	  shown.)	  We	  prefer	  these	  
more	  conservative	  estimates,	  but	  have	  no	  formal	  account	  of	  why	  the	  PPPs	  should	  
not	  move	  one-­‐for-­‐one	  with	  the	  CPIs.	  
If	  the	  analysis	  here	  is	  correct,	  and	  given	  that	  the	  ring	  prices	  moved	  whole	  re-­‐
gions	  relative	  to	  OECD/Eurostat,	  the	  $	  PPPs	  for	  Asia,	  Africa,	  and	  Western	  Asia	  were	  
all	  too	  high	  in	  2005,	  by	  22	  percent	  according	  to	  our	  best	  estimate.	  This	  number	  
should	  be	  compared	  with	  the	  revisions	  in	  the	  second	  column	  of	  Table	  1;	  if	  the	  2005	  
ICPs	  for	  the	  three	  regions	  were	  reduced	  by	  this	  amount,	  the	  extrapolations	  to	  2011	  
would	  have	  been	  close,	  not	  on	  a	  country-­‐by-­‐country	  basis,	  but	  region	  by	  region.	  
Inklaar	  and	  Rao	  (2015)	  propose	  an	  alternative	  calculation	  that	  uses	  the	  fact	  
that	  in	  the	  ring	  countries	  in	  2005,	  there	  were	  two	  pricing	  exercises,	  one	  for	  the	  orig-­‐
inal	  regional	  PPPs	  using	  the	  lists	  for	  each	  region,	  and	  one	  for	  the	  ring	  calculation,	  

	  

27	  

using	  the	  ring	  list.	  	  This	  calculation	  makes	  no	  use	  of	  the	  2011	  data,	  and	  is	  therefore	  
different	  from	  the	  calculation	  here.	  It	  also	  has	  the	  advantage	  that	  the	  overstatement	  
can	  be	  calculated	  for	  each	  country,	  although	  only	  relative	  to	  a	  regional	  numeraire.	  
Comparing	  with	  South	  Africa	  in	  Africa	  and	  Hong	  Kong	  in	  Asia,	  they	  find	  an	  average	  
overstatement	  in	  Africa	  of	  about	  9	  percent	  and	  in	  Asia	  of	  16	  percent.	  Figure	  5	  sug-­‐
gests	  that	  Hong	  Kong	  had	  no	  ring	  price	  overstatement,	  while	  South	  Africa	  is	  16	  per-­‐
cent	  below	  Britain	  and	  Hong	  Kong,	  so	  the	  final	  average	  overstatement	  is	  25	  percent	  
(16+9)	  for	  Africa,	  and	  16	  percent	  for	  Asia.	  These	  estimates	  compare	  with	  the	  esti-­‐
mate	  above	  of	  22	  percent	  for	  Africa,	  Asia	  and	  Western	  Asia	  together.	  	  
	  
4.3	  A	  crosscheck	  calculation	  
A	  different	  approach	  is	  to	  look	  for	  evidence	  of	  overstatement	  in	  the	  cross-­‐country	  
relationship	  between	  the	  price	  level	  index	  (PLI)—the	  ratio	  of	  the	  PPP	  to	  the	  ex-­‐
change	  rate—and	  per	  capita	  consumption.	  The	  Balassa–Samuelson	  theorem	  posits	  
that	  PLIs	  are	  lower	  in	  poor	  countries,	  and	  if	  this	  relationship	  is	  stable	  over	  time—
which	  may	  or	  may	  not	  be	  the	  case—and	  if	  the	  PPPs	  of	  Africa,	  Asia	  and	  Western	  Asia	  
were	  overstated	  in	  2005,	  we	  should	  see	  an	  upward	  shift	  in	  the	  relationship	  for	  those	  
regions	  in	  that	  year.	  Although	  we	  report	  results	  for	  this	  method,	  we	  regard	  it	  as	  un-­‐
satisfactory.	  The	  dynamic	  Balassa-­‐Samuelson	  works	  through	  time,	  and	  the	  most	  ap-­‐
propriate	  way	  to	  test	  it	  would	  be	  to	  follow	  at	  least	  one	  country	  over	  a	  substantial	  
period	  of	  time.	  In	  a	  cross-­‐section,	  or	  in	  a	  short	  time	  series	  of	  cross-­‐sections	  like	  
those	  from	  successive	  rounds	  of	  the	  ICP,	  the	  relationship	  will	  be	  obscured	  by	  time	  
series	  effects,	  of	  which	  the	  most	  important	  are	  likely	  to	  be	  those	  associated	  with	  

	  

28	  

currency	  movements.	  	  Currencies	  can	  deviate	  from	  fundamentals	  for	  long	  periods	  of	  
time,	  and	  non-­‐fundamental	  movements	  of	  major	  currencies,	  such	  as	  the	  dollar	  or	  the	  
euro,	  can	  distort	  the	  cross-­‐sectional	  relationship	  between	  PLIs	  and	  per	  capita	  GDP	  
in	  any	  given	  year,	  or	  over	  a	  run	  of	  years.	  	  That	  caveat	  should	  be	  kept	  in	  mind	  in	  read-­‐
ing	  the	  rest	  of	  this	  section.	  	  
	  

Suppose	  that	  the	  relationship	  between	  the	  PLI	  in	  country	  c	  and	  the	  level	  of	  

economic	  development	  can	  be	  approximates	  by	  an	  equation	  that	  is	  linear	  in	  logs	  
	  

ln PLI c* = α + β (lnCc* − lnC0 ) + uc 	  	  

(5)	  

and	  that	  this	  holds	  both	  across	  countries	  and	  across	  time,	  at	  least	  for	  the	  correctly	  
measured	  C*	  (in	  PPP	  terms)	  and	  PLI*.	  	   C 0 	  is	  per	  capita	  consumption	  in	  PPP	  for	  a	  ref-­‐
erence	  country,	  such	  as	  the	  United	  States,	  or	  the	  geometric	  mean	  of	  per	  capita	  con-­‐
sumption	  for	  a	  group	  of	  countries,	  such	  as	  the	  Eurostat–OECD	  countries;	  it	  is	  meas-­‐
ured	  without	  error.	  The	  Balassa–Samuelson	  theorem	  is	  silent	  about	  exactly	  which	  
measure	  of	  resources	  should	  represent	  the	  level	  of	  development	  on	  the	  right-­‐hand	  
side	  of	  (5).	  Our	  choice	  of	  a	  relative	  measure	  is	  motivated	  by	  the	  fact	  that	  ,	  in	  the	  nu-­‐
meraire	  country,	  in	  our	  data	  the	  US,	  always	  has	  a	  PLI	  of	  unity,	  so	  that,	  if	  the	  US	  econ-­‐
omy	  grows	  between	  two	  rounds,	  it	  is	  impossible	  for	  it	  to	  lie	  on	  the	  same	  curve	  if	  the	  
resource	  variable	  is	  an	  absolute	  measure.	  The	  relative	  specification	  (5)	  gets	  round	  
this	  problem,	  but	  there	  is	  no	  guarantee	  that	  it	  is	  correctly	  specified.	  Indeed,	  since	  
relative	  prices	  of	  goods	  change	  from	  one	  round	  to	  the	  next,	  the	  relative	  measure	  in	  
(5)	  can	  change	  with	  them,	  even	  if	  there	  has	  been	  no	  change	  in	  a	  country’s	  real	  posi-­‐
tion.	  We	  will	  use	  2005	  international	  dollars	  for	  the	  ratios	  in	  ICP2005,	  and	  2011	  in-­‐
ternational	  dollars	  for	  the	  ratios	  in	  ICP2011.	  Note	  also	  that	  (for	  the	  same	  reasons)	  

	  

29	  

the	  estimates	  of	  (5)	  are	  not	  invariant	  with	  respect	  to	  the	  choice	  of	  the	  comparison	  
country	  0;	  we	  will	  consider	  two	  possibilities	  here,	  the	  US	  and	  a	  Eurostat-­‐OECD	  com-­‐
posite.	  These	  ambiguities	  are	  yet	  another	  reason	  (in	  addition	  to	  exchange	  rate	  fluc-­‐
tuations)	  to	  be	  wary	  of	  the	  calculations	  reported	  in	  this	  subsection.	  	  
Suppose	  that	  for	  three	  regions,	  Western	  Asia,	  Africa,	  and	  Asia,	  and	  in	  one	  
year	  only,	  2005,	  the	  PPPs	  are	  overstated,	  so	  that	  
	  

ln PPPc = ln PPPc* + θ R 	  	  

(6)	  

where	   θ R 	  	  is	  a	  positive	  number	  for	  the	  selected	  regions	  in	  2005,	  and	  zero	  otherwise.	  	  
Note	  that	   ln PLI 	  and	   lnC − lnC0 	  are	  also	  derived	  from	  the	  mismeasured	  PPP	  and	  
are	  thus	  subject	  to	  a	  corresponding	  downward	  shift	  of	   θ . 	  If	  we	  substitute	  (6)	  into	  
(5),	  we	  get	  the	  relationship	  between	  the	  measured	  PLI	  and	  measured	  C,	  which	  is	  	  
	  

ln PLI c = α + θ (1+ β ) + β (lnCc − lnC0 ) + u 	  	  

(7)	  

so	  that	  equation	  (7)	  should	  show	  an	  intercept	  shift	  in	  2005	  for	  the	  three	  regions.	  	  
	  

Figure	  5	  shows	  the	  scatter	  of	  the	  logs	  of	  the	  PLIs	  and	  log	  of	  relative	  per	  capita	  

consumption	  in	  both	  ICP	  2005	  and	  ICP2011,	  with	  dark	  points	  for	  2011	  and	  lighter	  
points	  for	  2005.	  India	  and	  China	  are	  shown	  as	  larger	  circles,	  and	  the	  changes	  be-­‐
tween	  rounds	  by	  connecting	  arrows.	  Both	  ICPs	  have	  an	  upward	  slope,	  but	  it	  is	  clear	  
that,	  on	  the	  left	  of	  the	  figure,	  among	  the	  poorer	  countries,	  the	  lighter	  circles	  tend	  to	  
be	  above	  the	  darker	  circles	  at	  the	  same	  level	  of	  per	  capita	  consumption.	  Note	  too	  
that	  there	  is	  a	  good	  deal	  of	  scatter;	  for	  example,	  although	  China	  got	  richer	  and	  its	  PLI	  
increased,	  India,	  which	  also	  got	  richer,	  saw	  its	  PLI	  decline.	  Of	  course,	  if	  the	  ring	  
overstatement	  hypothesis	  is	  correct,	  both	  of	  those	  changes	  are	  biased	  downwards	  
because	  their	  PLIs	  in	  2005	  were	  too	  high.	  	  
	  

30	  

	  

To	  assess	  the	  degree	  of	  overstatement	  in	  ICP	  2005,	  we	  run	  Balassa-­‐

Samuelson	  regressions	  (7).	  We	  do	  so	  for	  countries	  in	  the	  three	  regions	  (Africa,	  Asia,	  
and	  Western	  Asia)	  only;	  this	  enables	  us	  to	  calculate	  estimates	  of	   θ 	  from	  the	  inter-­‐
cept	  shift	  between	  the	  two	  rounds.	  It	  also	  has	  the	  advantage	  that	  we	  are	  not	  assum-­‐
ing	  that	  the	  relationship	  is	  linear	  across	  rich	  and	  poor	  countries	  alike,	  which	  Figure	  
5	  suggests	  would	  not	  be	  appropriate.	  The	  results	  are	  shown	  in	  Table	  4,	  on	  the	  left	  
hand	  panel	  for	  the	  US	  as	  reference	  country,	  and	  on	  the	  right	  hand	  panel	  for	  the	  geo-­‐
metric	  mean	  of	  Eurostat-­‐OECD	  as	  reference	  “country.”	  In	  the	  first	  two	  columns	  of	  
each	  panel	  we	  estimate	  separate	  regressions	  for	  the	  two	  years,	  and	  then	  average	  the	  
difference	  between	  the	  two	  regression	  lines	  over	  all	  countries.	  To	  get	  an	  estimate	  of	  

θ 	  we	  must	  divide	  by	  the	  slope	  of	  the	  regression;	  when	  we	  use	  the	  average	  over	  the	  
two,	  we	  get	  an	  estimate	  of	  PPP	  overstatement	  of	  18	  percent	  in	  those	  three	  regions.	  
The	  third	  column	  shows	  the	  simpler	  case	  where	  we	  allow	  only	  an	  intercept	  differ-­‐
ence,	  which	  yields	  an	  estimate	  of	   θ 	  of	  21	  percent.	  When	  we	  use	  the	  compound	  
country	  as	  reference,	  the	  corresponding	  estimates	  are	  21	  percent	  and	  19	  percent.	  
These	  estimates	  are	  somewhat	  lower	  than	  our	  preferred	  estimate	  of	  23	  percent	  es-­‐
timated	  in	  the	  previous	  section	  but	  well	  within	  the	  margins	  of	  error	  we	  should	  ex-­‐
pect.	  	  
	  

Neither	  of	  these	  calculations	  is	  very	  precise,	  and	  both	  make	  assumptions	  

about	  functional	  forms	  and	  the	  absence	  of	  other	  effects.	  Even	  so,	  all	  of	  our	  evidence	  
is	  consistent	  with	  overestimation	  in	  2005	  for	  Asia,	  Africa,	  and	  Western	  Asia,	  by	  an	  
amount	  of	  around	  20	  percent.	  	  
	  

	  

31	  

5.	  Summary	  and	  conclusions	  
We	  began	  by	  documenting	  the	  differences	  between,	  on	  the	  one	  hand,	  the	  PPPs	  for	  
consumption	  that	  were	  measured	  in	  the	  2011	  round	  of	  the	  ICP	  and,	  on	  the	  other	  
hand,	  their	  extrapolations	  based	  on	  the	  2005	  round	  together	  with	  relative	  rates	  of	  
inflation	  using	  country	  consumer	  price	  indexes.	  There	  are	  good	  reasons	  to	  expect	  
the	  extrapolations	  to	  differ	  from	  actuals,	  but	  we	  show	  that,	  in	  the	  countries	  of	  the	  
OECD	  and	  Europe	  whose	  PPPs	  are	  calculated	  by	  Eurostat,	  the	  divergence	  is	  small,	  
even	  using	  the	  extrapolation	  procedures	  used	  for	  the	  rest	  of	  the	  world.	  Outside	  this	  
region,	  and	  especially	  in	  Africa,	  Asia,	  and	  Western	  Asia,	  the	  divergences	  are	  large.	  
ICP	  2005	  revised	  upward	  the	  PPPs	  for	  poor	  countries	  relative	  to	  the	  rich	  
countries	  and	  ICP	  2011	  revised	  them	  downward.	  Country-­‐by-­‐country,	  the	  revisions	  
in	  2011	  are	  only	  weakly	  correlated	  with	  the	  comparable	  revisions	  in	  2005,	  and	  in	  
aggregate,	  only	  remove	  part	  of	  them.	  In	  2005,	  when	  there	  were	  large	  methodologi-­‐
cal	  differences	  for	  many	  countries,	  the	  discrepancies	  with	  the	  extrapolations	  from	  
the	  previous	  round	  in	  1993/96	  varied	  both	  across	  regions	  and	  within	  them.	  In	  2011,	  
by	  contrast,	  where	  the	  methodological	  revisions	  were	  more	  limited,	  the	  biggest	  re-­‐
visions	  were	  across	  regions,	  not	  within	  them.	  	  
	  

The	  pattern	  of	  raising	  poor	  region	  PPPs	  in	  2005,	  and	  lowering	  them	  in	  2011	  

raises	  the	  possibility	  that	  there	  was	  a	  one	  time	  problem	  in	  2005	  that	  was,	  at	  least	  to	  
some	  extent,	  undone	  in	  2011.	  A	  plausible	  explanation	  for	  this	  is	  that	  the	  regions	  
were	  linked	  in	  2005	  using	  a	  group	  of	  eighteen	  ring	  countries,	  a	  method	  that	  was	  re-­‐
placed	  by	  a	  more	  robust	  and	  internally	  consistent	  procedure	  in	  2011,	  a	  method	  that	  
also	  involved	  all	  countries,	  not	  just	  a	  small	  group.	  Our	  direct	  analysis	  of	  the	  ring	  

	  

32	  

countries,	  comparing	  the	  inflation	  rates	  from	  one	  ICP	  to	  the	  next,	  and	  comparing	  it	  
with	  inflation	  rates	  from	  national	  CPIs,	  suggested	  that	  the	  PPPs	  for	  the	  Western	  
Asia,	  Africa,	  and	  Asia	  regions	  might	  have	  been	  inflated	  by	  around	  a	  fifth	  to	  a	  quarter.	  
A	  different	  approach,	  based	  on	  an	  analysis	  of	  the	  Balassa-­‐Samuelson	  or	  Penn	  effect	  
in	  2005	  and	  2011,	  which	  has	  problems	  of	  its	  own,	  is	  nevertheless	  consistent	  with	  a	  
similar	  overestimation	  in	  2005.	  This	  last	  method	  is	  conditional	  on	  assuming	  that	  
2011	  is	  correct,	  and	  2005	  not,	  so	  it	  is	  less	  strong	  than	  the	  method	  that	  looks	  at	  infla-­‐
tion	  in	  the	  ring	  countries.	  But	  both	  sets	  of	  results	  are	  consistent	  with	  the	  up	  and	  
down	  pattern	  shown	  by	  the	  discrepancies	  between	  actuals	  and	  interpolations	  in	  
2005	  and	  2011.	  	  
	  

It	  is	  not	  our	  purpose	  in	  this	  paper	  to	  discuss	  how	  these	  results	  should	  be	  

used.	  But	  our	  findings	  suggest	  that	  the	  ICP	  2011	  estimates	  are	  the	  most	  accurate	  
that	  we	  have,	  and	  provide	  no	  grounds	  for	  doubting	  them.	  Indeed,	  there	  are	  other	  
major	  improvements	  in	  2011	  that	  we	  have	  not	  discussed,	  including	  much	  more	  rig-­‐
orous	  validation	  of	  data,	  and	  much	  more	  attention	  to	  the	  local	  currency	  national	  ac-­‐
counts	  supplied	  by	  the	  countries.	  If	  this	  is	  correct,	  then	  the	  revisions	  that	  need	  to	  be	  
undertaken	  are	  to	  long-­‐standing	  previous	  estimates,	  a	  process	  that	  is	  likely	  to	  be	  
less	  than	  straightforward.	  	  
Given	  our	  results,	  one	  way	  to	  correct	  2005	  would	  be	  to	  preserve	  the	  within-­‐
region	  PPPs	  for	  each	  of	  the	  regions	  in	  2005,	  but	  to	  revise	  the	  regional	  linking.	  This	  
could	  be	  done	  by	  back	  casting	  (backward	  extrapolation	  from	  2011	  to	  2005)	  for	  each	  
country	  and	  then	  aggregating	  GDP	  and	  consumption	  up	  to	  regions.	  The	  regional	  to-­‐
tals	  would	  then	  be	  allocated	  to	  the	  countries	  in	  proportion	  to	  the	  original	  2005	  es-­‐

	  

33	  

timates,	  which	  would	  preserve	  the	  within-­‐region	  totals.	  This	  is	  essentially	  the	  Coun-­‐
try	  Aggregation	  with	  Redistribution	  (CAR)	  method	  that	  was	  used	  to	  link	  the	  regions	  
in	  2011.	  As	  far	  as	  the	  future	  is	  concerned,	  it	  would	  also	  be	  extremely	  desirable	  to	  
put	  the	  program	  on	  a	  continuous	  basis,	  with	  results	  updated	  from	  year	  to	  year,	  
which	  should	  avoid	  the	  large	  revisions	  that	  characterized	  the	  last	  two	  rounds.	  
	  
	  
6.	  Citations	  	  	  
Aten,	  Bettina,	  and	  Marshall	  Reinsdorf,	  2010,	  “Comparing	  the	  consistency	  of	  price	  
parities	  for	  regions	  of	  the	  U.S.	  in	  an	  economic	  approach	  framework,”	  Presented	  at	  
the	  31st	  annual	  conference	  of	  IARIW,	  St	  Gallen,	  Switzerland,	  August.	  
http://www.bea.gov/research/topics/price_indexes.htm	  
	  
Chandy,	  Lawrence,	  and	  Homi	  Kharas,	  2014,	  “What	  do	  new	  price	  data	  mean	  for	  the	  
goal	  of	  ending	  extreme	  poverty?”	  Brookings,	  May	  5,	  
http://www.brookings.edu/blogs/up-­‐front/posts/2014/05/05-­‐data-­‐extreme-­‐
poverty-­‐chandy-­‐kharas	  
	  
Deaton,	  Angus,	  2001,	  “Counting	  the	  poor:	  problems	  and	  possible	  solutions,”	  World	  
Bank	  Research	  Observer,	  16:2,	  125–47.	  
	  
Deaton,	  Angus,	  2010,	  “Price	  indexes,	  inequality,	  and	  the	  measurement	  of	  world	  pov-­‐
erty,”	  American	  Economic	  Review,	  100:1,	  5–34.	  
	  
Deaton,	  Angus,	  2012,	  “Calibrating	  measurement	  uncertainty	  in	  purchasing	  power	  
parity	  exchange	  rates,”	  incomplete	  paper,	  	  	  
http://siteresources.worldbank.org/ICPINT/Resources/270056-­‐
1255977254560/6483625-­‐
1338834270350/ADeaton_CalibratinguncertaintyinPPP.pdf	  
	  
Deaton,	  Angus,	  and	  Alan	  Heston,	  2010,	  “Understanding	  PPPs	  and	  PPP-­‐based	  nation-­‐
al	  accounts,”	  American	  Economic	  Journal:	  Macroeconomics,	  2:4,	  1–35.	  
	  
Diewert,	  Erwin,	  2013,	  “Methods	  of	  aggregation	  above	  the	  basic	  heading	  level:	  link-­‐
ing	  the	  regions,”	  Chapter	  6	  in	  Fred	  Vogel	  and	  D.	  S.	  Prasada	  Rao,	  Measuring	  the	  real	  
size	  of	  the	  world	  economy:	  the	  framework,	  methodology	  and	  results	  of	  the	  interna-­‐
tional	  comparison	  program,	  Washington,	  DC.	  The	  World	  Bank,	  pp.	  169–96.	  
	  
	  

34	  

Dykstra,	  Sarah,	  Charles	  Kenny,	  and	  Justin	  Sandefur,	  2014,	  “Global	  absolute	  poverty	  
fell	  by	  almost	  half	  on	  Tuesday,”	  Center	  for	  Global	  Development,	  May	  2,	  
http://www.cgdev.org/blog/global-­‐absolute-­‐poverty-­‐fell-­‐almost-­‐half-­‐tuesday	  
	  
Inklaar,	  Robert,	  2013,	  “Price	  levels	  and	  economic	  growth:	  making	  sense	  of	  revisions	  
to	  data	  on	  real	  incomes:	  a	  comment,”	  Review	  of	  Income	  and	  Wealth,	  59:4,	  614–22.	  
	  
Inklaar,	  Robert,	  and	  D.	  S.	  Prasada	  Rao,	  2014,	  “Cross-­‐country	  income	  levels	  over	  
time:	  did	  the	  developing	  world	  suddenly	  become	  much	  richer?”	  	  Groningen	  Growth	  
and	  Development	  Center	  Research	  Memorandum	  151,	  Groningen,	  The	  Netherlands,	  
December.	  
	  
Johnson,	  Simon,	  William	  Larson,	  Chris	  Papageorgiou,	  and	  Arvind	  Subramanian,	  
2013,	  “Is	  newer	  better?	  Penn	  World	  Table	  revisions	  and	  their	  impact	  on	  growth	  es-­‐
timates,”	  Journal	  of	  Monetary	  Economics,	  60(2),	  255–74.	  
	  
Kravis,	  Irving,	  Alan	  Heston,	  and	  Robert	  Summers,	  1982,	  World	  product	  and	  income:	  
international	  comparisons	  of	  real	  gross	  product,	  Baltimore,	  MD.	  Johns	  Hopkins	  Uni-­‐
versity	  Press	  for	  the	  World	  Bank.	  
	  
McCarthy,	  Paul,	  2011,	  “Extrapolating	  PPPs	  and	  comparing	  ICP	  benchmark	  results,”	  
International	  Comparison	  Project,	  
http://siteresources.worldbank.org/ICPINT/Resources/270056-­‐
1255977254560/6483625-­‐1291755426408/18_ICPBook_Extrapolating_FINAL.pdf	  
	  
Obstfeld,	  Maurice	  and	  Kenneth	  Rogoff,	  1996,	  Foundations	  of	  international	  macroeco-­‐
nomics,	  MIT	  Press.	  
	  
Ravallion,	  Martin,	  2012,	  “Price	  levels	  and	  economic	  growth:	  making	  sense	  of	  revi-­‐
sions	  to	  data	  on	  real	  incomes,”	  Review	  of	  Income	  and	  Wealth,	  59:4,	  593–613	  
	  
Ryten,	  Jacob,	  1998,	  Evaluation	  of	  the	  International	  Comparison	  Programme,	  United	  
Nations	  Economic	  and	  Social	  Council,	  New	  York,	  United	  Nations.	  
	  
World	  Bank,	  2014,	  Summary	  of	  results	  and	  findings	  of	  the	  2011	  international	  compar-­‐
isons	  program,	  International	  Comparison	  Program,	  
http://siteresources.worldbank.org/ICPINT/Resources/270056-­‐
1183395201801/Summary-­‐of-­‐Results-­‐and-­‐Findings-­‐of-­‐the-­‐2011-­‐International-­‐
Comparison-­‐Program.pdf	  
	  
	  
	  

	  

35	  

Table	  1:	  Regional	  revisions	  from	  extrapolations	  in	  ICP	  2005	  and	  ICP	  2011	  
	  
Region	  
Mean	  log	  
Mean	  log	  
s.d.	  log	  
s.d.	  log	  
Number	  of	  
ratio	  2005	   ratio	  
ratio	  
ratio	  
countries	  
2011	  
2005	  
2011	  
Africa	  
0.56	  
–0.25	  
0.27	  
0.15	  
33	  
Asia	  &	  Pacific	  
0.46	  
–0.34	  
0.27	  
0.08	  
15	  
CIS	  
0.40	  
–0.15	  
0.24	  
0.25	  
5	  
Eurostat/OECD	   0.08	  
–0.00	  
0.11	  
0.01	  
40	  
Latin	  America	  
0.26	  
–0.13	  
0.21	  
0.06	  
7	  
Western	  Asia	  
0.42	  
–0.56	  
0.14	  
0.12	  
5	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
Eurostat/OECD	  
–0.04	  
0.06	  
45	  
extrapolated	  
	  
Notes:	  	  CIS	  is	  the	  Confederation	  of	  Independent	  States.	  The	  means	  are	  calculated	  only	  for	  countries	  
that	  are	  common	  to	  both	  rounds,	  and	  are	  unweighted	  country	  means	  of	  the	  logarithm	  of	  the	  ratio	  of	  
the	  ICP	  consumption	  PPP	  to	  the	  previously	  extrapolated	  consumption	  PPP.	  	  The	  final	  row	  is	  what	  
would	  have	  happened	  in	  2011	  if	  the	  Eurostat/OECD	  PPPs	  had	  been	  projected	  from	  2005	  using	  con-­‐
sumer	  price	  indexes;	  of	  the	  47	  Eurostat/OECD	  countries,	  Cyprus	  is	  excluded,	  and	  Chile	  was	  not	  an	  
OECD	  member	  in	  2005.	  Extrapolation	  can	  be	  done	  for	  more	  countries	  than	  have	  full	  PPP	  data	  for	  all	  
three	  rounds,	  so	  that	  there	  are	  45	  countries	  in	  Eurostat/OECD	  in	  the	  last	  row,	  as	  opposed	  to	  40	  earli-­‐
er	  in	  the	  table.	  	  
	  
	  
	  

	  

36	  

Table	  2:	  Data	  on	  PPPs,	  exchange	  rates,	  and	  inflation	  from	  2005	  to	  2011	  
	  
Country	  
Brazil	  
Chile	  
Cameroon	  
Egypt	  
Estonia	  
UK	  
Hong	  Kong	  
Jordan	  
Japan	  
Kenya	  
Sri	  Lanka	  
Malaysia	  
Oman	  
Philippines	  
Senegal	  
Slovenia	  
South	  Africa	  
Zambia	  

PPP	  2005	  

PPP	  2011	   XR	  2005	  

2.801	  
2.720	  
684.1	  
641.0	  
649.8	  
404.2	  
3.570	  
3.275	  
15.51	  
13.64	  
1	  
1	  
9.764	  
9.128	  
0.6786	  
0.533	  
218.2	  
160.37	  
64.80	  
61.77	  
80.18	  
75.06	  
3.675	  
2.479	  
0.3393	  
0.292	  
39.72	  
31.49	  
604.3	  
439.9	  
287.2	  
252.4	  
7.735	  
8.132	  
5235.3	  
4111.0	  

XR	  2011	   Relative	  
Inflation	  rate	  
4.418	  
2.679	  
0.114	  
1018.4	  
780.8	  
–0.132	  
959.0	  
756.2	  
0.003	  
10.51	  
9.474	  
0.465	  
22.87	  
18.03	  
0.104	  
1	  
1	  
0	  
14.15	  
12.47	  
–0.017	  
1.291	  
1.138	  
0.158	  
200.4	  
127.9	  
–0.186	  
137.4	  
142.3	  
0.540	  
182.7	  
177.2	  
0.426	  
6.891	  
4.904	   –0.016	  
0.6909	  
0.617	  
0.134	  
100.2	  
69.41	  
0.106	  
959.0	  
756.2	  
–0.009	  
350.3	  
276.1	  
–0.019	  
11.56	  
11.64	  
0.206	  
8115.5	  
7789.5	  
0.395	  

Notes:	  PPPs	  are	  calculated	  using	  consumption	  data	  from	  ring	  countries	  only;	  the	  aggregation	  uses	  a	  
two-­‐stage	  CPD	  and	  weighted-­‐CPD	  method	  below	  and	  at	  BH	  level.	  The	  UK	  is	  the	  base	  country,	  and	  all	  
PPPs	  and	  exchange	  rates	  take	  GBP	  as	  numeraire.	  The	  inflation	  rate	  is	  the	  change	  in	  the	  log	  of	  each	  
county’s	  CPI	  from	  the	  World	  Development	  Indicators	  minus	  the	  change	  in	  the	  log	  of	  the	  British	  CPI,	  
so	  that	  the	  column	  shows	  the	  inflation	  rate	  relative	  to	  Britain.	  The	  exchange	  rates	  and	  PPPs	  for	  Esto-­‐
nia	  and	  Slovenia	  in	  2011	  have	  been	  multiplied	  by	  15.6466	  and	  239.64	  respectively,	  which	  are	  the	  
rates	  at	  which	  each	  country	  entered	  the	  Eurozone.	  If	  extrapolation	  of	  PPPs	  worked	  perfectly,	  the	  log	  
of	  the	  second	  column	  minus	  the	  log	  of	  the	  third	  column	  should	  be	  equal	  to	  the	  last	  column.	  
	  
	  
	  

	  

37	  

Table	  3:	  Changes	  in	  log	  PPPs	  compared	  with	  changes	  in	  log	  CPIs	  for	  ring	  coun-­‐
tries	  
	  
	  
Intercept	  
	  
dln(CPI)	  
	  
Poor	  group	  	  
dummy	  
#	  observations	  
Distance	  between	  
lines	  

Poor	  group	  
−0.348	  
(9.2)	  
0.557	  
(4.4)	  
-­‐-­‐	  

Rich	  group	  
−0.090	  
(3.0)	  
0.584	  
(2.4)	  
-­‐-­‐	  

10	  
	  
0.26	  

8	  

Pooled	  	  
−0.349	  
(10.0)	  
0.563	  
(5.2)	  
−0.260	  
(5.9)	  
18	  
	  
0.26	  

Note:	  The	  “rich”	  group	  consists	  of	  Britain,	  Japan,	  Chile,	  Hong	  Kong,	  Brazil,	  South	  Africa,	  Estonia,	  and	  
Slovenia.	  The	  “poor”	  group	  consists	  of	  Zambia,	  Kenya,	  Cameroon,	  Senegal,	  Egypt,	  Sri	  Lanka,	  Jordan,	  
Philippines,	  Oman,	  and	  Malaysia.	  The	  first	  two	  columns	  are	  separate	  regressions	  for	  the	  two	  groups,	  
and	  the	  distance	  in	  the	  last	  row	  is	  the	  average	  distance	  between	  the	  lines.	  The	  last	  column	  is	  a	  re-­‐
gression	  for	  all	  18	  countries	  with	  the	  distance	  estimated	  as	  the	  intercept.	  

	  
Table	  4:	  Balassa-­‐Samuelson	  regressions	  for	  Africa,	  Asia	  and	  Western	  Asia,	  
2005	  and	  2011	  
	  
	  
	  
Intercept	  
	  
Log	  cons	  p.c.	  
	  
2011	  
	  
#	  obs	  
Distance	  	  
θ 	  estimate	  

US	  as	  reference	  	  
2005	  
2011	  
−0.00	  
−0.42	  
(0.0)	  
(4.4)	  
0.170	  
0.110	  
(9.6)	  
(4.4)	  
-­‐-­‐	  
-­‐-­‐	  
72	  
0.205	  
0.180	  

79	  

Pooled	  	  
−0.09	  
(1.5)	  
0.146	  
(9.6)	  
0.238	  
(6.3)	  
151	  
0.238	  
0.209	  

Eurostat-­‐OECD	  GM	  as	  reference	  
2005	  
2011	  
Pooled	  
–0.17	  
–0.51	  
–0.231	  
(9.6)	  
(10.2)	  
(5.0)	  
0.170	  
0.110	  
0.146	  
(9.6)	  
(4.4)	  
(9.6)	  
	  
	  
0.215	  
(5.7)	  
72	  
79	  
151	  
0.202	  
	  
0.215	  
0.173	  
	  
0.188	  

Note:	  The	  estimate	  of	  θ	  is	  calculated	  from	  dividing	  the	  mean	  distance	  between	  the	  two	  regressions	  by	  
one	  plus	  the	  coefficient	  of	  log	  relative	  p.c.	  consumption,	  or	  in	  columns	  1	  and	  2,	  by	  one	  plus	  the	  aver-­‐
age	  of	  the	  two	  coefficients.	  The	  first	  two	  columns	  are	  separate	  regressions	  for	  the	  two	  groups,	  and	  
the	  distance	  in	  the	  last	  row	  is	  the	  average	  distance	  between	  the	  lines.	  The	  last	  column	  is	  a	  regression	  
for	  all	  18	  countries	  with	  the	  distance	  estimated	  as	  the	  intercept.	  Similarly	  for	  the	  right	  hand	  half	  of	  
the	  table	  where	  the	  reference	  level	  of	  consumption	  is	  the	  geometric	  mean	  consumption	  per	  capita	  of	  
the	  46	  countries	  that	  were	  in	  Eurostat-­‐OECD	  in	  both	  rounds.	  
	  

	  

	  

	  

38	  

	  
3

GMB
MWI

ratio of actual to extrapolated
1
2

MRT
BDI

MOZ

TCD
GHA

PHL
CPV
CHN

BLR
IDN
UGA
SYR
TGO NPL
MNG
SEN
COL
NER
MAR FJI TUN
MLI
BFA
ZAF
ETH MDG
MUS
LSO
JOR
RWA
SWZ
SAU
ARM
IRL
IRN
BRA
BHR
TZABEN LAO
SLE
CMR
PAK
LKA
KAZ
ISR
CHL
CIV IND
BGD
ROM
ARG
MYS
KEN
AZE
ALB
URYBWA
PRY
YEM
CZE
EGY
GAB PRT
UKR
VEN
PER
THA
FIN
MLTNZL
HKG
ISL
NOR
ITA
SWE
ECU
SGP
BEL
TUR MEX
COG
GRC
AUS
SVN
BOL
KOR
EST
CAN
ESP
LVA
FRA
DNK
JPN
GBR
CHE
SVK
NLD
USA
DEU
AUT
HUN
LTU
ZMBNGA
BGR HRV
RUS

QAT

LUX

MAC

0

POL

6

7
8
9
10
log of 2005 GDP per capita in 2005 international dollars

Figure	  1:	  Ratio	  of	  ICP	  to	  extrapolated	  consumption	  PPPs,	  ICP	  2005	  

	  

39	  

11

1.4

BRB

BLR
DMA
LCA
SYC
ATG
UKR
CHL
VCT
BIH
ALB
MKD
SRB
MNE
BGR
ROU
MEX
TUR
HRV
LVA
POL
HUN
RUS
LTU
EST
SVK
PRT
GRC
CZE
SVN
KOR
MLT
CYP
ISR
NZL
GBR
JPN
FRA
ITA
SWE
CAN
BEL
FIN
ISL
AUS
AUT
NLD
IRL
USA
CHE
NOR LUX
GHA
ESPDEU
DNK
ECU
GRD
MWI GMB
PERBRA
BWA KNA
SLV TUN
COL
MOZ BFA LSO
ZAF
BOL JAM
CRI IRN
CHN
BRN
NER
KAZ
NIC
PRY
UGA
TZA
GAB
BLZ MDVMUS
HND SWZ
URY
PAN
DJIKGZMDA
SEN
CAF GNB TCD
GEONAMDOM
MAR
HKG SGP
TGOHTI
BEN
ETH
ARM
TWN
CMR
VNM
DZA MYS
MAC
MRT
MLI
RWA
IDN
BTN
COM
TTO
MNG THA
BGD
BDI
KHM
GIN
CIVSDNPAKCOG
SUR
GTM
BHR
PHL LKA
IND
NPL NGALAO
FJI
STP
MDG KEN
GNQ
AZE
QAT
OMN
IRQ
AGO
CPV
KWT
EGY
YEM
JOR
SAU
MMR

.4

Ratio of actual to extrapolated
.6
.8
1
1.2

BHS
TJK

6

8
10
log of 2011 GDP per capita in 2011 international $

Figure	  2:	  Ratio	  of	  ICP	  to	  extrapolated	  consumption	  PPPs,	  ICP	  2011	  

	  

40	  

12

	  

.3

BWA

CPI inflation less deflator inflation
-.1
0
.1
.2

KEN
KHM
SLE
UGA

ALB
IND
ZMB
MNG

URY
BGR

BRN IRL
ETH
TMP CMR
CZE
BDI
HKG
NAM
JPN
DOMZAF
RUS
RWA GMB LSO
NZL
CAN
GNQ
LBR
PRTESP
USA LUX
EST KOR
DEU
BGD NGA LKA GTM COLCRI POL
NLD
DNKNOR
GRCITA
PERBLZ TUR
AUS
SEN PHL
BEL
HND
FRA
GBR
AUT
SWE
ECU MUS
SGP
MYS
ARM
FIN
ISL
EGY SWZ
CHE
BOL
SRB
HRV
MEX
MKD
MARSLV
UKRTHA PAN
MAC
BHS
BRA
NPL LAO VNM
ISR
KGZ
AZE
PRY
BFA
MDABTN
CHN TUN
MLI
IDN
MWI
BLR
TGO
JOR
COG
ROM
KAZ
CHL

-.2

MOZ

ARE

PAK

4

6

8
log p.c. GDP in 2005, int $

10

Figure	  3:	  CPI	  inflation	  minus	  consumption	  deflator	  inflation	  2005-­‐2011	  
India	  (dark	  grey)	  and	  China	  (light	  grey)	  enlarged	  

	  

41	  

12

.2

	  

ICP inflation minus CPI inflation
-.4
-.2
0

CHL
GBR
HKG
SVN
BRA ZAF

JPN

EST
SEN
PHL
JOR
CMR

MYS

LKA

-.6

EGY
KEN
ZMB

7

8

9
log GDP per capita in 2005

Figure	  4:	  ICP	  minus	  CPI	  inflation	  and	  GDP	  per	  capita	  

	  

42	  

10

11

	  

logarithm of price level index
-1
-.5
0

.5

Balassa-Samuelson, 2005 (light) and 2011 (dark)

China

USA

-1.5

India

-6
-4
-2
0
logarithm of per capita consumption relative to per capita consumption in USA

Figure	  5:	  PLIs	  and	  consumption,	  2005	  (light)	  and	  2011	  (dark)	  ICPs	  

	  

43	  

	  

