NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

BEHAVIORAL INDIFFERENCE CURVES
John Komlos
Working Paper 20240
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20240

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2014

I would like to thank Jack Knetsch for comments on an earlier version of this paper. The views expressed
herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by John Komlos. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Behavioral Indifference Curves
John Komlos
NBER Working Paper No. 20240
June 2014
JEL No. A2,D03,D11
ABSTRACT
According to the endowment effect there is some discomfort associated with giving up a good, that
is to say, we are willing to give up something only if the price is greater than the price we are willing
to pay for it. This implies that the indifference curves should designate a reference point at the current
level of consumption. Such indifference maps are kinked at the current level of consumption. The
kinks in the curves imply that the utility function is not differentiable everywhere and the budget constraint
does not always have a unique tangent with an indifference curve. Thus, price changes may not bring
about changes in consumption which may be the reason for the frequent stickiness of prices, wages
and interest rates. We also discuss a multiple period example in which the indifference map shifts
as the reference point shifts implying that the curves cross over time even though tastes do not change.

John Komlos
Department of Economics
Ludwig-Maximilians University
Ludwigstrasse 33/IV
Munich D-80539
and NBER
john.komlos@gmx.de

Behavioral indifference curves

It is important to update the way we teach indifference curves. The standard depiction
is still being taught to millions of students annually, although a crucial inconsistency with its
conceptualization was discovered more than three decades ago, namely that it fails to indicate
the reference point or the current level of consumption (Knetsch and Sinden, 1984;
Kahneman, Knetsch, and Thaler 1990; Knetsch, Riyanto, and Zong, 2012). According to the
conventional indifference curve diagrams when deciding between two goods, say, food and
clothing, it is as though we’ve never consumed them before. Thus, we are assumed to come to
the problem in a pristine state, without indicating the amount of the goods in question we
consumed in the prior period or are adapted to. However, this is contradictory, because if we
have not consumed these items before how are we supposed to know how much utility we
should expect from them.
Hence, the customary indifference curve depends on the implicit assumption that
choice along indifference curves are reversible. That is, if an individual owns x and is
indifferent between keeping it and trading it for y, then when owning y the individual should
be indifferent about trading it for x. If loss aversion is present, however, this reversibility will
no longer hold (Knetsch 1989; Kahneman, Knetsch, and Thaler 1991). Knetsch and Sinden
were the first to point out that the standard assumption pertaining to the equivalence of losses
and gains is contradicted by the experimental evidence: “the compensation measure of value
seems to exceed significantly the willingness to pay measure, which would appear to call into
some question… interpretations of indifference curves” (Knetsch and Sinden, 1984).
Thus, the mainstream representation of indifference curves is outdated, inconsistent,
and misleading, because it overlooks the ample empirical evidence that current consumption
(or current endowment) matters to subsequent consumption decisions as it becomes a

reference point to which other states of the world are compared (Rabin 2008). The
endowment effect implies that there is an excess discomfort associated with giving something
up, i.e., in excess of the pleasure associated with acquiring it. Let us suppose that the current
level of consumption is (Qx1, Qy1) (Figure 1). Then point “a” becomes the origin of the
coordinate system and the relevant reference point for the current period 1. While recently
there has been some discussion about how to define the reference point in various
circumstances (Heffetz and List, 2013), in this example it is straightforward, it is simply the
current level of consumption at point a.
We divide the plane into four quadrants (numbered counter clockwise) with the axis
going through the origin at point a. In quadrant 1 the reference point is irrelevant as both x
and y are increasing. In this quadrant the standard convex-to-the-origin indifference curve is
unchanged. However, x decreases in quadrant 2 while y increases; in quadrant 3 both x and y
decrease, and in quadrant 4 x increases while y decreases. (All changes are relative to the axis
that go through the initial reference point a (Figure 1).
Thus, lowering consumption of (x) below the initial level, Qx1, requires a larger
amount of a compensating good (y) in order to maintain the same level of utility than the
amount of y required to be given up if there were an identical increase in x beyond Qx1. In
other words, at point a the loss in marginal utility of giving up a unit of x is larger (in absolute
value) than the marginal utility of obtaining a unit of x; i.e., decreasing one’s consumption
from the current level is more painful than increasing consumption from the current level is
beneficial. This is critical, because it implies that the indifference curves are kinked at the axis
that go through point a, with slopes steeper in quadrant 2 than in quadrant 4, a factor
overlooked in conventional treatments of indifference curves. David Just works out the
properties of such behavioral indifference maps with straight lines, i.e., with constant
marginal rate of substitution (Just 2014, p. 81), while Knetsch et al demonstrate with

indifference curves the discrepancy of evaluating welfare in the domains of gains and losses
(Knetsch, Riyanto, and Zong, 2012).
To demonstrate the impact of the endowment effect on the indifference map with
declining marginal rate of substitution (mrs) let us suppose that the standard (mrs) along an
indifference map were mi=

, and the endowment effect of x at a point i is given by xi and

that of y is given by yi where >0 is the extra price (in terms of the other good) required to
give up an object above the price for which it would be acquired. Then the mrs of the
behavioral indifference curve in quadrant 2 relative to the reference point a is bmi=
in quadrant 3 is bmi=

, and in quadrant 4 is bmi=

,

. Hence, in quadrant 2 the

slope of the indifference curve is steeper than the standard indifference curve because in order
to give up 1 unit of x one would need a greater amount of y as compensation on account of
the pain of giving up x relative to the level to which one is accustomed. Similarly, in quadrant
4 except in this case the indifference curve is flatter than the standard indifference curve
because in this case it is more difficult to give up y. In quadrant 3 the slope of the behavioural
indifference curve relative to the standard one is ambiguous depending on the sizes of xi and
yi; the curve is drawn in this quadrant in such a way that the endowment effects cancel each
other and the standard indifference curve obtains.
The implication is that there is a kink in the behavioral indifference curves as they
cross the axis from one quadrant to another. This implies that the utility function is not
differentiable everywhere and that preferences are not homothetic. Moreover, budget lines
cannot be tangent to the indifference curve along the axis that divides the plane into four
quadrants. For instance, budget lines 1 and 2 in Figure 2 show that changes in price will not
bring about any change in the consumption bundle at point a, contrary to conventional

analysis. This may well explain the oft found stickiness in adjustment to changes in wages,
prices, and interest rates (Anderson 1998; Carlton, 1986; Ausubel, 1991).
Furthermore, let us suppose that in period 1 the actual budget line 3 is tangent to the
indifference curve at b in quadrant 4 (b is not on an axis in period 1). Thus, Figure 2 shows
that with budget constraint 3 the new consumption bundle becomes (Qx2, Qy2) at point b. Once
choosing to consume at point b in period 1, however, the origin of the new axis of the
behavioral indifference map shifts to b and, in turn, that becomes the new reference point in
period 2. This implies that the two sets of indifference maps cross over time even if the taste
of the consumer does not change over time.1
Moreover, the new indifference map of period 2 is superimposed on the previous one
of period 1 (Figure 3). However, the budget constraint, which was tangent to the old
indifference curve at b is no longer tangent to the new indifference curve at b (Figure 4).
Therefore, the tangency with the new set of indifference curves will be elsewhere implying
that consumption will change in period 2 even if prices, income, or taste remain unchanged.
Thus, the consumption bundle can change even if there is no fundamental change in either the
economy or in the consumer’s preferences. In other words, the adjustment to the new budget
constraint occurs in two steps: the first step uses the initial reference point in order to choose
the optimal bundle and having made that choice the reference point also shifts implying that
the whole indifference curve shifts. This, in turn, displaces the optimal consumption bundle
once again to c even if there are no other changes in the relevant parameters.
In sum, behavioral indifference curves are relative to a reference point.
The endowment effect implies that people are willing to give up an object only at a higher
price than the price at which they are willing to buy it, i.e., it is psychologically more difficult
to give up an object than to acquire it. This changes the shape and properties of the
indifference map that has far-reaching implications and not only in the classrooms but also in

applied areas such as the evaluation of welfare states and stickiness of economic variables
such as wages, prices, and interest rates (Knetsch, Riyanto, and Zong, 2012). This salient
issue ought no longer be ignored and needs a much wider research agenda than hitherto
allotted to it at the margins of the discipline.
Even at this stage it is important to incorporate the behavioral indifference curves into
the curriculum and stop teaching outdated concepts. If you think that behavioral indifference
curves would be too complicated for beginners then I would urge you not to teach the
conventional ones until the students are ready for the current version because one should not
mislead students by teaching inappropriate concepts. If the straight-talking Nobel-prize
winning physicist Richard Feynman (1918-88) were still with us he would concur with this
view; in his famous 1974 commencement address at the California Institute of Technology, he
beseeched the graduating class to practice scientific integrity, utter honesty, and to lean over
backwards so as not to fool ourselves [and of course others] (Feynman 1985). I believe that
the same is true for us: teachers of economics: it is time to start leaning over backwards and to
stop teaching the standard indifference curves.

Figure 1. Behavioral indifference curves in Period 1 showing initial endowment

Figure 2. Behavioral indifference curves in Period 1 with reference point at a and several
budget constraints

Figure 3. In period 2 behavioral indifference curves shift the origin from a to new reference
point at b

Figure 4. In period 2 consumption changes to point c even if there is no change in taste or the
budget constraint.

References
Andersen, T.M., 1998. Persistence in sticky price models. European Economic
Review 42, 593–603.
Ausubel, L., 1991. The failure of competition in the credit card market. American Economic
Review 81, 50–81.
Carlton, D.W., 1986. The rigidity of prices. American Economic Review 76, 637–58.
Feynman, R.P., 1985. Cargo Cult Science. In: Feynman, R.P. Leighton, R., Hutchings, E.
(Eds.). Surely You’re Joking, Mr. Feynman!. New York: W.W. Norton, 338-46.
Heffetz, O., List, J., 2014. Is the Endowment Effect an Expectations Effect? Journal of the
European Economic Association, forthcoming.
Just, D.R., 2014. Introduction to Behavioral Economics. New York: Wiley and Sons.
Kahneman, D., Knetsch, J.L., and Thaler, R.H., 1990. Experimental Tests of the Endowment
Effect and the Coase Theorem. Journal of Political Economy 98, 1325-48.
_________. 1991. Anomalies: The Endowment Effect, Loss Aversion, and Status Quo Bias.
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 5 (1): 193-206.
Knetsch, J.L., 1989. The Endowment Effect and Evidence of Nonreversible Indifference
Curves. American Economic Review 79, 1277-84.
Knetsch, J.L., Sinden, J.A., 1984. Willingness to pay and compensation demanded:
Experimental evidence of an unexpected disparity in measures of value, Quarterly Journal of
Economics 99, 507-521.
Knetsch, J.L., Riyanto, Y.E., Zong. J., 2012. Gain and Loss Domains and the Choice of
Welfare Measure of Positive and Negative Changes. Journal of Benefit-Cost Analysis 3,
Article 1.
Rabin, M., Kahneman, D. (born 1934). The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics. Second
Edition. Eds. Steven N. Durlauf and Lawrence E. Blume. Palgrave Macmillan, 2008. The

New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics Online. Palgrave Macmillan.
http://www.dictionaryofeconomics.com/article?id=pde2008_K000065 (accessed May 26,
2014).
Endnotes
1

That indifference curves can intersect has been experimentally verified in a different setting
(Kahneman, Knetsch, and Thaler, 1991, p. 197).

