                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     THE REVOLVING DOOR AND WORKER FLOWS IN BANKING REGULATION

                                            David Lucca
                                             Amit Seru
                                          Francesco Trebbi

                                        Working Paper 20241
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20241


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2014




The authors would like to thank the editor Marvin Goodfriend as well as John Ferejohn, Joshua Gottlieb,
Ed Kane, Debbie Lucas, Joseph Ma, Laura Pilossoph, Howard Rosenthal, Aysegul Sahin, Chester
Spatt, Eugene White, Luigi Zingales and Allen Zhang for useful discussion and comments. We are
also grateful to participants at the November 2013 Carnegie Rochester NYU Conference on Public
Policy and December 2013 Harvard PIEP where this paper was presented. We are indebted to Jacob
Conway, Moon Kang, Karen Shen, Lucy Shen, Navid Siami, Zachry Wang and Allen Zhang for outstanding
research assistance. Seru thanks the Fama Miller Center at the University of Chicago that funded the
project. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau
of Economic Research. All errors are ours.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by David Lucca, Amit Seru, and Francesco Trebbi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Revolving Door and Worker Flows in Banking Regulation
David Lucca, Amit Seru, and Francesco Trebbi
NBER Working Paper No. 20241
June 2014
JEL No. G21,G28

                                               ABSTRACT

This paper traces career transitions of federal and state U.S. banking regulators from a large sample
of publicly available curricula vitae, and provides basic facts on worker flows between the regulatory
and private sector resulting from the revolving door. We find strong countercyclical net worker flows
into regulatory jobs, driven largely by higher gross outflows into the private sector during booms.
These worker flows are also driven by state-specific banking conditions as measured by local banks’
profitability, asset quality and failure rates. The regulatory sector seems to experience a retention challenge
over time, with shorter regulatory spells for workers, and especially those with higher education. Evidence
from cross-state enforcement actions of regulators shows gross inflows into regulation and gross outflows
from regulation are both higher during periods of intense enforcement, though gross outflows are significantly
smaller in magnitude. These results appear inconsistent with a "quid-pro-quo" explanation of the revolving
door, but consistent with a "regulatory schooling" hypothesis.


David Lucca                                            Francesco Trebbi
Federal Reserve Bank of New York                       University of British Columbia
33 Liberty Street                                      1873 East Mall
New York, NY 10045                                     Vancouver, BC, V6T1Z1
david.lucca@ny.frb.org                                 Canada
                                                       and CIFAR
Amit Seru                                              and also NBER
Booth School of Business                               ftrebbi@mail.ubc.ca
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
amit.seru@chicagobooth.edu
1. Introduction

According to a prominent narrative of the recent financial crisis, weakness in banking regulatory

oversight and, in particular, regulatory capture was a key contributing factor in the buildup of risk

ahead of the crisis.1 In conjecturing this link, a much talked about source of regulatory capture is the

revolving door of regulatory personnel between the official and private sector that allegedly

incentivizes regulatory personnel to soften their regulatory stance due to the prospect of future

lucrative employment in the private sector.2 Future job opportunities may, on the contrary,

incentivize regulators to toughen their oversight and favor complex regulations as these might

enhance the subsequent value of regulators, should they transition to the private sector. Other

commentators have downplayed distortions of the revolving door in either direction and presented a

more benign viewpoint of revolving doors as a means for regulatory agencies to attract higher ability

and skilled workers. Despite the continuing debate on this issue and numerous policy prescriptions,

little systematic evidence exists on the incidence and drivers of the revolving door -- i.e., worker

transitions between the banking regulatory and private sectors.



In this paper we attempt to fill this gap with two goals. First, we provide basic facts on worker flows

between the banking regulatory and private sectors by examining worker transitions resulting from

hirings and separations. Second, we characterize these flows in terms of their business cycle

variation, job creation and destruction in the two sectors (Davis, Faberman and Haltiwanger, 2006)

and worker characteristics such as human capital and seniority. As well, we study worker flows as a


 1
   Banking regulation and supervision are complementary, but distinct activities. Regulation involves issuing rules
 that mandate or restrict certain banking activities for safety and soundness or other reasons, such as consumer
 protection. Supervision instead involves monitoring, inspecting and examining banks as well as enforcing
 corrective actions if banks are deemed deficient. In this paper we do not explicitly distinguish between these two
 activities, and collectively refer to agencies involved in either regulation or supervision as regulators.
 2
   For instance, Cohen (1986) states that the revolving door hypothesis implies that the prospect of a future job in the
 regulated industry promotes support for the regulated industry. Similar discussions on revolving door hypothesis
 have a long pedigree in political science (e.g., see Gormley (1979)), in theory of regulation (e.g. Salant (1995)) and
 in law and economics such as recent work on financial regulators (deHaan et al. (2012)).



                                                           1
function of intensity of regulatory activity to assess if worker flows in the aggregate can shed light

on different views of revolving door.



The main obstacle in studying worker flows between the regulatory and private sector is a lack of

available data. A large literature has studied direct job-to-job flows (Blanchard and Diamond 1990;

Fallick and Fleischman 2004), and more closely to this paper, inter-industry job transitions (for

example, Artuc, Chaudhuri and McLaren 2010) with longitudinal and cross-sectional data surveys.

However, because banking regulators account for only a tiny fraction of all US workers, none of

these sample surveys is detailed enough to construct worker flow statistics for the regulatory sector.3

We circumvent this challenge by constructing a unique dataset of career paths of more than 35,000

former and current regulators across all regulators of commercial banks and thrifts -- the Federal

Reserve Banks (Fed), the Federal Depository Insurance Corporation (FDIC), the Office of

Comptroller and Currency (OCC), the Office of Thrift Supervision (OTS), and state banking

regulators -- that have posted their curricula vitae (CVs) on a major professional networking website.

Our sample spans the past twenty-five years and provides a unique view into the process of selection

and transition of personnel from these regulatory agencies to the private sector. After detailing our

approach to construct worker transitions, which is new in the literature, and contrasting its

shortcomings and strengths to labor data surveys, we study worker flows both in the aggregate and

using panel regressions at the worker level.



Our data reveal clear evidence of countercyclical net worker inflows into the regulatory sector. Net

worker flows from the private sector to the regulatory sector fall significantly and are often negative

in good times, which may be the result of higher gross inflows to the regulatory sector in bad times

or higher gross outflows in good times. Looking at the data, we find that higher gross outflows to


 3
  As we discuss in more detail in the paper, key sources include such as the Current Population Survey (CPS), the
 Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) and the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP).
                                                        2
the private sector in good times are a key driver of the countercyclical regulator net worker flows.

We also find evidence of higher gross inflows in regulation in bad times as well as in the past few

years, likely due to strong regulatory demand linked to enhanced banking supervision following the

financial turmoil.



We investigate in more detail the potential sources of inflows and outflows from regulatory jobs by

assessing the relationship of worker flows with relative demand-side proxies for job-creation or

destruction in the banking and regulatory sector. Job creation in the regulatory as compared to the

banking sector is likely to be positively related to measures of banking stress and inversely related to

bank profitability, with opposite patterns expected for job destruction. Indeed, after controlling for

aggregate economic conditions, net regulatory inflows tend to be higher in periods and states where

local banks have lower ROAs, higher non-performing loan ratios, as measured from Call Reports,

and higher occurrences of bank failures. Overall, we find regulatory job mobility to be much lower

than in the private sector. On average, gross-worker flows between the regulatory and private sector

is less than half the job-to-job transitions in the private sector as measured from a benchmark sample

we employ and data from the Current Population Survey (CPS).4



Next, using information obtained from the workers’ CVs and the fact that our dataset is longitudinal,

we examine the selection of individuals into and out of the regulatory sector by assessing which

individuals enter and exit banking regulation over the business cycle, as a function of their human

capital (i.e., their education levels) and skills/connections (i.e., their seniority in the regulatory

organization). We find that the best talent, as proxied by higher human capital, has shorter regulatory

spells because of higher outflows to the private sector. We also find that more senior staff, not

surprisingly, spend more time in regulation. While we find no significant differences in the business


 4
  Because regulator-to-regulator flows are tiny in our sample, regulator-to-private flows or private-to-regulator flows
 are all job-to-job transitions experienced by current or next-period regulatory employees.
                                                           3
cycle sensitivity across different human capital levels, overall, the regulatory sector appears to face a

retention challenge when it comes to individuals with higher human capital based on their shorter

regulatory spells. Consistent with this finding, we also find that regulatory spells have been declining

in the past twenty-five years. For example, while about 88% of workers that started working in

regulation in 1988 spent three or more years in regulation, only 64% of workers that started working

did so two decades later.



We briefly turn next to an analysis that explores aggregate regulator mobility as a function of

regulatory actions. According to one prominent view (the “quid-pro-quo” view), future employment

opportunities in the private sector affects, as a quid pro quo, the strictness of actions of a regulator

while the individual is employed in the regulatory sector. This hypothesis implies that we should

observe lower gross outflows from regulation to private banking during periods of high enforcement

activity. Understanding whether this hypothesis may be at play is important since destabilizing

banking crises have often been ascribed to weak regulatory oversight. Based on an alternative view

of the revolving door (the “regulatory schooling” view) regulators may instead have an incentive to

favor complex rules because "schooling" in these regulations enhance regulators future earnings,

should they transition to the private sector.5 Such a hypothesis would imply high gross inflows into

regulation at times of higher regulatory intensity as workers are schooled in the new rules as well as

high gross outflows from regulation into the private sector as regulators earn returns from schooling

in the new rules. According to the regulatory schooling view, inefficiencies may derive not from

laxity, but on the contrary from more complex regulations.



In order to shed light on these hypotheses, we relate worker flows to intensity of supervisory activity

in the data. We measure each regulator’s strictness using their formal enforcement activity in a given

state and year and focus on the most severe of these actions: terminations or suspensions of deposit
 5
     We thank the editor for suggesting this alternative view.
                                                                 4
insurance as well as cease-and-desist orders and prompt corrective action directives, for which

failure to comply are all grounds for receivership. While enforcement activity is not a measure of

regulatory complexity per se, as discussed in Agarwal et al. (2014) the final impact of rules on

regulated entities is the result of both regulations and the manner in which these are enforced

through supervisory activity. Empirically, we find a positive association between the intensity of

strict actions over time and across states and the net inflows into the regulatory sector. Looking more

closely at gross flows, we find that this relationship is driven by more inflows into regulatory jobs in

periods of high enforcement/more intense regulatory activity. Gross outflows from the regulatory

sector are, in fact, higher around periods of higher enforcement activity. We find similar patterns

when we focus on cross-state variation only by including time fixed effects. This implies that the

association between regulator activity and worker flows is identified even when we use variation

across states and regulators and is not just capturing aggregate economic conditions. Based on the

discussion above, the patterns we uncover are opposite of what would be implied by a quid pro quo

story but are instead consistent with the regulatory schooling story. These patterns are consistent

with Agarwal et al. (2014) who find higher turnover of state regulators into private sector if these

regulators give harsher supervisory ratings to banks under their supervision.



This evidence is admittedly naïve to some extent and not a ubiquitous test of the quid-pro-quo or

regulatory schooling hypothesis. For instance, it cannot rule out the presence of distortions in

banking regulations at a more micro level or whether regulations are more complex as a result of the

schooling hypothesis. Uncovering whether revolving doors distorts regulatory effectiveness at a

micro level or leads to regulators favoring excessive regulatory complexity remain open questions

requiring more research. A recent paper by Shive and Forster (2014) takes a promising step in this

direction.




                                                   5
This paper is most directly related to work studying revolving doors in banking regulation. Most of

this work (for example, Johnson and Kwak 2010) is normative in nature but relies on case studies or

other anecdotal evidence. Our analysis, which relies on a new data collection, is instead mainly

positive, and we therefore see it as complementary the existing work.6 More generally this paper is

also connected to a vast literature in both political economy and banking on the role of regulation

and its potential distortions (for examples, specific to banking: Kroszner and Strahan 1999, Berger

and Hannan 1998, Barth et al. 2004; Agarwal et al. 2014, and more in general: Besley and Coate

2003). Finally, our work is related to the labor literature on job-to-job transitions and intersectoral

job transitions, mentioned above, and to the modern approach to labor flows (Davis, Faberman and

Haltiwanger, 2006) from which we borrow methods and definitions, while proposing a new

approach to computing worker flows.


2. Data, Sample Construction and Descriptive Statistics

Studying regulatory worker flows resulting from the revolving door requires information on job-to-

job transitions between the banking regulation sector and the private sector. Available empirical

measures of aggregate job-to-job and cross-industry transitions in the labor literature are typically

constructed using either the Current Population Survey (CPS), the Survey of Income and Program

Participation (SIPP), or the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID). Fallick and Fleishman (2004)

construct job-to-job transitions from matched monthly data from the CPS, while Nagypal (2008)

uses SIPP data, which contains occupational information at weekly frequency and thus limits issues

of temporal aggregation bias.7 Direct cross-industry transitions occur less frequently than overall

job-to-job transitions, and so most studies (for example, Artuç, Chaudhuri, and McLaren, 2010) rely


 6
   Other studies on the revolving door based on empirical data, albeit outside banking regulation, include Cohen
 (1986) who shows that Federal Communications Commissioners who end up working in the industry after their
 tenure shift their voting pattern toward more support for the industry in their final year of service. There is a larger
 body of work that explores the value of lobbying (see, Blanes I Vidal et al. (2012) and Bertrand et al. (2013)).
 7
   For example, the CPS may overstate transitions relative to SIPP because job-to-unemployment-to-job transitions
 may be misclassified as direct job-to-job transitions. That said, SIPP as been shown to suffer from “seam biases”,
 that is statistics computed across the “seam” between two successive survey administrations differ from those
 obtained within a single interview (see for example Moore, 2007).
                                                            6
on the CPS because with about 60000 households, the survey has the largest sample size among

publicly available sources of worker flows.8



The CPS contains information on the Census Industrial and Census Occupational Classification for

each individual in the survey that is occupied. The Industrial Classifications only contain eight

categories for the official sector (public administration), so the only hope to construct flows for

workers in banking regulation would be to proxy their identity by conditioning on industry and their

occupation. Doing so, however, stretches the limits of the CPS survey sample. For example, from

2003 we could only match a total of 15 instances per annum of financial examiners working in

public administration matching monthly data as in Shimer (2012). Accounting for the fact that each

individual can be observed only in six pairs of consecutive months in the CPS, this handful of

observations corresponds to only about a pair of individuals each year. Given the limited usefulness

of available data sources, we turned to an alternative method to compute cross-industry worker

transitions that directly samples individuals employed in banking regulation.

2.1 Data and Construction of Worker Flows

The empirical analysis in the paper relies on a sample that is constructed using career transitions

from CVs in the database of a leading social networking website for professionals. In this section we

provide an overview of the method used to construct a sample of individuals who have worked in a

banking regulatory institution at any point in their career starting in the 1980s.



Our main sample includes current and former employees of all U.S. banking regulatory institutions:

the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency

(OCC), the former Office of Thrift Supervision (OTS), the Federal Reserve’s Board of Governors

and Reserve Banks, and state banking departments. Figure 1 illustrates what constitutes the scope of

 8
   The CPS has limited longitudinal information as each household remains in the panel for eight months, with a gap
 of eight months after the first four months. Thus studies (for example, Loungani and Rogerson 1989) that require
 longitudinal data, such as permanent cross-industry transitions, have relied on the PSID.
                                                         7
this paper. To form the sample, we search all profiles in the database for workers with a regulatory

spell in their current or past employment information.



Based on these selected profiles, we collect each worker’s information focusing in particular on the

career path of each individual, the position he or she has in a given job, and for each position, his or

her company name, start date, and end date. We also determine the chronological order of the

positions using their arrangement on the profile page, and assign to each worker a unique identifier.

Based on our search criterion, we obtained 21,396 profiles of individuals who have worked at some

point for the Federal Reserve, 6,958 profiles of individuals who have worked at some point for the

FDIC, 3,418 profiles of individuals who have worked for the OCC, 646 profiles of individuals who

have worked for OTS, and 3,186 profiles for individuals who have worked for one of the state

regulators, for a total of 35,604 profiles. We perform additional data cleaning by using the unique ID

mentioned above to remove duplicate individuals who may have worked in more than one regulatory

agency and that were therefore downloaded more than once. In the end, we are left with 34,064

unique profiles of individuals who have worked at any point in time during their careers in the

regulatory agencies we have mentioned above. We also build a benchmark sample (“never-

regulator” sample) of career movements outside the regulatory sector using CVs of a sample of

individuals who are never employed in the regulatory sector but have worked at least once in the

firms included in the treatment sample.9



Once the CVs are acquired, we reshape the data in the CV, which is reported at each job level to a

panel that lists an individual’s name and work information in each period. While we have


 9
   In particular, we start with the list of firms that each individual in the treatment sample has ever worked in. This
 gives us a list of 113,548 instances. We sample from this list, which includes repeat firms, since we are interested in
 the empirical distribution of firms that individuals in the regulators sample are employed by. We randomly pick
 34,064 instances from this list and download a profile from each selected firm. This procedure ensures that we
 match the empirical frequency of firms that individuals in the regulators sample have worked for at some point in
 their career. For example, it is reasonable to expect more individuals in the regulators sample would work for large
 banks. Our procedure ensures that we sample more individuals in the never-regulators sample from such banks.
                                                           8
information at the monthly level for a number of CVs, we define a period to be a year in our analysis

both for computational reasons and because monthly information is often missing.



A key issue that we face when reorganizing the information from the CVs into the panel are multiple

overlapping job spells; that is, some individuals may list several occupations over the same period.

While we track all occupations for all the individuals in our sample, we need to make some

assumptions when performing the analysis on career transitions. In particular, we limit our analysis

to individuals that list a maximum of three simultaneous occupations in a year. These individuals

account for more than 90% of our original sample. In order to deal with missing spells or holes in

CVs we classify an individual as unemployed if there is a one- or two-year long time gap between

job (or education) spells, and we instead classify a spell as having missing information if the time

gap between two spells is longer than two years. Based on these rules, at any given point of time we

classify individuals into one of four activity categories: private sector, regulatory sector, student, and

unemployed. We turn next to a description of our sample.10



Figure 2 plots the total number of active individuals in our sample as well as the number split by

each of the regulatory agencies in our sample over time. The black line in the panel on the left

(Figure 2A) shows that there are about 30,000 active individuals at the end of our sample in 2013,

which is when we collected the CV information. Also evident from the chart is a thinning in the

number of individuals as we go further back in time. The reason is twofold: first, younger

individuals that have a shorter work history are more likely to post online, and second, career-

inactive individuals are less likely to post (that is, we cannot collect CVs for inactive workers).

These cohort effects make our panel unbalanced.




 10
   As noted in Section 2.1, there is also a small fifth category, “unusable” or inactive, for periods when individuals
 have missing information in their job history for a period of longer than two years.
                                                          9
As shown by the thin grey line in Figure 2A, similar cohort effects are also present in the benchmark

never-regulators sample. The similarity of the pattern between the two groups suggests that the

cohort effect is not specific to the sample of regulators, but rather the result of constructing a

longitudinal dataset from CV information collected at one point in time. As will become apparent in

the empirical section, we will explicitly control for these effects with individual-specific or cohort

fixed effects in order to ensure that our empirical results are not affected by the panel structure.



In Figure 2B, we plot the number of individuals by regulatory agency, as measured by having at

least one employment spell with a given regulator. In particular, we trace the number of career active

individuals that have worked for a given regulator at any point in time in their career. We only find a

very small fraction (less than half a percent) of cases where individuals work for multiple regulatory

agencies, or in other words for essentially all individuals in our sample, workers have a single

regulatory-institution stint. The figure shows that, similar to Figure 2A, there is thinning as we go

back in time in the number of individuals who report having worked for any of the regulatory

agencies, except the OTS. In addition, it is clear that the regulators sample consists primarily of

individuals who have worked for the Fed (both Reserve Banks and the Board of Governors) and the

FDIC (almost two-thirds of the total).11

2.2 Descriptive Statistics and Variable Definitions

We present in Table 1 summary statistics for our main variables of interest, split by whether these

measures are used in a panel (1A) or cross-sectional analysis (1B). Our empirical analysis mainly

relies on transitions between private and regulatory sectors. As discussed in the previous section we

track each individual’s status (employed in banking regulation or in the private sector, student or

 11
    Comparing the number of workers in our sample to headcount of regulators, which we obtain from each agency’s
 Internet website, we find that while the total headcount in each agency fluctuates from year to year (especially
 around recession, as we will see), overall it remained fairly stable, or declined, over time. For instance, the total
 number of full-time employees (irrespective of occupation) at the Fed has remained roughly 22,000 in the sample
 period, with a bit of decline in recent years. Full-time employees at OTS declined on net through 2010, the last year
 of that agency during our sample period. Finally, the FDIC has had roughly 8,000 full-time employees during the
 last twenty years, but significantly more in the years before then.
                                                          10
unemployed) at a yearly frequency. To establish the timing of a transition from one job to another

we track worker information in the year prior to and following a switch to resolve timing ambiguity

in the case of multiple listings. For example, if an individual lists both private and regulatory sector

employment in year t, we use data in the following and preceding year to determine the direction and

timing of the transition.12 Based on these guidelines, we define the dummy variable “Into (Out) Reg

Status”, which indicates if a transition into (out of) the regulatory sector occurs in a given year for an

individual in our sample, and “ΔRegulator Status” which is equal to the difference between the

inflow and outflow dummies. Because our data is measured at yearly frequency our measures of

direct inter-industry transitions are subject to aggregation biases similar to other measures of annual

job-to-job transitions used in the labor literature. For example, a transition from the private sector to

a spell of unemployment that lasts less than 12 months and then into regulation will be recorded as a

direct transition in our data. In other words, our measures of direct inter-industry transitions may

include some indirect transitions that include a short unemployment spell.



We also use transition dummies to exploit longitudinal information in our sample and track worker

information such as the first year in which he or she enters a regulatory spell, as well as the length of

time that is spend in the regulatory sector. Based on the information that we obtain from the CV we

also construct measures of an individual’s seniority (seniority) within the regulatory organization

and maximum level of education attained (human capital).



We finally match employment information to other data sources such as aggregate measures of

economic activity: NBER-dated indicators and year-on-year real-GDP percent growth rates. We

also construct measures of enforcement activity at the state and year level (reported in 100s in Table

1), based on the number of harsh enforcement actions for each federal regulatory agency obtained


 12
   For example a private job in year t-1 and t and a regulatory job in year t and t+1, implies that a transition into
 regulation occurred in period t.
                                                         11
from each agency’s website. We describe these measures in more detail below. Finally we use Call

Reports and data from the Federal Reserve’s National Information Database, to track time variation

in return on assets (ROA) for commercial banks and thrifts in each state, as well as the fraction of

non-performing loans relative to their loan book (either 90+ delinquent or in non-accrual status) and

the total number of bank failures in each state (also reported in 100s in the Table). We turn to our

empirical results next.


3. New Facts on Regulators’ Transitions

This section presents a first set of stylized facts concerning aggregate worker flows into and out of

the banking regulatory sector and then studies how these flows relate to observable characteristics

such as worker education and job seniority.


3.1 Economic Cycles in the Revolving Door

Net Worker Flows

In this section we characterize how worker flows into and out of the regulatory sector vary with

economic conditions. We first analyze the aggregate data graphically and then use panel-level

regressions at the year and worker levels. We run this analysis starting in 1988 and ending in 2013

for the sample of regulators, which, as discussed above, is defined by all workers that have been

employed by a banking regulator at some point in their career. The choice of our starting date

balances the more limited availability of information in the early 1980s and our interest in studying

worker flows around the 1990-91 recession.



Figure 3 plots net worker flows (measured on the left scale) against macroeconomic conditions as

measured by real GDP annual growth rates (dashed lines) and NBER recessions (shaded vertical

areas). Net private-to-regulator worker flows (thick black line) are defined as the share in each year

of all active workers in our sample that transition from the private sector to the regulatory sector, less


                                                   12
the share of transitions out of the regulatory and into the private sector. We also show total net-

regulator flows (thin black line), which include transitions in and out of the regulatory sector to the

private sector, as well as to student status and to unemployment, as a share of all individuals in our

sample.



Focusing on the net private-to-regulator worker flows, it is apparent that these flows are

countercyclical. Net worker flows into the regulatory sector are lower (mid-2000s) and turn negative

(1990s) outside economic recessions; that is, workers exit regulation, on net, during normal

economic times and tend to enter regulation in bad economic times. Indeed, we observe an increase

in net worker flows from the private sector into regulatory sector during all three recessions in the

sample.   In addition, strong net inflows are evident a couple of years following the 2007-09

recession, but then decline thereafter. The likely driver of these inflows is the implementation of, and

enhanced supervisory monitoring under, the Dodd-Frank Act, which boosted the demand for

workers in the regulatory sector. Given the exceptional circumstances around these years and the

recent financial crisis, we will explore the robustness of our regression results to the exclusion of the

post-2007 sample. Overall, throughout the sample, private-to-regulator net worker flows have a

correlation of -0.6 with the GDP-growth measure, and similar correlations are also present with other

indicators of economic condition such as the unemployment rate (.75; not shown). We return to

these patterns in our panel regressions below.



Aside from flows from the private sector, total net flows into regulation may also be driven by flows

from schooling and unemployment. Figure 3 shows what we refer to as “total net regulator flows,”

which includes these other flows. The time-series variation in the total net flow series is extremely

similar to the net flows from private sector to regulatory sector, highlighting that the time series

variation in net regulator worker flows is dominated by direct private sector flows. Given our interest


                                                   13
in “revolving doors” and their key importance in total net flows into regulation, we focus on this

category in our empirical analysis below.



We turn next to the panel regression analysis, which allows us to more formally establish the

cyclical (and other) patterns of regulatory worker flows after controlling for potential sampling

issues such as the unbalanced nature of our panel due to cohort effects as discussed in Section 2.

One of the key dependent variables in our regressions is Regulator Statusit, which measures for

each individual i transitions in and out of employment in the regulatory sector between year t and t-

1. In particular, the dependent variable takes a value of 1 for an individual who is employed in

regulation today but was not in the regulatory sector last year, 0 if an individual stays in the same

activity today and tomorrow (i.e., if she or he is either in regulation in both periods or not in

regulation in both periods), and -1 if an individual who was employed in the regulatory sector last

year is in the private sector this year. To establish the cyclical patterns, we use current and lagged

values of an NBER Recession Indicator, which measures the number of months each year that have

been classified by the NBER as being part of a recession.



Let us indicate with    our dependent variable of interest for individual i in year t. The specification

we employ is:

                                                       ,       (1)

where     measures the key variable of interest such as proxies for economic conditions, and the

vector     is a vector of additional regressors as discussed next. To understand this specification,

consider the case in which no additional explanatory variable          is included and the dependent

variable is Regulator Statusit. Because net worker flows into regulation are in each year equal to the

mean of the dependent variable,     in (1) recovers the time series relation between net worker flows

and real GDP growth shown in Figure 3 if      is set equal to real GDP growth.


                                                  14
Beyond recovering the coefficient in the aggregate coefficients model (1) allows to control for

potential sampling issues through the additional variables in              . The main concern is that the

cyclical patterns that we may recover in the aggregate may be distorted because of the unbalanced

nature of our panel (Figure 2). As discussed in Section 2, the likely key drivers of the panel

structure are cohort effects. We control for these effects through either individual fixed effects or

when we study additional cross-sectional determinants (such as education or seniority) through

cohort-group effects. These effects are defined as all individuals whose first career entry year on

their CV is within a five-year band, beginning with 1964 (i.e., cohorts are defined as dummies for

individuals whose first career entry on the CV is between 1964 and 1968, 1969 and 1973, etc.).

Finally, to guard against the alternative that cohort effects may be driving the thinning in the number

of individuals going back in time, and to control for potential trends, we also include a quadratic

polynomial in time. This specification is sufficiently flexible to capture the sample size evolution

over time in Figure 2. We always report standard errors clustered at the locality level, which controls

for potential serial correlation in the error terms at a regional level.



Table 2A reports the regression estimates. Column 1 presents results for pooled analysis on the

entire sample starting in 1988. Matching the aggregate patterns shown in Figure 2, the coefficient on

concurrent Recession is both positive and highly statistically significant. To account for possible

delayed effects of economic conditions on net worker flows we also include a lagged recession

indicator, and we indeed find similar effects in the year following a recession (column 2). We next

include additional controls in the regression to guard against sampling issues as discussed earlier. As

shown in the remaining columns, the results change little if we include cohort fixed effects (column

3), include individual fixed effects (column 4), exclude the recent financial crisis (i.e., use the period

1988-2006) (column 5) and finally proxy for economic conditions using real GDP growth (column


                                                     15
6). The magnitudes of the relationship between net regulatory worker flows and economic conditions

are economically large. For instance, when using within-individual variation in column 4, the

propensity to move into banking regulation increases by around 2 percentage points around a

recession year ([0.013+0.027]/2), which is about as large as the average within-worker net transition

rate in the sample (2.1%, reported at the bottom of the table) and about 13% of the within-worker

standard deviation (14%). Similarly, estimates from column 6 suggest that a one-standard-deviation

decline in real GDP growth rate would increase the transition rate out of the regulatory sector by

roughly 40% relative to the average within-individual transition rate.


Inflows and Outflows

The countercyclical relationship between economic conditions and net flows into banking regulation

can occur because of two channels: either gross inflows into regulation increase, or gross outflows

from regulation decline. In this section we study each gross flow separately to establish their relative

importance and then link these measures to proxies of job creation and destruction in the regulatory

and private sectors.



Figure 4 shows gross worker flows in our main sample (of individuals that have been in the

regulatory sector at least once in the sample). Several patterns emerge. First, through the mid-2000s,

worker regulator outflows to the private sector outside the recessions average around 3.5% in 1990s

(peaking at 5%) and around 3% in 2000s. During this period, the rate of worker flows from private

sector to regulatory sector is relatively flat at around 3%. As a result, the countercyclical net flows

into regulation are driven to some extent by more individuals exiting the regulatory sector in good

times. We also observe that worker regulator inflows increase to some extent in economic

downturns, consistent with either higher job creation in regulation or higher attractiveness of

regulatory jobs versus private ones in bad times. The regulatory demand likely dominates regulatory

inflows in the post-2007 sample, due to increased demand for regulation following the recent

                                                  16
financial crisis, and over this time we also observe an increase in outflows, although to a lesser

extent.



More formally, in Table 2B, we study the relation between economic conditions and gross inflows

and outflows separately in a panel regression analysis. We use gross inflows from private sector into

the regulatory sector as the dependent variable in the odd columns (1, 3, and 5). The variable Into

Regulatory Statusit is a dummy that takes a value 1 if the individual i enters a regulatory job in year t

from a private sector position in t-1 and is 0 otherwise. Similarly, in the even columns (2, 4, and 6)

we study gross outflows from regulatory sector to private sector with a dummy variable, Out of

Regulatory Statusit, which takes a value 1 if the individual i exits a regulatory job to private sector in

year t and is 0 otherwise. As in Table 2A, we control for cohort effects and sampling issues using

individual fixed effects and a quadratic trend.



Our results confirm the cyclical patterns shown in Figure 4. Throughout the sample the cyclicality of

net flows is the result of higher regulatory inflows and lower outflows around recessions (columns 1

and 2). When excluding the post-2007 sample (columns 3 and 4) or when conditioning on GDP

growth, however, net flows are dominated by the procyclicality of gross outflows to the private

sector. For instance, column 4 shows that, on average, there is a decrease in gross outflows from the

regulatory sector of around 1.35% around NBER-dated recessions ([.011+.016]/2). In contrast,

column 3 shows that the increase in gross inflows into the regulatory sector of around 0.15% around

the recessions ([.008-.005]/2). Comparing columns 1 and 2 with 3 and 4, we confirm that, as noted

earlier, the importance of gross inflows in the full sample is due to the post-financial-crisis period.



Worker flows are determined both by supply-side conditions, such as workers entering or exiting the

labor force, as well as demand-side factors that drive employers’ job creation and destruction


                                                   17
decisions. Next, we investigate further the potential sources of inflows and outflows by assessing the

relationship of worker flows with proxies for job-creation or destruction in the banking and

regulatory sector over time. In particular, in Table 2C we use specifications similar to those in Table

2A-B, but also include the profitability of the banking sector in each year and state, as measured by

each year’s ROA for banks in a given state, to proxy for job creation in the banking sector. We also

include proxies of banking stress, % Non-performing loans in the portfolio of banks in a given state-

year, as well as the yearly local Total Bank Failures to proxy for job creation in the regulatory sector

as well as destruction in the banking sector. As can be observed, we find the earlier relation that net

worker flows into the regulatory sector are countercyclical -- and this variation is driven primarily by

worker outflows. In addition, columns 1 and 2 show that net flows into the regulatory sector are

related to job creation/destruction proxies in the two sectors. Net flows into regulation fall when the

banking sector does well and rise at times of banking stress, which is when the regulatory sector

faces an increased worker demand. Looking at gross flows, we see that both worker inflows and

outflows are driven by the three measures of banking sector conditions (columns 3 to 6).



In sum, countercyclical worker flows into the regulatory sector are primarily due to higher gross

regulatory outflows in good times up to the financial crisis. These flows are driven to some extent

by the health of the banking sector as measured by its profitability and asset quality. Gross inflows,

which tended to increase marginally during recessions, have become more important in the aftermath

of the recent financial crisis, likely due in part to the higher regulatory demand.



Regulatory Worker Flows and Job-to-Job Flows in the Private Sector

As a benchmark to assess the magnitude of the regulatory worker flows we briefly turn to the never-

regulators sample. Using this data, we construct private sector worker job-to-job flows as the

fraction of active individuals who change jobs within the private sector between years t and t-1. On


                                                   18
average we find that job transitions average to about 20% in our sample period.13 The average

frequency in the data is very similar to the job-to-job transition rate from CPS data. Using monthly

CPS data matched as in Shimer (2012) for all types of workers we find annualized job-job-transition

annualized probabilities of about 26% through 2012 and of about 22% in the finance and insurance

sectors (based on the Census Industrial Classification).14 These numbers are very similar to the job-

finding rate in the never-regulator sample.



Because as noted above, regulator-to-regulator flows are very small in our sample, regulator-to-

private and private-to-regulator flows represent job-to-job transitions for (current or next period)

regulatory employees. From Figure 3, total private-to-regulator and regulator-to-private flows add

up to about 9% in the regulator sample (excluding students, inactive individuals and unemployed),

which is less than half the private sector job-to-job flows in the never-regulators sample.15



A large labor literature has studied the source of private-sector job-to-job mobility, and similarly we

will try some characterization of regulator/private flows in the next section. That said, the mobility

between private and regulator sectors is significantly smaller than that within the private sector.


3.2 Worker Mobility as a Function of Human Capital and Seniority

Interaction with Economic Cycles

We now study in more detail regulatory sector worker mobility by assessing which individuals enter

and exit banking regulation over the business cycle as a function of their education levels and

seniority in the regulatory organization. We study education levels as a proxy for human capital,

 13
    Looking at the time variation, we see an upward trend and some pro-cyclicality of job-transitions, with transitions
 about 1 to 3 percent lower during recessions (consistent with previous findings, for example Shimer (2005)). While
 one may suspect that the upward trend could be the result of the cohort effects, we find similar patterns when
 conditioning to within-individual variation (that is controlling for individual fixed effects).
 14
    Given that we are using similar methods to match monthly observations in CPS the job-to-job transition
 probability for all workers that we compute in CPS is very similar to that reported in Fallick and Fleishman (2004),
 which report a monthly probability of 2.6% that translates into a 27.1% annual rate.
 15
    These rates are higher than those reported in Table 1 as those summary measures are computed in terms of all
 individuals in the main sample, i.e., without excluding years where individuals are inactive, students or unemployed.
                                                          19
while seniority proxies for workers’ skills, connections, and importance within the organization. We

explore how the sensitivity of regulatory sector transitions to economic conditions varies as a

function of an individual’s education and seniority by augmenting the specification in Table 2 with

interaction terms. We then exploit the longitudinal properties in our sample of worker transitions to

study the ability of regulators to retain key employees as measured by their higher education and

seniority by characterizing the entry year of each worker into regulation and the duration of the

regulatory spell as a function of his or her education and seniority.



We explore the role of education by constructing a variable, Human Capital, which is a dummy

variable that takes a value of 1 for an MBA or other master’s degree, a PhD or a JD and is 0

otherwise. In addition, to explore the role of seniority, which may proxy for a variety of factors such

as skills and connections, we use a dummy variable, Seniority, that is equal to 1 for either senior

management, high-level executive reporting to head, and head of the organization and 0 otherwise.

The seniority dummy is constructed for each job title using regular expression and information from

each organization; our classification covers about 90% of all titles with the remaining accounted for

by idiosyncratic titles and temporary positions (for example interns, contractors, or consultants). For

each individual we track the highest level of seniority while on a regulatory spell (that is, the within-

worker maximum of the yearly seniority).



Table 3 shows the sensitivity of worker flows into and out of the regulatory sector to economic

conditions as a function of the worker’s education. We study this sensitivity by interacting the

recession dummy with these indices and include individual fixed effects and trend terms as in Tables

2A/B. In addition, each index is de-meaned so that the parameter estimates on the recession

dummies are the same as the un-interacted ones.




                                                   20
As can be observed from column 1, the interaction term between the current recession indicator and

the human capital indicator is negative but statistically insignificant. This suggests that the net flows

of higher–human-capital individuals, as proxied by their educational qualification, into the

regulatory sector are as sensitive to business cycle fluctuations as the net flows of their lower-

human-capital counterparts. Columns 2 and 3 reveal similar sensitivity of worker gross inflows and

outflows across different levels of worker education. These patterns are maintained when we exclude

the recent financial crisis in the last three columns, and we obtain similar results when using GDP

growth as an alternative measure of business cycles (unreported for brevity).



Overall, while the evidence presented in the previous section concluded that net worker flows from

private sector to regulatory sector were countercyclical -- with the effects driven by gross outflows

during economic booms, especially before the financial turmoil -- this effect is evident across

individuals of varying human capital. Of course, higher or lower cyclicality does not predict whether

higher-skilled and more senior regulatory staff outflows are higher or lower on average, an issue that

we analyze next.


Timing of Regulatory Spells and Retention of Talent

To better understand the interaction of worker flows in the regulatory sector and talent, we construct

two variables -- Time to first regulatory spell, which captures the time it takes for an individual to

start her or his first spell in regulation from the first career activity reported on her or his CV, and

Regulatory spell duration, which captures the number of years in a regulatory spell spent by an

individual. In Table 4 we relate these variables to the human capital index and seniority index that

we discussed earlier. For simplicity, we focus only on workers with a single regulatory spell in our

sample, which cover about 97% of the whole sample. These regressions are estimated in the cross

section, and as such we condition on cohort fixed effects, rather than individual fixed effects, and a



                                                   21
quadratic year trend to control for potential sampling issues. We cluster the standard errors at the

level of locality of the regulator.



Column 1 reveals that higher Human Capital, as captured by the highest educational qualification of

an individual, predicts a later entry into regulation in an individual’s career. The estimates in column

1 suggest that individuals with high Human Capital enter the regulatory sector almost 1.5 years later

than those with lower degrees. This pattern, while interesting, could be somewhat mechanical since

individuals who spend time acquiring human capital would tend to enter the regulatory sector later in

the career.



Next, we examine the relation between seniority of regulators and the time it takes for them to enter

the regulatory sector. In general, this relation could be positive or negative. On the one hand, if some

senior-ranked employees are hired externally or spend more time accumulating human capital

outside the regulatory sector, this relation would be positive. The reason is that such individuals

would have spent more time in the private sector rising up the ranks before becoming regulators.

Alternatively, if more senior-ranked regulators are promoted from within, one would expect a

negative relation as these individuals would enter the regulatory sector early and then move up the

ranks. Column 2 shows that the first effect is more dominant in our data -- more senior-ranked

individuals tend to enter the regulatory sector almost a year later. These patterns are robust to

including both the human capital index and seniority index together (column 3).



The next three columns assess the relation between human capital and seniority of regulators and the

time they spend on average in regulation. The results show that individuals with higher human

capital tend to have shorter spells in regulation once they enter regulation. The estimates we find are

economically meaningful. For instance, estimates in column 6 suggest that individuals with high


                                                  22
Human Capital tend to remain in the regulatory sector 2 years less than those with a lower human

capital, which is sizable relative to a median spell duration of 6 years in regulation. We find an

opposite effect of seniority: more senior regulators tend to have longer spells. This may not be very

surprising since we pick the highest level in the regulatory organization for each worker, and the

rank will tend to be higher for more seasoned workers.



While patterns with seniority may be hard to interpret because of the higher probability that

employees with longer spells raise through the ranks of an organization, the evidence in terms of

human capital suggests that regulators face some retention challenges. The best talent, as proxied by

higher human capital (and seniority in regulatory organization) takes longer to enter the regulatory

sector and spends less time in the regulatory sector before switching to the private sector.



One concern in interpreting our findings regarding the length of the regulatory spell is that any

temporal spell in our data suffers from right truncation because we can only observe the data through

the end of our sample. To address potential truncation issues, we use an alternative approach and

analyze how the fraction of regulators with medium to long regulatory spells -- either more than

three years or more than five years – evolved as a function of worker characteristics and over time.

In particular, in Table 5, we estimate a cross-sectional regression where the dependent variable is an

indicator variable, Spell, which is equal to 1 if the regulatory spell of a given regulator was more

than three years (columns 1 to 4) or five years (columns 5 to 8). To guard against data truncation

towards the end of the sample we end our sample in the year 2010 (2008) when studying the share of

workers with at least three (five) year spells. The main explanatory variable is Start, which measures

the first year in regulation for a given regulator since 1988 (that is, this variable is normalized to zero

in 1998).




                                                    23
Focusing on the three-year spells first, we observe that, on average, regulators have a roughly 71%

probability of spending three years or more in regulation (column 1). In other words, about 71% of

the workers in our sample had a regulatory spell of more than three years. Consistent with the results

in Table 4, higher human capital workers are less likely to stay in regulation for more than three

years, and the opposite is true for more senior workers (column 2). There is a large decline in the

likelihood of spending three years or longer in regulation for all the workers (column 3). While, on

average, about 88% of workers that started working in regulation in 1988 spent three years or more

in regulation, only 64% (.884- 20*.012) of workers that started working two decades later did so.

These patterns remain when we control for human capital and seniority levels (column 4) and when

studying workers with job spells that are at least five years long. These findings reiterate presence of

retention issues in the regulatory sector for employees with the highest levels of human capital, and

also suggest retention issues may have indeed worsened for all employees over the past few years as

measured by the fraction of workers with short employment spells in the regulatory sector.


4. Transitions and Enforcement Actions: “Quid-Pro-Quo” & “Regulatory Schooling” Hypotheses

Regulatory transitions are often scrutinized because of the quid-pro-quo channel according to which

future employment opportunities in the private sector may affect the strictness of actions of

regulatory personnel. This hypothesis implies that we should observe low gross outflows from

regulation to private banking during periods of high enforcement activity. According to a different

view (the “regulatory schooling” view), regulators may have an incentive to favor excessively

complex regulations or strict enforcement activity because the "schooling" in regulations enhances

the expected future earnings of regulators, should they move to the private sector. While empirically

enforcement actions do not measure regulatory complexity, the ultimate impact of a rule is the result

of both regulations and the manner in which these are enforced through supervision (see Agarwal et

al., 2014 on these points). Thus, based on the schooling view, we should observe higher gross

inflows into regulation at times of higher regulatory intensity, as workers are schooled, as well as

                                                  24
contemporaneous or subsequent high gross outflows from regulation to private sector as these

workers earn the return from regulatory schooling. In this section we study whether these channels

may be driving fluctuations in regulatory worker transitions beyond the cyclical patterns that we

have uncovered so far. More specifically, we test whether variation in regulatory enforcement

activity is related to the frequency with which we observe regulatory personnel transitioning into and

out of private sector employment over time and in the cross-section of states.



The central challenge in testing such a link is the measurement of regulatory enforcement activity.

We measure such activity using the frequency of public enforcement actions both because of their

availability and their key importance in supervisory activity. As discussed in Agarwal et al (2014),

regulators use onsite examination to audit bank conditions and assign confidential regulatory ratings

based on their findings on a scale from one to five. Banks with a rating of 1 or 2 are considered to

present few (if any) significant regulatory concerns, whereas those rated 3 and above present

moderate to extreme levels of regulatory concerns. When problems are uncovered at exams,

regulators use enforcement actions to communicate problems and weaknesses to banks and require

them to take corrective actions (see, for example, OCC Policies and Procedures Manual 5310-3).

When a bank is in good standing (i.e. a rating of 1 or 2), regulators typically use informal

enforcement actions, which are not disclosed to the public, such as memoranda of understanding and

commitment letters. Formal actions are instead disclosed to the public, are much more severe, and

their use is often mandated for banks rated 3 or above.



We collect all enforcement orders and actions of banking regulators in our sample period from the

Fed, the FDIC, the OCC, and the OTS. Formal enforcement actions include prohibition and removal

orders, civil money penalties, formal agreements, cease and desist (C&D) orders, prompt corrective




                                                  25
action (PCA) directives, and terminations or suspensions of deposit insurance.16 Because each action

may in principle be of different severity and it is not possible to rank all of these actions on an

objective scale, we focus on a set of formal actions that are similar in their severity. We first

exclude civil penalties and prohibition and removal orders, because these actions are generally taken

against individuals and for law violation rather than for safety and soundness of a bank. Further, we

exclude formal agreements, which are bilateral documents signed by the bank and regulators, which,

unlike C&D orders and PCA directives, are not enforceable in the federal court system. C&D

orders are used to impose corrective action on a bank for example by restricting a bank’s growth and

forcing disposal of assets. Similarly PCA directives impose mandatory restrictions on a banks’

activity as a function of its capital levels. Failure to comply with C&D orders and PCA directives

and actions on deposit insurance are all grounds for receivership. Accordingly, we focus on the

intensity of these enforcement orders by regulators on institutions in their geographical jurisdiction

as an indicator of regulatory strictness.



In Table 6 we use specifications similar to those employed in Table 2A and Table 2B to examine

whether movement of an individual in and out of the regulatory sector is related to the intensity of

formal enforcement orders by that individual’s regulatory agency in a given state and year. In the

first two columns, the dependent variable is Regulator Statusit, which measures whether an

individual is employed in the regulatory sector this year relative to the prior year. In columns 3 and

4 we run analogous regressions, using the dummy for inflow and outflow as defined in Table 2B. As

was the case in previous specifications, the regressions include individual fixed effects and time

controls to account for unobserved characteristics and potential sampling distortions. In terms of

time controls we either use quadratic trends and a NBER recession dummy as in prior specifications


 16
    We restrict this information to that reported by federal banking regulators because information for state regulators
 is not standardized and is difficult to collect. That said, because state regulators supervise state chartered banks
 jointly with the FDIC and the Fed, and many of these enforcement actions are taken jointly by the two regulators,
 our sample includes information on state regulators’ actions as well.
                                                           26
(odd columns) or, given that enforcement actions also have cross-state variation, time dummies

(even columns). The main explanatory variable is Enforcement Actions, which measures the total

enforcement actions as discussed above that are issued by her or his agency in the state and year of

location of that individual.



On net, we find a positive association between the intensity of strict actions and the net movement

into the regulatory sector in the full sample (column 1). Importantly, in column 2, we show that this

relation survives inclusion of time fixed effects. This implies that the positive association between

regulator activity and net inflows is identified even when we use variation across states and

regulators and is not just capturing aggregate economic conditions. Next, we drill down into these

patterns by examining the relation between intensity of enforcement and gross inflows (columns 3

and 4) and outflows (columns 5 and 6) from the regulatory sector into the private sector. Several

patterns emerge from this analysis. First, the results established in the first two columns are driven

largely by inflows of individuals into regulatory jobs around periods of or for regulators in states

with high enforcement activity rather than outflows. This can be clearly seen if we compare the

magnitude of estimates on enforcement variables in column 3 (0.245) with estimates on these

variables in column 5 (0.04). The estimates in column 3 suggest about 12% higher inflows into the

regulatory sector, relative to the within-individual standard deviation of inflows, around periods of

one-standard-deviation higher enforcement activity in a given state. In other words, the relationship

between high enforcement intensity and flows into the regulatory sector is driven by a surge of

inflows around periods of high regulatory activity. This pattern is inconsistent with the quid-pro-quo

channel where outflows should be the dominant factor. Second, setting aside the relative absolute

magnitude of inflows and outflows, the sign on the outflow term (column 5) is also not consistent

with the quid-pro-quo channel since we find more outflow from the regulatory sector around periods

of higher enforcement activity. We find similar results when controlling for time effects (columns 4


                                                 27
and 6) or when we proxy for economic condition with real GDP growth rather than with the NBER

recession dummy.



The evidence on gross flows and intensity of regulatory activity is, instead, broadly consistent with

the regulatory school view. High gross inflows into regulation during times of regulatory intensity

may reflect workers moving into regulatory sector to get schooled in the new complexity. As well,

gross flows from regulation to private sector may reflect regulators’ increased incentives to earn

returns from regulatory schooling at times of higher enforcement activity when their regulatory

human capital becomes more valuable. These patterns are consistent with Agarwal et al. (2014) who

find higher turnover of state regulators into private sector if these regulators give harsher supervisory

ratings to banks under their supervision.



In sum, we find that based on our measures, the patterns in overall aggregate transitions of

regulatory personnel over time and across states are opposite of what would be implied by a quid pro

quo story and are instead broadly consistent with the regulatory schooling story. This evidence is

admittedly naïve and not a ubiquitous test of the quid-pro-quo or regulatory schooling hypothesis.

Moreover, it cannot rule out the presence of distortions in banking regulations at a more

microeconomic level or that regulations may be more complex as a result of the schooling

hypothesis (see Shive and Forster (2014) for a step in this direction).


5. Conclusion

In the aftermath of the financial crisis, job transitions of regulatory personnel between the regulatory

and private sector have come under intense scrutiny and have been blamed by economists (Johnson

and Kwak 2010), legal scholars (John Coffee in Financial Times [April 23, 2012]) and policymakers

(Dodd-Frank Act, Section 968) alike for distorting government regulators’ actions on behalf of

industry interests. Because of the difficulty in obtaining data, the general perception driving these

                                                   28
discussions are informed by anecdotes, which are often linked to former regulatory personnel

transitioning to the private sector around apparent regulatory failures.



This paper presents a novel data set tracing the career transitions of a large sample of former and

current banking regulators in and out of the private sector. Based on this data, we find that similar to

worker transitions in other industries, worker flows between the regulatory and private sector in

banking can also be characterized in terms of standard demand and supply factors in the two sectors.

Workers enter regulation in tough economic conditions, likely due to its relative attractiveness at

these times, and in periods of financial distress, when job creation in the regulatory sector and job

destruction in the private sector are at their peaks. Overall the mobility of regulatory workers is

lower than their private-sector counterparts.



The evidence on higher gross inflows and outflows during periods of more intense regulatory

activity are consistent with the regulatory school view. According to this view, workers may move

into the regulatory sector to get schooled in the new complexity and then move from regulation to

the private sector to earn the returns from regulatory schooling at times of higher enforcement

activity when their regulatory human capital may be more valuable. The evidence is inconsistent

with the quid-pro-quo channel driving variation in aggregate worker flows between the regulatory

and private sector in banking. Our tests on this dimension are limited due to availability of regulator

specific proxies of enforcement activity or of regulatory complexity. We therefore caution against

taking these findings as establishing a conclusive assessment of whether quid-pro-quo or regulatory

schooling leads to regulatory distortions.



More broadly, our findings speak to the debate on the design of rules concerning revolving doors.

Critics of the regulatory revolving door have proposed restricting the ability of regulatory personnel

to transition to the private sector, which under federal law (see 12 U.S.C. § 1820(k)) is subject to a
                                                   29
one-year “cool-off” period for any compensation -- as an employee, officer, director, or consultant --

with a previously supervised institution. There have also been discussions to further tighten the

hiring of industry insiders by regulatory agencies. Such arguments, while no doubt important, ignore

other important positive aspects of the revolving door, such as its potential to enhance the ability of

regulatory agencies to hire better quality workers. Our results suggest that the regulatory sector faces

a retention challenge, as measured by the lower employment spells of regulatory personnel in more

recent years and for workers with higher education. While more work is needed to quantify the

regulatory distortions induced by the revolving door, our findings do suggest that tightening the

revolving door without altering other aspects of worker incentives may further create challenges for

regulatory agencies to seek and retain talent.

References

Agarwal, Sumit, David Lucca, Amit Seru, and Francesco Trebbi, 2014, “Inconsistent Regulators:
Evidence from Banking”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming.

Artuç, Erhan, Shubham Chaudhuri, and John McLaren. 2010. "Trade Shocks and Labor
Adjustment: A Structural Empirical Approach." American Economic Review, 100(3): 1008-45.

Barth, James, Gerard Caprio, and Ross Levine, 2004, “Bank Regulation and Supervision: What
Works Best?” Journal of Financial Intermediation 13, 205-248.

Berger, Allen N., and Timothy H. Hannan, 1998, “The efficiency cost of market power in the
banking industry: A test of the ‘quiet life’ and related hypotheses,” Review of Economics and
Statistics, Vol. 80, No. 3, August, pp. 454–465.

Besley, Tim and Stephen Coate, 2003. “Elected Versus Appointed Regulators: Theory and
Evidence” Journal of the European Economic Association, 5(9), pp 1176-1206.

Betrand, Marianne, Matilde Bombardini, and Francesco Trebbi. 2013 “Is It Whom You Know or
What You Know? An Empirical Assessment of the Lobbying Process” NBER WP 16765.

Blanchard, Olivier J. and Peter Diamond 1990. “The Cyclical Behavior of the Gross Flows of U.S.
Workers, ” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2, 85–155.

Blanes I Vidal, Jordi; Draca, Mirko; Fons-Rosen, Christian; 2012. “Revolving Door Lobbyists”
American Economic Review, Volume 102, Number 7, pp. 3731-3748(18).

Cohen, Jeffrey E. 1986 “The Dynamics of the "Revolving Door" on the FCC” American Journal of
Political Science, Vol. 30, No. 4, pp. 689-708.


                                                  30
Davis, Steve, Faberman, Jason, and John Haltiwanger “The Flow Approach to Labor Markets:
New Data Sources and Micro-Macro Links.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Summer 2006.

deHaan, Ed and Kedia, Simi and Koh, Kevin and Rajgopal, Shivaram, 2012 “Does the Revolving
Door Affect the SEC’s Enforcement Outcomes?” mimeo Stanford University.

Diermeier, Daniel, Michael Keane, and Antonio Merlo. 2005. "A Political Economy Model of
Congressional Careers" American Economic Review, 95(1): 347-373.

Fallick, Bruce and Charles A. Fleischman 2004. “Employer-to-Employer Flows in the U.S. Labor
Market: The Complete Picture of Gross Worker Flows,” FEDS Working Papers 2004-34, Federal
Reserve Board.

Gormley, William. 1979. “A test of the revolving door hypothesis on the FCC”. American Journal
of Political Science, 23:665-83.

Hall, Robert E. 2006. “Job loss, job finding and unemployment in the US economy over the past
50 years”, NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2005.

Johnson Simon and James Kwak 2010. "13 Bankers: The Wall Street Takeover and the Next
Financial Meltdown," Published by Random House Inc.

Kroszner, Randall S., and Philip E. Strahan, 1999. “What Drives Deregulation? Economics and
Politics of the Relaxation of Bank Branching Restrictions,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol.
114, No. 4, November, pp. 1437-1467.

Loungani, Prakash, and Richard Rogerson. "Cyclical fluctuations and sectoral reallocation:
evidence from the PSID." Journal of Monetary Economics 23.2 (1989): 259-273.

Moore, Jeffrey C, 2008 "Seam Bias in the 2004 SIPP panel: much improved, but much bias still
remains." US Census Bureau Statistical Research Division Survey Methodology Research Report
Series 3 (2008): 2008.

Nagypál, Éva, 2008 “Worker reallocation over the business cycle: The importance of job-to-job
transitions.” mimeo, Northwestern University

Mukoyama Toshihiko (2013) “The Cyclicality of Job-to-Job Transitions and its Implications for
Aggregate Productivity.” Working paper.

Salant, D. 1995. "Behind the Revolving Door: A New View of Public Utility Regulation." RAND
Journal of Economics, Vol. 26, pp. 362-377.

Shimer, Robert 2005. “The Cyclicality of Hires, Separations, and Job-to-job Transitions” Federal
Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review 87(4), 493-507.

Shimer, Robert 2012. "Reassessing the ins and outs of unemployment." Review of Economic
Dynamics 15.2: 127-148.

Shive, Sophie and Margaret Forester 2014. “The Revolving door for financial regulators.”
Working paper

                                               31
                                                               Table 1: Summary Statistics
This table presents summary statistics for the main variables of interest, split by whether these measures are used in a panel (1A) or cross-section analysis (1B).
Sample period is 1988-2013.

                                                      Panel A: Variables used in Panel Regressions

                                                                 (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)
                                                                 N             Mean              SD              Min            Max
                       Regulator Status                      555,139           0.013            0.27             -1              1
                       Into Reg Status                        555,139           0.042            0.20             0               1
                       Out of Reg Status                      555,139           0.029            0.17             0               1
                       Recession Indicator                    555,139            0.13            0.28             0               1
                       Real GDP                               527,574            2.45            1.80           -2.80            4.85
                       Enforcement Actions                    411,404           0.023           0.068             0             0.65
                       Human Capital                          555,139            0.45            0.50             0               1
                       Seniority                              482,442            0.11            0.32             0               1
                       ROA                                    482,916          0.0073          0.0060          -0.029           0.055
                       % Non-performing loans                 482,916           0.016           0.015           0.001           0.12
                       Total Bank Failures                    532,807           0.032            0.14             0             1.97


                                                Panel B: Variables used in Cross-sectional Regressions

                                                                 (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)
                                                                  N             Mean            SD               Min             Max
                       Time to first regulatory spell          24,543           9.57            9.06              0              56
                       Regulatory spell duration               29,774           6.72            7.41              1              53
                       Human Capital                           29,774           0.43            0.49              0               1
                       Seniority                               25,235           0.096           0.29              0               1




                                                                                32
                                      Table 2: Economic Cycles and Regulatory-Private Sector Worker flows
This table reports estimates from regressions of net worker flows into regulatory sector and gross inflows and outflows on business cycle measures. In Panel A, the
dependent variable is Regulator Statusit which measures for each individual i transitions in and out of employment in the regulatory sector between year t-1 and t.
The main explanatory variables are current and lagged values of a Recession Indicator, which measures the number of months each year that have been classified
by the NBER as being part of a recession. In last column Real GDP growth is annual real GDP growth rate in percent. Panels B and C show estimates analogous to
Panel A but also use gross inflows and gross outflows from regulatory sector as the dependent variables. Into Reg Statusit (Out of Reg Statusit) is a dummy that
takes a value 1 if the individual i leaves a private (regulatory) job in year t-1 for a regulatory (private) job in year t.and is 0 otherwise. Controls include a quadratic-
polynomial in the calendar year and cohort fixed effects. In the individual fixed effects analysis we drop the cohort effects, as these are spanned by the individual
effects. Standard errors clustered at the locality level. *** significant at 1% level. ** significant at 5% level. * significant at 10% level.
                                                     Panel A: Net Worker Flows into Regulatory Sector

                                                      (1)               (2)                 (3)            (4)                   (5)              (6)
                                                                                           Regulator Status
               Recession Indicatort               0.020***           0.014***            0.013***          0.013***           0.019***
                                                   [0.003]            [0.002]             [0.002]           [0.002]            [0.003]
               Recession Indicatort-1                                0.030***            0.027***          0.027***           0.011***
                                                                      [0.004]             [0.004]           [0.004]            [0.002]
               Real GDPt                                                                                                                      -0.004***
                                                                                                                                               [0.001]
               Real GDPt-1                                                                                                                     -0.002**
                                                                                                                                                [0.001]
               Observations                        555,139           555,139           555,139             555,139            359,059           527,574
               R-squared                            0.000             0.001             0.005               0.026              0.038             0.029
               Individual FE                         No                No                No                  Yes                Yes               Yes
                                                                                      Quad.Trend
               Other Controls                         No                No                               Quad.Trend         Quad.Trend       Quad.Trend
                                                                                    and Cohort FEs
               Sample                            1988-2013          1988-2013          1988-2013          1988-2013          1988-2006        1988-2012
               N Individuals                       29734              29734              29734              29734              26926            29658
               Within Mean                                                                                  0.0210             0.0110           0.0232
               Within SD                                                                                     0.147              0.183            0.157


                                                                                    33
                       Table 2: Economic Cycles and Regulatory-Private Sector Worker flows (contd.)

                                Panel B: Gross Worker Flows into and out of Regulatory Sector

                                  (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)              (6)
                            Into Reg Status Out of Reg Status Into Reg Status Out of Reg Status Into Reg Status Out of Reg Status
Recession Indicatort          0.006***         -0.008***        0.008***        -0.011***
                               [0.002]          [0.001]          [0.002]         [0.002]
Recession Indicatort-1        0.019***         -0.008***        -0.005**        -0.016***
                               [0.004]          [0.001]          [0.002]         [0.001]
Real GDPt                                                                                         -0.001*          0.003***
                                                                                                  [0.001]           [0.000]
Real GDPt-1                                                                                       -0.001           0.001***
                                                                                                 [0.001]            [0.000]
Observations                  555,139          555,139          359,059         359,059          527,574            527,574
R-squared                      0.035             0.039            0.060           0.052            0.042             0.042
Individual FE                   Yes               Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes               Yes
Other Controls               Quad.Trend       Quad.Trend       Quad.Trend      Quad.Trend       Quad.Trend        Quad.Trend
Sample                       1988-2013        1988-2013        1988-2006       1988-2006        1988-2012         1988-2012
N Individuals                  29734            29734            26926           26926            29658              29658
Within Mean                    0.0561           0.0351           0.0354          0.0244           0.0587            0.0355
Within SD                       0.127            0.133            0.147           0.130            0.136             0.135




                                                                34
                 Table 2: Economic Cycles and Regulatory-Private Sector Worker flows (contd.)

                         Panel C: Sources of Worker Flows into and out of Regulatory Sector

                                   (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)        (5)            (6)
                                    Regulator Status                Into Reg Status          Out of Reg Status
Recession Indicatort            0.010***       0.009***           -0.000         -0.000    -0.010***     -0.010***
                                 [0.003]        [0.003]          [0.002]        [0.002]     [0.001]       [0.001]
ROAt                           -0.827***         -0.366          -0.354*          -0.078    0.473***       0.288*
                                [0.237]         [0.242]          [0.204]         [0.212]     [0.123]       [0.147]
%Non-performing loanst                         0.289***                         0.164**                   -0.125**
                                                [0.087]                         [0.078]                    [0.056]
Total Bank Failurest                           0.035**                          0.023*                  -0.012***
                                               [0.016]                         [0.013]                   [0.004]
Observations                    482,916        482,916           482,916       482,916      482,916      482,916
R-squared                         0.031          0.032             0.046         0.046        0.045        0.045
Individual FE                      Yes            Yes               Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes
Other Controls                 Quad.Trend     Quad.Trend        Quad.Trend    Quad.Trend   Quad.Trend   Quad.Trend
Sample                         1990-2012      1990-2012         1990-2012     1990-2012    1990-2012    1990-2012
N Individuals                    28691          28691             28691         28691        28691        28691
Within Mean                      0.0232         0.0232            0.0588        0.0588       0.0356       0.0356
Within SD                        0.161           0.161            0.141          0.141        0.138        0.138




                                                           35
                       Table 3: Economic Cycles and Regulatory-Private Sector Worker flows as a function of Human Capital

      This table reports estimates from regressions of net worker flows into regulatory sector and gross inflows and outflows on business cycle conditions. The
      explanatory variables include interaction of Human Capital (a value 1 implying more educational qualification) with the current value of a Recession Indicator,
      which measures the number of months each year that have been classified by the NBER as being part of a recession. Additional controls are quadratic-polynomial
      in the calendar year and individual fixed effects. Standard errors clustered at the locality level. *** significant at 1% level. ** significant at 5% level. * significant
      at 10% level.

                                                           (1)               (2)              (3)              (4)               (5)              (6)
                                                     Regulator Status Into Reg Status Out of Reg Status Regulator Status Into Reg Status Out of Reg Status
Recession Indicatort                                     0.0186***             0.0093***           -0.0093***              0.0187***            0.0081***            -0.0106***
                                                          [0.0029]              [0.0025]            [0.0010]                [0.0033]             [0.0024]             [0.0015]
Human Capital Index* Recession Indicatort                 -0.0002               0.0013               0.0016                 -0.0024              -0.0026               -0.0003
                                                         [0.0031]              [0.0022]             [0.0019]               [0.0046]             [0.0034]              [0.0029]
Observations                                             555,139               555,139              555,139                359,059              359,059               359,059
R-squared                                                  0.025                 0.035                0.039                  0.038                0.060                 0.051
Individual FE                                               Yes                   Yes                  Yes                    Yes                  Yes                   Yes
Other Controls                                          Quad.Trend            Quad.Trend           Quad.Trend             Quad.Trend           Quad.Trend            Quad.Trend
Sample                                                  1988-2013             1988-2013            1988-2013              1988-2006            1988-2006             1988-2006
N Individuals                                              29734                29734                29734                   26926                26926                 26926
Within Mean                                                0.0210               0.0561               0.0351                  0.0110               0.0354                0.0244
Within SD                                                   0.147                0.127                 0.133                  0.183                0.147                0.130




                                                                                         36
        Table 4: Time to first Regulatory spell and Regulatory spell duration as a function of Human Capital and Seniority

This table reports estimates from regressions that relate the time it takes an individual to enter the regulatory sector and the years spent on average in regulation to
human capital and seniority indices we constructed earlier. The main dependent variable in the first three columns is Time to first regulatory spell, which captures
the time it takes for an individual to start their first spell in regulation from their first career activity reported on their CV. In the last three columns, the dependent
variable is Regulatory spell duration, which captures the number of years in a regulatory spell spent by an individual. The main explanatory variables are indicator
variables, Human Capital (a value of 1 implying more educational qualification) and Seniority (a value of 1 implying higher rank in the regulatory organization)
Controls include a quadratic-polynomial in the calendar year and cohort fixed effects. Standard errors clustered at the locality level. *** significant at 1% level. **
significant at 5% level. * significant at 10% level.

                                                        (1)             (2)           (3)                  (4)          (5)            (6)
                                                          Time to first regulatory spell                      Regulatory spell duration
                      Human Capital                  1.570***                      1.513***            -2.000***                   -2.321***
                                                      [0.194]                       [0.203]             [0.117]                      [0.130]
                      Seniority                                     0.808***        0.578*                           3.900***       4.253***
                                                                     [0.312]        [0.302]                           [0.374]        [0.361]
                      Observations                    23,708         20,902         20,902               28,910       24,412         24,412
                      R-squared                        0.233          0.218          0.225                0.177        0.166          0.190
                      Year and Cohort FEs               Yes            Yes            Yes                  Yes          Yes            Yes
                      Sample                        1988-2013       1988-2013       1988-2013         1988-2013        1988-2013       1988-2013




                                                                                    37
                                                           Table 5: Regulatory Spells over time

This table reports estimates from regressions that analyze how the fraction of regulators with medium to long tenures (either more than three or more than five
years) has changed as the private financial sector has expanded over time. The dependent variable is a dummy variable, Spell, that indicates whether the regulatory
spell of a given regulator was more than three years (columns 1 to 4) or five years (columns 5 to 8). The main explanatory variable is Start, which measures the
first year in regulation for a given regulator, starting in 1988 (that is, this variable is normalized to zero in 1998). Other explanatory variables include indicator
variables, Human Capital (a value of 1 implying more educational qualification) and Seniority (a value of 1 implying higher rank in the regulatory organization)
Standard errors clustered at the locality level. *** significant at 1% level. ** significant at 5% level. * significant at 10% level.

                                                   (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)     (5)         (6)        (7)        (8)
                                                       I(Spell of more than 3 years=1)             I(Spell of more than 5 years=1)
             Start                                                      -0.012*** -0.009***                        -0.008*** -0.004***
                                                                          [0.000]     [0.000]                        [0.001]    [0.001]
             Human Capital                                 -0.053***                -0.049***           -0.116***             -0.113***
                                                             [0.007]                  [0.007]             [0.009]               [0.009]
             Seniority                                      0.180***                 0.169***            0.281***              0.278***
                                                             [0.008]                  [0.008]             [0.012]               [0.012]
             Constant                          0.712*** 0.764*** 0.884*** 0.881*** 0.565*** 0.617*** 0.654*** 0.665***
                                                [0.003]      [0.004]      [0.006]     [0.007] [0.004]     [0.006]    [0.008]    [0.009]
             Observations                       19,449       16,501       19,449      16,501  15,031      13,056     15,031     13,056
             R-squared                           0.000        0.017        0.038       0.038   0.000       0.039      0.010      0.042
             Sample                           1988-2010 1988-2010 1988-2010 1988-2010 1988-2008 1988-2008 1988-2008 1988-2008




                                                                                 38
                            Table 6: Formal Enforcement actions and Regulatory-Private Sector Worker flows

This table reports estimates from regressions that examine whether movements of an individual in and out of the regulatory sector are related to the intensity of
formal enforcement orders by that individual's regulatory agency. In the first two columns, the dependent variable is Regulator Statusit, which measures whether
an individual is employed in the regulatory sector this year relative to the prior year. In columns 3 to 6 we run analogous regressions, using Into Reg Statusit and
Out of Reg Statusit as dependent variables. The main explanatory variable is current Enforcement Actions, which captures the total formal enforcement orders
pertaining to cease and desist orders, prompt corrective action directives and actions on deposit insurance that are issued by a regulator’s agency in the state and
year of location of that regulator. All regression specifications include individual fixed effects, quadratic trends and NBER recession dummies. Standard errors
clustered at the locality level. *** significant at 1% level. ** significant at 5% level. * significant at 10% level.



                                                 (1)             (2)                  (3)             (4)                (5)             (6)
                                                  Regulator Status                     Into Reg Status                   Out of Reg Status
              Enforcement Actionst           0.205***          0.181***          0.245***          0.216***          0.040***          0.035***
                                              [0.039]           [0.042]           [0.044]           [0.045]           [0.013]           [0.012]
              Recession Indicatort           0.018***                            0.008***                           -0.010***
                                              [0.003]                             [0.003]                            [0.001]
              Observations                    411,404          411,404            411,404          411,404           411,404           411,404
              R-squared                        0.029             0.031             0.041             0.045             0.041             0.044
              Individual FE                     Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes
              Other Controls                Quad.Trend         Year FEs         Quad.Trend         Year FEs         Quad.Trend         Year FEs
              Sample                        1990-2013         1990-2013         1990-2013         1990-2013         1990-2013         1990-2013
              N Individuals                    22881            22881              22881            22881             22881             22881
              Within Mean                     0.0196            0.0196            0.0545            0.0545            0.0348            0.0348
              Within SD                        0.151             0.151               0.132           0.132             0.134             0.134




                                                                                39
                                                              Figure 1: Scope of the paper

This figure depicts the regulatory structure for US Commercial Banks and thrifts in our sample period. The regulatory institutions are the Federal Reserve Banks
(Fed), the Federal Depository Insurance Corporation (FDIC), the Office of Comptroller and Currency (OCC), the Office of Thrift Supervision (OTS) and the
state banking regulators.




                                                                              40
                          Figure 2: Total number of individuals in our sample and the number split by regulator
In the left panel, the thick black line shows the active individuals in a given year in the “regulator” sample, i.e., sample of individuals who have worked at any
point in time during their careers in the regulatory agencies. The thin grey line shows the active individuals in a given year in the “never-regulator” sample, i.e.,
sample of individuals who are never employed in the regulatory sector. In the right panel, we plot the number of career active individuals that have worked for a
given regulator at a point in time in their career.




                                                                                 41
                                                 Figure 3: Net Worker Flows into Regulatory Sector

This figure plots net worker flows (measured on the left-scale) against macroeconomic conditions as measured by real GDP annual growth rates (dashed line)
and NBER recessions (shaded vertical areas). Net private-to-regulator worker flows (thick solid line) are defined as the share in each year of all workers in our
sample that transition from the private sector to the regulatory sector, less the share of transitions out of the regulatory and into the private sector. We also show
total net-regulator flows (thin solid line), which include transitions in and out of the regulatory sector to the private sector, as well as to student status and to
unemployment.




                                                                                 42
                                        Figure 4: Gross Worker Flows into and out of Regulatory Sector

This figure shows gross worker flows against macroeconomic conditions as measured by NBER recessions (shaded vertical areas). Gross private-to-regulator
worker flows are defined as the share in each year of all workers in our sample that transition from the private sector to the regulatory sector. Gross regulator-to-
private worker flows are defined as the share in each year of all workers in our sample that transition from the regulatory sector into the private sector.




                                                                                 43
