NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE EUROCRISIS: MUDDLING THROUGH, OR ON THE WAY TO A MORE PERFECT
EURO UNION?
Joshua Aizenman
Working Paper 20242
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20242

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2014

Insightful comments by Jerry Cohen, Barry Eichegreen, Andrew Rose, Paul Wachtel and the 20th
Dubrovnik Economic Conference participants are gratefully acknowledged. Joshua Aizenman is grateful
for the support provided by the Dockson Chair in Economics and International Relations, USC. The
views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Joshua Aizenman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

The Eurocrisis: Muddling Through, or On the Way to a More Perfect Euro Union?
Joshua Aizenman
NBER Working Paper No. 20242
June 2014
JEL No. F32,F36,F41
ABSTRACT
This paper looks at the short history of the Eurozone through the lens of an evolutionary approach
to forming new institutions. The euro has operated as a currency without a state, under the dominance
of Germany. This has so far allowed the euro to achieve a number of design objectives, and this may
continue, as long as Germany does not shirk its growing responsibility for the euro’s future. Germany’s
resilience and dominant size within the EU may explain its “muddling-through” approach towards
the Eurozone crisis. We review several manifestations of this muddling through process. Greater mobility
of labor and lower mobility of under-regulated capital may be the costly “second best” adjustment
until the arrival of more mature institutions in the Eurozone.

Joshua Aizenman
Economics and SIR
USC
University Park
Los Angeles, CA 90089-0043
and NBER
aizenman@usc.edu

The euro – a currency without a state
“After more than seven years, the euro is firmly established as the currency of over 300 million people.
Its internal stability is evidenced by the fact that inflation has been steadily low from the very start,
despite a sequence of negative price shocks (in particular a continuous surge in oil prices). As an
international currency, the euro is second only to the US dollar.”
“The EU has always been, and will remain, a unique undertaking for which there are no models that can
easily be adopted. It is important to allow an evolutionary process, which is open to further steps of
integration, yet safeguards what is already in place and working well, and which assigns competencies to
nation states or even regions as appropriate. In fact, we have been in the midst of such a process for quite
some time, and Monetary Union is and will remain one of its major success stories.”

The opening and the closing of a speech by Otmar Issing, Member of the Executive Board of the
ECB, Helsinki, 24 March 2006

The short history of the Eurozone has been remarkable and unprecedented: the euro
project has moved from the planning board to a vibrant currency within less than ten years.
Earlier concerns about the stability of the transition from national currencies to the euro as well
as skepticism regarding the gains from forming the euro were deemed overblown by the mid2000s. Issing’s optimistic 2006 speech reflects well the buoyant assessment of the first decade of
the euro—an unprecedented formation of a new currency without a state. Observers viewed the
rapid acceptance of the euro as a viable currency and the deeper financial integration of the
Eurozone and the EU countries as stepping stones toward a stable and prosperous Europe. The
growing current account deficits of GIIPS (Greece, Ireland, Italy, Portugal, and Spain) were
caused by borrowing at low sovereign spreads. Intriguingly, GIIPS bonds’ interest rates
dramatically converged during the 1990s to the German rate [see Figs. 1 and 2]. The IMF’s
World Economic Outlook (WEO; 2008) viewed emerging Europe’s large current account
deficits as a validation of the gains associated with “capital flowing downhill,”1 possibly
1

WEO (2008, October, page 228) noted “…emerging Europe’s ability to borrow foreign capital

for long periods suggests that the standard growth model, with capital flowing downhill, remains
relevant.” “In emerging Europe, the large current account deficits are related to a rapid
liberalization of domestic financial markets and open capital accounts, which attracted large
capital inflows and prompted a rapid rise of foreign bank ownership. The process of integration
into the EU also enhanced foreign capital inflows by improving prospects for economic and
policy stability.”
2

dispelling concerns about the limited benefits of importing foreign savings as a means of
financing domestic growth.2 The celebratory assessment of the euro continued well into its tenthyear anniversary,3 only to crash by the unfolding events of the Eurozone crisis. Fig. 3 shows the
association between the current account and economic growth before and after 2009 in the
Eurozone and Emerging Markets, illustrating the impact of the euro crisis on reversing the
current account - economic growth patterns in the Eurozone.
This paper looks at the short history of the Eurozone through the lens of an evolutionary
approach to forming new institutions. This lens provides a useful perspective on the formation of
global exchange-rate regimes, currency unions, and the like.4 It suggests that Issing’s optimism
on “The euro as a currency without a state,” overstates the evidence. At best, the euro is a
currency without a state, under the dominance of Germany. This statement by itself may be good
news: Cohen (1994) identified two crucial political characteristics common to sustainable
currency unions: first, the presence of a dominant state “willing and able to use its influence to
keep a currency union functioning effectively,” and second, the presence “of a broader
constellation of related ties and commitments sufficient to make the loss of monetary autonomy,
whatever the magnitude of prospective adjustment costs, seem basically acceptable to each
partner.” The growing dominance of Germany in the Eurozone suggests that it may meet
Cohen’s first characteristic. Yet, Germany would stabilize the Eurozone as long as it does not
shirk its growing responsibility for the euro’s future. This would require Germany to invest more
in upgrading Eurozone institutions and balancing its dominance gains with the economic and
political responsibilities that come with it.

2

Gourinchas and Jeanne (2006) found that the welfare gains in switching from financial autarky

to full capital mobility equal a paltry 1% increase in domestic consumption for the typical
emerging market. Aizenman, Pinto and Radziwill (2007) and Prasad, Rajan, and Subramanian
(2007) noted that fast growing developing countries have tended to self-finance their investment,
and run current account surpluses.
3

See Weber (2008) and Jonung and Drea (2010).

4

See Aizenman (2012) and for further discussion and references dealing with the evolutionary

approach of forming currency unions and new institutions.
3

Ironically, there are curious parallels between the global role of the U.S. since the end of
the Bretton Woods system and the role of Germany in the Eurozone. The presumption in the
1970s was that the demise of the Bretton Woods system would propagate a symmetric globalfinancial architecture, where major currencies would freely float against each other. Within two
decades, it became clear that in the post-Bretton Woods system, the U.S. had kept its hegemony.
The U.S. dollar has retained its position as the leading global currency, with the country enjoying
the exorbitant privilege of running current and growing account deficits supported by an
increasingly vibrant demand for U.S. government bonds by the foreign central banks, as well as
by the private sector in foreign countries [as “safe haven asset”]. The global financial crisis,
propagated globally from the U.S., induced a reluctant U.S. Treasury and Federal Reserve Board
(FED) to adopt unprecedented steps aiming at stabilizing the global economy.
In the same vein, the presumption was that forming the euro as “a currency without a
state” would provide a more symmetric structure to Europe and contain the fear of a German
hegemony. This supposition seemed to work in “good times”—the first decade of the euro. The
Eurozone crisis put an end to the euro honeymoon, bringing to the fore the key importance of
Germany’s economic and political decisions in determining the Eurozone’s viability and future.
The challenges associated with managing the growing fragility of the euro may induce a
reluctant Germany to face an upcoming stark tradeoff: the vibrant growth of Germany, while
running large current account surpluses under a pegged exchange rate with the other Eurozone
countries, may come to an abrupt end if the Eurozone unravels.
Germany has not yet been exposed to the full costs of the macro straightjacket associated
with the euro. The economic benefits of the Eurozone to Germany and GIIPS were initially
frontloaded. Arguably, the improving growth and current account surpluses of Germany during
the first decade of the euro were the outcome of earlier investing in structural reforms as well as
the euro’s growing credibility at the time. Being a member of the Eurozone mitigated Germany’s
real appreciation, in comparison with retaining the Deutsche Mark. For GIIPS, the availability of
cheap borrowing at a time of growing optimism about the euro supported growing current
account deficits; vibrant consumption and investment, which eventually contributed to
unsustainable growth and real estate booms.
Similar to the experience of emerging markets that liberalized financial systems in the
1990s under a fixed exchange rate, the increasing costs of the resultant balance-sheet exposures
4

were below the radar screens of markets and policy makers, until an abrupt stop, which was
followed by capital flight crises [Calvo (1998)]. This may reflect a fundamental problem with the
pricing of sovereign risk in which the private sector, as the “interest rate taker,” overlooks the
growing marginal impact of borrowing on sovereign risk [Aizenman (2004)]. This externality
also holds under a flexible exchange rate, but has probably been magnified by the economic
strength of the Eurozone core and by moral hazard—the presumption that the growing costs of
unwinding the euro will induce bailouts down the road. Chances are that the elusive “Great
Moderation” did not help by masking the growing tail risks in the OECD countries (Rajan
(2005)). The countries joining the Eurozone experienced two decades of growing optimism
associated with their deepening financial integration and convergence to low inflation before the
Eurozone version of the “capital flight” crisis hit.
The Eurozone crisis forced GIIPS to confront the costs of their excessive borrowing prior
to the crisis, as the crisis terminated the countries’ easy access to funding their current accounts
and addressing their growing fiscal deficits. In contrast, beyond the growing balance-sheet
exposure of its financial system, Germany has not yet been fully exposed to the downside risk of
higher unemployment and lower growth that has already hit most of the Eurozone countries [see
Fig. 4]. The resilience of the German economy probably reflects the advantage of running a
sizable current account surplus under a fixed exchange rate with its Eurozone counterparts; the
relative efficiency of the German labor market; and the country’s specialization in exporting
advanced manufacturing products and highly demanded capital goods. Germany’s resilience and
dominant size within the EU may explain its “muddling-through” approach towards the
Eurozone crisis. The muddling-through approach is akin to walking on a double-edged sword:
doing enough to prevent the unraveling of the Eurozone while resisting policies that may
mitigate the depth of the crisis if they involve short-run costs to Germany.
A manifestation of this approach is the revealed asymmetric bias of the European Central
Bank’s (ECB) inflation targeting. The short history of the ECB reveals a strong deflationary bias,
which probably reflects the well-known German aversion to moderate inflation. A hint of this
bias is provided in Issing’s (2006) opening statement: “Its internal stability is evidenced by the
fact that inflation has been steadily low from the very start, despite a sequence of negative price
shocks (in particular a continuous surge in oil prices).” A symmetric inflation targeting would
also require an aggressive expansionary-monetary policy in the presence of a sequence of
5

deflationary prices shocks, such as a sequence of lower prices of commodities, and other
deflationary developments that impact the Eurozone’s consumer price index (CPI).
So far, we have not seen the willingness of the ECB to follow symmetric inflation
targeting. Observers have noted that the ECB’s revealed inflation targeting is closer to targeting
Germany’s inflation rather than targeting inflation of the entire Eurozone. While this may not be
a surprise considering the bargaining clout of Germany, the resultant low Eurozone inflation—
approaching 0.5% as we speak—puts further drag on the adjustment of GIIPS. The net outcome
is the continuation of accelerated debt deflation, which pushes the Eurozone toward the Japanese
style of lost decades [see iMFdirect (2014)]. The risk of lost decades for the Eurozone is much
greater than the risks that faced Japan: low employment and growth in the Eurozone would
increase the strength of the “Anti-euro” camp, leading to deeper social and political instability
and threatening the survival of the Eurozone.5
Another manifestation of Germany’s muddling-through approach is the prevalent view
that its persistent current account surplus is a reflection of the country’s efficiency and is
irrelevant to the adjustment challenges facing the global economy, the Eurozone, and GIIPS.6
5

There are several key differences making lost decades much more destabilizing in the Eurozone

than in Japan. Unlike the Eurozone, Japan is a mature currency and fiscal union of its 47
prefectures, a country with large net foreign asset position, and overall homogenous population
and economic structure.
6

The debate about the merits of current account imbalance is as old as the debate about the

merits of financial integration. Supporters of current account surpluses tend to focus on
competitiveness as the key driver of surpluses, viewing it as a virtue [see Schäuble’s FT
September 16, 2013 column]. Opponents of current account surpluses focus on the truism that
current account surplus reflects the excess of saving over investment [see Wolf’s FT September
16, 2013 column]. On balance, this debate is less relevant at times of strong global growth, but
at times of global deflationary stance; the global adding up property, stating that sum of global
current accounts is zero, matters. It implies that current accounts of large countries matters in the
global distribution of employment and economic activities. The sheer size of Germany suggests
that its current account surpluses have a non-trivial effect on the Eurozone and the global
economy [see Fratzscher’s November 18, 2013 FT column]. At times of global deflationary
6

Ironically, Germany’s attitude toward the Eurozone resembles the attitude of the U.S. toward the
Bretton Woods system in the 1960s—benign neglect of the growing tensions, which led to the
ultimate demise of the Bretton Woods system:

“… the new (Nixon’s) government took no initiative to do anything about the monetary turmoil
as long as it did not see its domestic priorities endangered by the “market”. Frist, it tried to get
domestic inflation under control by tightening macroeconomic policies and cutting government
expenditure. When this policy failed and appeared to scare away voters, the government
undertook a series of expansionary steps which struck the fatal blow to the Bretton Woods
system.
… As a result of the policy of “benign neglect”, however, the US deficits rose out of all
proportion. When the dollar-holders desperately tried to cash in their reserves, Nixon acted in
August 1971, after years of precipitously increasing speculative crises, closed the gold window,
imposing a ten percent surtax on all imports.”
Zimmermann (2002), page 66.

Chances are that unraveling the Eurozone would be much more costly than the end of the
Bretton Woods regime [see Eichengreen (2013)].

Approaching the fifth year of the Eurozone crisis, one detects green shoots that, with
proper stewardship, may lead to the emergence of a more resilient and successful union. Recent
output projections suggest that the worst may be over for GIIPS and recovery may be around the
corner. Their primary fiscal deficits stopped have been drastically trimmed and are moving
toward surpluses. GIIPS are also gaining access to borrowing at declining sovereign spreads.
These developments may be the bonus of the “positive contagion” triggered by Draghi’s policy
stance. The challenges facing the ECB and Germany is to do what it takes to prevent a reversal
of these gains. The tentative recovery of GIIPS may be threatened if and when global interest

pressure, global employment is not a zero sum game -- higher investment and lower saving in
surplus countries would help in mitigating global protectionist threats and underemployment
pressures.
7

rates rise, or when the risk tolerance towards GIIPS debt deteriorates. The chance of pushing
these countries’ future to the wrong side of the debt Laffer curve would be mitigated by a greater
willingness for debt concessions tied to deeper structural reforms. The mixed messages from
Germany regarding its lackluster support of Draghi’s policies, including the country’s
constitutional court “thunderbolt” ruling in February, is the “elephant in the room,” raising
serious questions about the durability of any green shoots.
In the same vein, the Balkanization of the banking system induced by the Eurozone crisis
is also a double-edged sword. Rapid financial integration in the Eurozone prior to setting
efficient and prudent supervision helped contribute to over-borrowing by GIIPS. The challenge
facing the Eurozone financial system remains that of finding a healthy balance between banking
integration and prudent regulations. This challenge remains a work in progress in both the U.S.
and the Eurozone, and time will tell if GIIPS greater access to renewed borrowing will not
backfire.7 An underappreciated development has been the growing mobility of labor in the
Eurozone and in the rest of the EU.8 Although this mobility is mostly confined to younger
workers and immigrants, it facilitates easier adjustment and increases the flexibility of labor
7

The banking system of the US was ‘Balkanized’ during the three decades post WW II. While

this system came with its costs, the US grew at a healthy rate during that period. The
deregulation of the US banking system in the 1990s came with its short term benefits, and the
longer run costs. Chances are that the growth challenges of countries are less the balkanization
of their banking and financial systems, and more their structural distortions.
8

Jauer et al. (2014) reported “there is tentative evidence that the migration response to the crisis

has been considerable in Europe, in contrast to the United States where the crisis and subsequent
sluggish recovery were not accompanied by greater interregional labour mobility in reaction to
labour market shocks. Our estimates suggest that, if all measured population changes in Europe
were due to migration for employment purposes – i.e. an upper-bound estimate – up to about a
quarter of the asymmetric labour market shock would be absorbed by migration within a year.
However, in the Eurozone the reaction mainly stems from migration of third-country nationals.
Even within the group of Eurozone nationals, a significant part of the free mobility stems from
immigrants from third countries who have taken on the nationality of their Eurozone host
country.”
8

markets. Greater mobility of labor and lower mobility of under-regulated capital may be the
costly “second best” adjustment until the arrival of more mature institutions in the Eurozone.
The muddling through process may prove to be a stepping stone toward a more perfect euro
union. The challenges facing the Eurozone are not unforeseen or unprecedented. The history of
other unions provides examples where crises, with the proper leadership, created new institutions
and upgraded existing ones in ways that increased their resilience.9

9

This is in line with European Commission President Romano Prodi statement in 1999, “I am

sure the euro will oblige us to introduce a new set of economic policy instruments. It is
politically impossible to propose that now. But some day there will be a crisis and new
instruments will be created.”
9

References
Aizenman, J. (2004) “Financial Opening: Evidence and Policy Options,” Challenges to
Globalization (R. Baldwin and A. Winters, eds.), 2004, University of Chicago Press, pp.
473-498. http://www.nber.org/chapters/c9547.pdf .
Aizenman, J., B. Pinto, and A. Radziwill, (2007) “Sources for Financing Domestic Capital—Is
Foreign Saving a Viable Option for Developing Countries?” Journal of International
Money and Finance 26 (2007):682–702.
Aizenman, J. (2012) “The Euro and the Global Crises, Finding the Balance between Short-Term
Stabilization and Forward Looking Reforms.” Proceedings, European Monetary Union:
Lessons from the Debt Crisis, 40th Economics Conference, 2012. Bank of Austria:
Vienna, Austria, 10–11 May 2012, pp 111-120.
http://www.oenb.at/dms/oenb/Publikationen/Volkswirtschaft/Volkswirtschaftliche-Tagung/2012/Volkswirtschaftliche-Tagung2012/fullversion/vowitag_2012_tcm16-251965.pdf

Cohen, Benjamin, (1994), “Beyond EMU: The problem of sustainability”, in B. Eichengreen and
J. Frieden, eds., The Political Economy of European Monetary Unification, Westview,
Boulder.
Eichengreen, Barry. (2013) “Mother of all sudden stops” Voxeu14 September 2013.
http://www.voxeu.org/article/mother-all-sudden-stops

Fratzscher, Marcel (2013), “Investment, not the surplus, is Germany’s big problem,” Financial
Times, November 18, 2013.
iMFdirect (2014) Euro Area — “Deflation” Versus “Lowflation”, March 4, by Reza
Moghadam, Ranjit Teja, and Pelin Berkmen
Issing, Otmar (2006) “The euro – a currency without a state,” Helsinki, 24 March 2006.
http://www.bis.org/review/r060331e.pdf

Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier and Olivier Jeanne, (2006) “The Elusive Gains from International
Financial Integration,” Review of Economic Studies 73:715–41.
Jauer, Julia, Thomas Liebig, John P. Martin and Patrick Puhani, (2014) “Migration as an
adjustment mechanism in the crisis? A comparison of Europe and the United States,”
OECD Social, Employment and Migration Working Paper No 155.
Jonung, L. and O. Drea (2010). U.S. Economists on the EMU and the Euro. 1989–2002. In: Econ
Journal Watch 7(1) 4–52.
Prasad, Eswar S., Raghuram G. Rajan, and Arvind Subramanian, (2007) “Foreign Capital and
Economic Growth,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1:153–209.
Rajan R. (2005). Has Financial Development Made the World Riskier? Proceedings - Economic
Policy Symposium - Jackson Hole, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, issue Aug,
pages 313-369.
Schäuble, W. (2013) “Ignore the doomsayers: Europe is being fixed,” Financial Times,
September 16, 2013.
Zimmermann, Hubert (2002), page 66 “The fall of Bretton Woods and the emergence of the
Werner Plan,” in From the Werner Plan to the EMU: in search of a political economy for
Europe.- Bruxelles [u.a.]: PIE Lang, ISBN 9052019487 , p. 49-72.
Weber, Axel (2008) “The Eurosystem and its Prospects – History in the Making” Keynote
address, Frankfurt, 30 May 2008.
http://www.bundesbank.de/Redaktion/EN/Downloads/Press/Reden/2008/2008_05_30_weber_eurosystem-and-its-prospects-historyin-making.pdf?__blob=publicationFile

10

Figure 1

GIIPS and German Government Bond Rates [Source: European Central Bank, Bloomberg,
http://iuwest.wordpress.com/]

11

Figure 2

GIIPS and German current account/GDP [source: FT, Gavyn Davies]

12

-20

-20

-10

-10

0

0

10

10

Figure 3a: Eurozone - the association between current account surplus/GDP and Real GDP
growth, before and after 2009 10

-20

-10

0

-10

10

-5

0
cact_gdp [EIU]

cact_gdp [EIU]
GDP growth (annual %) [WDI]

GDP growth (annual %) [WDI]

Fitted values

2005-2009 Slope: -0.211, P-value: 0.005

5

10

Fitted values

2009-2013 Slope: 0.03, P-value: 0.8

-20

-20

-10

-10

0

0

10

10

20

30

20

Figure 3b: Emerging Markets - the association between current account surplus/GDP and Real
GDP growth

-20

0

20

-20

40

cact_gdp [EIU]
GDP growth (annual %) [WDI]

-10

0

10
cact_gdp [EIU]

GDP growth (annual %) [WDI]

Fitted values

2005-2009 Slope: 0.06, P-value: 0.18

20

30

Fitted values

2009-2013 Slope: 0.15, P-value: 0.01

10

Source: Aizenman and Koo (2014), in progress. Data Sources WDI, IFS and EIU
Emerging Markets: Emerging markets categorized by Dow Jones (as of 2013) plus markets
categorized by Prasad (2014, countries that meet the cut off of annual per capita income of
$16,000 in 2012)
Argentina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Chile, China, Colombia, Czech Republic, Egypt, Greece, Hungary,
India, Indonesia, Jordan, Kazhkstan, Kenya, Latvia, Lithuania, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco,
Nigeria, Pakistan, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Quatar, Romania, Russia, Saudi Arabia, South
Africa, South Korea, Taiwan, Thailand, Turkey, UAE, Ukraine
13

8.0
6.0
4.0

Spain
Portugal

2.0

Italy
Ireland

0.0
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
‐2.0

Greece
France
Germany

‐4.0
‐6.0
‐8.0

Figure 4: Real GDP, percentage change from previous year, 2001-2014
Germany, France, and the GIIPS [Source: OECD]

14

