                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 MEASURING THE RISK-RETURN TRADEOFF WITH TIME-VARYING CONDITIONAL
                           COVARIANCES

                                          Esben Hedegaard
                                          Robert J. Hodrick

                                        Working Paper 20245
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20245


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2014




We thank Andrew Ang, Turan Bali, Jules van Binsbergen, Oliver Boguth, and Xiaoyan Zhang for
useful comments and discussions. This research was supported by a grant from the Network for Study
on Pensions, Aging, and Retirement to the Columbia Business School. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Esben Hedegaard and Robert J. Hodrick. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Measuring the Risk-Return Tradeoff with Time-Varying Conditional Covariances
Esben Hedegaard and Robert J. Hodrick
NBER Working Paper No. 20245
June 2014
JEL No. G12

                                            ABSTRACT

We examine the prediction of Merton’s intertemporal CAPM that time varying risk premiums arise
from the conditional covariances of returns on assets with the return on the market and other state
variables. We find a positive and significant price of risk for the covariance with the market return
that is driven by the time series variation in the conditional covariances, and the risk-premium on the
market remains positive and significant after controlling for additional state variables. Our method
estimates the risk-return tradeoff in the ICAPM using multiple portfolios as test assets.


Esben Hedegaard
W. P. Carey School of Business
Arizona State University
400 E. Lemon Street, BAC 518
Tempe, AZ 85287-3906
esben.hedegaard@stern.nyu.edu

Robert J. Hodrick
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
3022 Broadway
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
rh169@columbia.edu




An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w20245
   The paper develops a multistep estimation procedure to investigate versions of Merton’s
(1973) intertemporal capital asset pricing model (ICAPM). The ﬁrst step estimates the
conditional covariances of asset returns with the risk factors using Engle’s (2002) dynamic
conditional correlation (DCC) model, and the second step estimates the prices of risks in a

panel regression. Simulations demonstrate that the estimation method produces unbiased
estimates in situations with up to 100 test assets. The results are robust to using diﬀerent
portfolios as test assets as well as to including state variables in addition to the market
return. We invariably ﬁnd that the conditional covariance of an asset’s return with the
market return is a priced risk. When including additional state variables in the analysis we

ﬁnd that the covariance of asset returns with the bond yield does not have a signiﬁcant price
of risk, but we ﬁnd that the covariance of returns with the return on the HML portfolio of
Fama and French (1992) does have a signiﬁcant price of risk. Surprisingly, the signiﬁcant
results on the risk-return tradeoﬀ relative to using only the market return as a test asset

are not caused by an increase in statistical power from using the cross section of returns,
but rather from a change in the point estimates. The results provide support for Merton’s
(1973) ICAPM and show that a risk-return tradeoﬀ exists in the time series.
   Merton’s (1973) ICAPM states that the conditional expected return on any asset is

proportional to its conditional covariance with the return on the market, as well as to its
conditional covariances with state variables that describe future investment opportunities.
The coeﬃcient linking the expected return on an asset to the conditional covariance of the
asset’s return with the return on the market is the relative risk aversion of a representative
investor, and the prices of the risks induced by the conditional covariances of returns with

state variables are determined, as Merton (1973) states, by investors’ desires to hedge against
unfavorable shifts in the investment opportunity set, that is, by what Cochrane (2014) calls
investors’ state-variable aversion. An immediate implication of the ICAPM is that the
conditional expected return on the market is proportional to the conditional variance of


                                              2
the market, and to the covariances of the market return with innovations in state variables.
Many existing studies focus on the implication for the expected return on the market and test
the ICAPM by estimating the relation between the return on the market and the conditional
variance of the market. These studies ﬁnd mixed evidence on the relation between risk and

expected return.1
       A time-series relation between conditional measures of risk and conditional expected
returns should be present both for the market return, as well as for individual assets or
portfolios of assets. The expected return of any asset should vary through time proportionally
to the asset’s conditional covariances with the market return and with state variables, and

the same coeﬃcients should describe this relation for all assets.
       When we use the market return as the only test asset, we ﬁnd only a marginally signif-
icant estimate of the risk-return tradeoﬀ, which conﬁrms the ﬁndings in previous studies.
However, when we include additional test assets as well as the market, we consistently ﬁnd

positive, statistically signiﬁcant estimates of the risk-return tradeoﬀ. These estimates in-
dicate strong evidence of a time-series relation between the conditional covariances of the
returns on portfolios with the market return and the conditional expected returns on the
portfolios. The results are generally robust to using diﬀerent test assets, as well as to the

inclusion of additional state variables.
       We demonstrate that our multi-asset estimator is a weighted average of the individual
estimates one would obtain by estimating the risk-return relation using individual portfolios.
When estimating the risk-return relation using the Fama and French (1992) 25 size and book-
to-market portfolios one-by-one, we ﬁnd that most of the estimates for the four smallest size

quintiles are positive and signiﬁcant, and most are larger than the estimate based on the
market return only. Thus, the result that the multi-asset estimate is positive and signiﬁcant
   1
    Lettau and Ludvigson (2010) provide a review of the literature on the risk-return tradeoﬀ. See Hedegaard
and Hodrick (2014) for recent estimates.




                                                     3
is not simply driven by small stocks, but it arises from the fact that there is a positive
risk-return relation for a variety of portfolios.
       In the ICAPM, investors not only care about their level of wealth, but also about the
distribution of future returns. As a result, the risk of an asset is measured not only by the

covariance of the asset’s return with the return on wealth, but also by the asset’s covariances
with state variables containing information about future investment opportunities. Merton
(1973) suggests that the risk free interest rate is one such state variable to which investors
would desire to hedge against its unanticipated adverse changes. Scruggs (1998) was the ﬁrst
to include the return on a long-term Treasury bond as an additional state variable noting

that in his sample its omission induces a negative bias in the estimate of the price of risk
associated with the return on the market. When including this second state variable, he
ﬁnds a positive and signiﬁcant price of risk for the return on the market, and a negative
and signiﬁcant price of risk for the return on the long-term bond. While we are able to

replicate his parameter estimates, we ﬁnd larger standard errors in his sample implying that
the estimates are less signiﬁcant. Furthermore, including the next 15 years of data results in
estimates that are much closer to zero and no longer at all signiﬁcant, a ﬁnding supportive of
the conclusions in Scruggs and Glabadanidis (2003). Nevertheless, the conditional covariance

of the return on an asset with the return on the market remains a signiﬁcantly priced risk
factor.2
       In factor models, often the factors are thought of as mimicking portfolios for unobserved
state variables. For instance, Fama and French (1992) suggest that the HML and SMB
portfolios are mimicking portfolios for underlying common risk factors in returns. Despite the

success of factor models in explaining the cross-sectional variation in returns in unconditional
   2
     Guo and Whitelaw (2006) also stress that estimating the risk-return tradeoﬀ of the market return with
its conditional variance requires controlling for the eﬀects of additional state variables. However, they do
not attempt to measure the conditional covariances of returns with their state variables. They merely argue
that the conditional covariances are proportional to a linear prediction based on the state variables.




                                                     4
frameworks, there has so far been little evidence that these factors are helpful in explaining
the time-series variation in expected returns. We include the Fama-French factors as state
variables and examine their ability to explain the time-series variation in returns. We ﬁnd
that controlling for the conditional covariation with the market return drives out the size-

eﬀect. This conﬁrms the results in Lewellen and Nagel (2006), who use a diﬀerent estimation
procedure and arrive at the same conclusion. On the other hand, the HML portfolio carries
a positive and signiﬁcant price of risk in the time series. This provides support for the idea
that the HML portfolio acts as a mimicking portfolio for some underlying state variables.
   Two studies of the ICAPM that ﬁnd strongly supportive time series results are Bali

(2008) and Bali and Engle (2010). Both of these papers test the ICAPM using multiple
assets, but unfortunately they report incorrect severely understated standard errors. Af-
ter estimating the conditional covariances, Bali (2008) and Bali and Engle (2010) use a
traditional Seemingly Unrelated Regression (SUR) approach to estimate the coeﬃcient of

relative risk aversion. As we discuss in Section 2.1, the SUR estimation minimizes the pricing
errors on transformed portfolios which may not have any economic relevance. More impor-
tantly, Bali (2008) and Bali and Engle (2010) employ the usual SUR standard errors that do
not account for the conditional heteroskedasticity of the error terms and that consequently

severely understate the true standard errors and overstate the t-statistics. When we develop
heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors, the resulting t-statistics are on average four
times smaller than the ones reported in Bali and Engle (2010) causing the parameter esti-
mates generally to become statistically insigniﬁcant. We demonstrate that while there is no
evidence of a risk-return relation in daily data, which is the investment horizon used in Bali

and Engle (2010), there is strong evidence of a risk-return tradeoﬀ for longer horizons of one
to three months. We demonstrate these horizon eﬀects using the overlapping data inference
approach of Hedegaard and Hodrick (2014).
   The organization of the paper is as follows. Section 1 lays out the asset pricing frame-


                                              5
work. Section 2 presents our estimation method which ﬁrst estimates DCC models and then
uses one of several diﬀerent methods to estimate the model subject to the cross-equation
restrictions of the theory. Section 3 describes the data. Section 4 discusses the results of
the estimation when the return on the market is the only state variable. Section 5 includes

additional state variables such as the yield on long-term bonds and the Fama-French factors.
Section 6 relates our ﬁndings to the existing literature. In particular, we replicate the results
in Bali and Engle (2010), and we provide both corrected t-statistics as well as estimates
using the methodology of Section 2. We also update the results in Scruggs (1998). Section 7
concludes.



1       The Asset Pricing Model

Merton (1973) derives the ICAPM by analyzing the optimal portfolio choice of an individual
investor, aggregating across investors, and imposing equilibrium. He derives an expression
that the conditional expected return on any asset i must satisfy

                                                       
                                                       K
  Et (Ri,t+1 ) − RF,t = γM covt (Ri,t+1 , RM,t+1 ) +         γk covt (Ri,t+1 , Sk,t+1 ),   i = 1, . . . , N (1)
                                                       k=2


where RF,t is the risk free return, RM,t+1 is the return on the market, S2 , . . . , SK denote
K − 1 state variables that contain information about future investment opportunities, and
covt denotes the conditional covariance operator. Merton shows that the coeﬃcient γM is the
relative risk aversion of a representative agent, and similarly, the γk coeﬃcients are weighted

averages across investors of their state-variable aversions. Thus, the sign and magnitude
of the γk s are determined by the curvature of the investors’ value functions.3 Aggregating
    3
    We treat the prices of risk, the γk ’s, as constants. Maio and Santa-Clara (2012) argue incorrectly
that in this case one can condition down such that equation (3) holds with the unconditional expectation
on the left-hand side with unconditional covariances on the right-hand side. This is incorrect because
the unconditional expectation of a conditional covariance equals the unconditional covariance minus the



                                                   6
across assets implies that the conditional expected return on the market is given by

                                                              
                                                              K
                Et (RM,t+1 ) − RF,t = γM Vt (RM,t+1 ) +              γk covt (RM,t+1 , Sk,t+1 ).         (2)
                                                               k=2


where Vt (RM,t+1 ) is the conditional variance of the market return.                   If there are no state

variables (or, if the sensitivity of the representative investor’s value function with respect to
the state variables is small, or the variation in the state variables is very small), the model
simpliﬁes to the conditional CAPM in which Et (RM,t+1 ) − RF,t = γM Vt (RM,t+1 ).
    As noted in the introduction, many existing studies of the ICAPM focus on equation (2),

whereas we include multiple test-assets while also including the market return and focus on
equation (1). We simplify notation by letting the ﬁrst state variable be the return on the
market, such that S1,t+1 = RM,t+1 and γ1 = γM , in which case we can write equation (1) as

                                          
                                          K
                  Et (Ri,t+1 ) − RF,t =         γk covt (Ri,t+1 , Sk,t+1 ) ,    i = 1, ..., N.           (3)
                                          k=1


    To represent the model in econometric form, compile the prices of risks into the vector
γ = (γ1 , ..., γK ) ; let S t+1 = (S1,t+1 , . . . , SK,t+1 ) be the vector of state variables; let Rt+1 =

(R1,t+1 − RF,t , . . . , RN,t+1 − RF,t ) be the vector of excess returns on the test assets; and
                           
let Z t+1 = S t+1 , Rt+1 be the (K + N)−dimensional vector of state variables and returns.
Because some state variables may also be returns, we interpret the notation ﬂexibly so as not
to double count these returns, and we make the appropriate adjustments to the dimension

of Z t+1 . Let H t denote the conditional covariance matrix of Z t+1 .4 We use the notation
H N K,t to denote the lower left (N × K)-block of H t containing the conditional covariances
unconditional covariance of the conditional means. Since the conditional means vary through time with the
conditional variance, equation (3) does not condition down. This point was ﬁrst made by Grant (1977) and
was expanded upon by Jagannathan and Wang (1996), Lewellen and Nagel (2006), and Boguth, Carlson,
Fisher, and Simutin (2011).
    4
      We denote conditional moments of random variables that will be realized at time t + 1 with a subscript
t to indicate when they enter the information set.



                                                       7
of Rt+1 with the state variables S t+1 . We can now write the asset pricing model as


                  Rt+1 = μ + H N K,tγ + εt+1 ,     Et (εt+1 ) = 0N , Vt (εt+1 ) = H N N,t             (4)


where we have introduced a vector of asset speciﬁc constants, μ, and the vector of innovations
in returns, εt+1 . The innovations have mean zero and covariance matrix H N N,t which is the
lower right (N × N)-block of H t . We do not assume conditional normality.

        We want to test the time series prediction that higher systematic risk at a point in
time as given by larger conditional covariances requires the conditional risk premium to be
higher. We test this time series prediction by examining constrained regressions of returns
on risks, which are measured as the covariances of the returns with the market return and
with additional state variables.



2         Estimation

2.1        Estimating the Model

In this section we ﬁrst discuss alternative ways to estimate the system (4) under the assump-

tion that the conditional covariance matrices are known. We then turn to the estimation
of the conditional covariance matrix process in Section 2.3 below. We use a sequential es-
timation approach in which we ﬁrst estimate the conditional covariances, and then, taking
these as given, we estimate the fundamental parameters of the model. We demonstrate

below through simulations that the estimates of the fundamental parameters in the second
step are unbiased and that their standard errors are correctly estimated, even though the
conditional covariances are estimated in a ﬁrst step and then treated as known.5
    5
    Cochrane (2005) credits Shanken (1992) with deriving correct standard errors in the i.i.d. environment
of unconditional beta models. In discussing the need for such corrections in an analogous GMM setting,
Cochrane (2005, p. 258) notes, “In my experience so far with this method, the correction for the fact that



                                                    8
    To simplify notation, deﬁne

                                                                   
                                          X t = I N | H N K,t                                               (5)


and δ ≡ (μ , γ  ) . Then, the system (4) can be written as


                                            Rt+1 = X t δ + εt+1 .                                           (6)


There are several ways of estimating the parameters of this system of equations.
    Each of the methods we consider can be thought of as minimizing the sum of quadratic

forms in the pricing errors

                                 
                                 T
                                       (Rt+1 − X t δ) W −1
                                                         t (Rt+1 − X t δ)                                   (7)
                                 t=1


for some weighting matrices, W t , which are in the time-t information set. By setting W t =
I N , we obtain the constrained OLS estimator.

    We explore three other choices of W t . First, if we set W t = H N N,t , we obtain the
conditional generalized least squares (CGLS) estimator, which is equivalent to maximum
likelihood under the assumption of conditional normality for this part of the model. This
estimation method is eﬃcient, but it is likely less robust than OLS. Second, we scale the
time-t observations by their conditional standard deviations, but we do not account for the

correlations of the innovations. That is, we set W t = diag(h1,t , . . . , hN,t ), where hi,t is the
conditional variance of Ri,t+1 . The advantage of this approach is that it scales the time-t
observations by their conditional standard deviations to avoid the results being driven by
large returns in periods with high volatility. At the same time, by not scaling the system
Ef is estimated is very small in practice, so that little damage is done in ignoring it (as is the case with the
Shanken correction).” Newey and McFadden (1994) discuss how to derive corrections to the standard errors
resulting from ﬁrst stage estimation, but such analysis is quite diﬃcult in our application.



                                                       9
by the inverse of the full conditional covariance matrix, we maintain a robust estimation
procedure. Finally, we estimate the parameters of the system using SUR, which corresponds
to W t = Σ, where Σ is the estimated unconditional covariance matrix of the innovations,
but we do not use the traditional SUR standard errors.

   In each case, the ﬁrst order conditions of the minimization are considered to be orthog-
onality conditions of Hansen’s (1982) GMM method, and we construct the standard errors
appropriately with GMM allowing for the conditional heteroskedasticity and cross-correlation
of the residuals. We derive explicit expressions for μ̂ and γ̂ as well as the GMM estimates
of their standard errors in Appendix A.

   When reporting our results below, we primarily focus on the constrained OLS estimation.
We examine all estimation procedures in more detail using simulations, and we discuss the
results of the alternative estimation procedures in sections 4.4 and 4.5.


2.2    On the Importance of Including a Constant

Before discussing the estimation of the conditional covariance matrices, we brieﬂy discuss

the speciﬁcation of the model. Scruggs (1998) and Nyberg (2012) estimate models such as
equation (4) with and without constant terms in the conditional means of the asset returns
ﬁnding that the estimated prices of risks in their models are much more signiﬁcant when the
models are estimated without constants. Lanne and Saikkonen (2006) explicitly advocate

estimating asset pricing models without constants to impose the null hypothesis. Scruggs
(1998, p. 589) cautions that estimating without a constant can lead to “misleading estimates”
of the prices of risks because the market excess return is positive on average and the variance
of the market return is positive by construction.

   In Hedegaard and Hodrick (2014) we demonstrate the importance of including a constant
in the maximum likelihood estimation of the single factor conditional CAPM when the only
asset in the estimation is the market return. In that framework, if a constant is not included

                                              10
in the conditional mean, the estimate of γM is merely the average return on the market
divided by the average conditional variance of the market, which does not examine the
time series prediction of the conditional CAPM that the conditional expected return on the
market moves simultaneously with the conditional variance of the market return.

   Appendix A demonstrates an analogous point in the context of multivariate conditional
asset pricing models. Including constant terms in the conditional means of the returns is
necessary to allow for a test of the time series prediction of the model that the conditional
expected returns vary contemporaneously with the conditional covariances of the returns
with the risk factors. If asset-speciﬁc constants are not included in the estimation, the

constrained OLS estimator of γ̂ is

                                                         −1
                                    1                         1 
                                       T                           T
                         γ̂ =            H      H N K,t              H      Rt+1 .             (8)
                                    T t=1 N K,t                 T t=1 N K,t

Notice that this estimator of γ does not test the prediction of the theory that the conditional
expected returns move with the conditional covariances of the returns with the risk factors.
Equation (8) is the multivariate analogue to the ﬁndings of Hedegaard and Hodrick (2014)
for the single factor conditional CAPM. Consider the case of the conditional CAPM, in

which the market is the only state variable. Since the covariances of the test-assets with
the market are generally positive, and average returns on the test-assets are positive, the
estimator mechanically produces a positive and signiﬁcant estimate of γM .
   On the other hand, when asset-speciﬁc constants are included, the constrained OLS

estimator of γ is

                                                      −1                                
                   1                                          1 
                      T                                            T
                                                                                      
        γ̂ =             H N K,t H N K,t − H N K,t                   H        Rt+1 − Rt+1 ,    (9)
                   T t=1                                        T t=1 N K,t


where X t denotes the time series average of the matrix process X t . Consider again the


                                                    11
case of the conditional CAPM. Now, since the returns are demeaned in the second term,
the estimator of γM is only positive when the sample covariance between the conditional
covariance with the market and future returns on the test-assets is positive. In this sense,
the signiﬁcance of γ̂ arises purely from the time series predictability of returns. These results

are, of course, merely a reinterpretation of the standard results for the intercept and slope
in a linear time series regression.


2.3       Multivariate GARCH Models

The challenges in conditional multivariate asset pricing are estimating the conditional covari-
ances between the returns and the risk factors and linking these covariances to the conditional

means of the asset returns. Bollerslev, Engle, and Wooldridge (1988) were the ﬁrst to use
a multivariate generalized autoregressive conditional heteroskedasticity (GARCH) model to
estimate conditional second moments and link them simultaneously to conditional ﬁrst mo-
ments.6 One can think of this approach as adding simultaneous estimation of the conditional
second moments to the GMM system of equations of the previous section. Unfortunately,

this simultaneous estimation approach is computationally diﬃcult and is tractable only for
a small number of returns. It quickly becomes intractable when the cross section of returns
is expanded.
       To examine the time series predictions of conditional asset pricing models for multiple

assets, one must estimate the conditional covariance matrices, H t , of both the state variables
and returns. Here we explore the dynamic conditional correlation (DCC) model of Engle
(2002).7 Under the null hypothesis in which the returns are not predictable but have constant
   6
     Garch-in-Mean models with multiple assets have also been used by Ng (1991) and DeSantis and Gerard
(1997, 1998). Ng (1991) uses decile portfolios ranked on either size or beta to test the conditional CAPM.
DeSantis and Gerard (1997, 1998) use currency portfolios as additional sources of risks that must also be
simultaneously priced.
   7
     We also examined the constant conditional correlation (CCC) model of Bollerslev (1990), which is used
by Ng (1991). Because the results are similar, we only report the results of the DCC models. Other
approaches, such as mixed data sampling (MIDAS) could also be used. See Hedegaard and Hodrick (2014)


                                                   12
means with conditionally heteroskedastic innovations, we can write the mean equations and
the traditional GARCH (1,1) models for each return as follows (similarly for the K state
variables):


                              Ri,t+1 = α0i + εi,t+1 ,      εi,t+1 ∼ N(0, hi,t )               (10)

                               hi,t+1 = ωi + αi ε2i,t+1 + δi hi,t .                           (11)


   As in Engle (2002), we model H t as


                                             H t = DtP tDt                                    (12)


                     1/2         1/2
where D t = diag(h1t , . . . , hN t ) and P t = [ρij,t ] represent positive deﬁnite correlation ma-
trices with ρii,t = 1 on the diagonal. We assume that

                                                         qij,t
                                            ρij,t = √               ,                         (13)
                                                        qii,t qjj,t

and that the matrix process Qt = [qij,t ] follows


                           Qt+1 = S(1 − a1 − a2 ) + a1 (ut+1 ut+1 ) + a2 Qt                  (14)


where S is the unconditional correlation matrix, the standardized innovations are ut+1 =

D −1
  t εt+1 , and a1 and a2 are scalar parameters that describe the persistence of the correla-

tions. We use maximum likelihood to estimate the parameters of the DCC model and the
conditional covariances as described in the Appendix.
   Of course, under the alternative hypothesis, the conditional means of the returns depend

on the conditional covariances of the returns with the risk factors, and the likelihood function
for a comparison of GARCH and MIDAS approaches to estimating the risk-return tradeoﬀ in the single
equation case when the market return is the only priced asset.


                                                     13
does not separate into GARCH and correlation parts as demonstrated in the Appendix.
Estimating under this hypothesis leads to the curse of dimensionality. Rather than doing
everything simultaneously, we perform a four-step estimation as follows:

   i. Estimate GARCH(1,1) models for the conditional variances of the individual asset

      returns, including the market, as well as the state variables. For each process, we
      estimate the model in equations (10)-(11).

  ii. Estimate the DCC model for the correlation matrix process for all assets and state
      variables, using the standardized residuals from step one.

  iii. Compute the conditional covariance matrix process using the conditional variances
      from step one and the conditional correlation matrix from step two.

  iv. Estimate the risk-return parameters in the constrained system (4).

   We use simulations to demonstrate that the multistep estimation produces well-behaved
point estimates and t-statistics. Intuitively, if the time variation in expected returns is small
relative to the innovation variance, the error in estimating the conditional covariances is
small when the conditional mean is assumed to be constant.


2.4    ODIN Estimation

In addition to the basic parameter estimates and standard errors described above that are
derived for non-overlapping monthly data, for the actual estimation we also report param-
eter estimates and standard errors calculated with overlapping data inference (ODIN) as
in Hedegaard and Hodrick (2014). The ODIN methodology allows the econometrician to
use all of the available daily data, even when the forecast horizon is set to an arbitrarily

longer interval. Theoretical models are essentially silent on the period of time over which
the predictions of the model are thought to hold, and Merton (1980, p. 336) suggested that

                                               14
a one month interval is “not an unreasonable choice” in statistical analyses of the risk-return
tradeoﬀ.
   Given that the forecast horizon is monthly, though, there is no reason why the returns
must be sampled as calendar months. Indeed, with a monthly forecast interval, the ﬁrst

sampling day could be chosen to be any of the (on average) 22 trading days in the month.
Consider a forecast interval F , where F equals 5 for weekly data, 22 for monthly data, or 66
for quarterly data. The ODIN parameter estimate is derived by maximizing the average of
the F non-overlapping MLE equations for each of the F possible sampling days. As a result,
the ODIN estimation uses all of the available daily data, for any given forecast horizon.

   In this application, we ﬁrst estimate the DCC model using ODIN. For, say, a 22 day
forecast interval, we calculate 22 day returns for all assets for the 22 diﬀerent possible starting
dates. To estimate the DCC model, we maximize the sum of the 22 individual likelihoods
for the 22 diﬀerent models, resulting in one set of GARCH parameters for each return

process, and one set of DCC parameters. Using the estimated parameters, we calculate the
22-day-ahead conditional covariance matrix of the returns, for each day.
   Finally, we use overlapping constrained regressions to estimate the risk-return tradeoﬀ.
We regress 22-day-ahead returns on the conditional covariances, for each day in our sam-

ple. The standard errors are then corrected for the overlap in the forecasts, as in Hansen
and Hodrick’s (1980) application of Hansen’s (1982) GMM, but allowing for conditionally
heteroskedastic errors in the estimator of the spectral density matrix. The simulations in
Hedegaard and Hodrick (2014) suggest that the standard errors from this strategy are well
behaved in sample sizes such as ours and are generally smaller than the standard errors

from any particular non-overlapping sample. Using ODIN also forces the econometrician to
consider all F parameter estimates than arise from diﬀerent sampling dates, and as in Hede-
gaard and Hodrick (2014), we demonstrate in Section 4 that the non-overlapping estimates
vary greatly with changes in the sampling start date.


                                                15
3     Data

We begin by estimating the conditional CAPM in which case the market return is the only
risk factor. For the market portfolio, we use the value-weighted return on the CRSP market
portfolio. When estimating the model, we always include the market return as well as one
of the following ﬁve additional data sets: i) six size and book-to-market sorted portfolios,
ii) size sorted decile portfolios, iii) book-to-market sorted decile portfolios, iv) 25 size and

book-to-market sorted portfolios, v) 100 size and book-to-market sorted portfolios, and vi)
10 market beta sorted portfolios. We obtain the beta-sorted portfolios from CRSP and the
remaining data from Ken French’s web site. In all cases, we use excess returns that are
constructed as the diﬀerence of the raw returns and the one-month risk-free rate. Including

the market return does not induce a redundant set of orthogonality conditions, which would
induce singularity into the covariance matrix, because the market is value weighted, and the
weights on the portfolios vary over time.
    For our ﬁrst multi-factor model, we use the yield on the 10-year Treasury bond from the

Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis as an additional state variable. Since monthly observations
on the yield are available from February 1954 to December 2012 we limit all of our samples
to these 707 monthly observations, and in our simulations we consequently use this same
number of observations. For daily data, the 10-year Treasury yields are available from
January 1962 to December 2012.

    The next multi-factor model is the conditional Fama and French (1992) model in which
we examine whether the HML and SMB portfolios are mimicking portfolios for underlying
common risk factors in returns that can explain the time-series variation in returns. The
HML and SMB series are also taken from Ken French’s web site. Bali and Engle (2010) also

include conditional covariances with a number of other potential risk factors like the change
in the fed funds rate, the term premium, the default spread, and stock market volatility, and



                                              16
we discuss their data sources in Section 6.1.



4         The Market as the only State-Variable

Table 1 presents the estimation results with monthly returns, reporting results both for the
standard non-overlapping estimation from calendar months and for the ODIN estimation
based on constrained OLS estimation of the system of equations. We report asymptotic and
bootstrap standard errors and p-values, where the bootstrapped values are based on 1,000

simulations.
        The estimation with the market return as the only test asset produces a positive point
estimate of the risk-return tradeoﬀ of 3.61 with a standard error of 2.14 and a p-value
of .09 indicating only marginal signiﬁcance of the parameter estimate. As noted in the

introduction, previous papers have generally reported relatively insigniﬁcant estimates of
γM using the market as the only test asset. One of our main results is that when adding
additional test assets, the parameter estimates of γM become more signiﬁcant as the p-values
fall to between .01 and .04 (except when using the 10 book-to-market portfolios in which
case the p- value is .08).8

                                          [Table 1 about here.]

        These estimates use the traditional, non-overlapping, calendar monthly returns. However,
the estimates are very sensitive to the day of the month on which returns are sampled. If
we instead use a ﬁxed 22-day forecast interval and consider the various estimates that are

obtained from the 22 diﬀerent possible starting dates using the return on the market as the
only test-asset, we ﬁnd that the point estimates of γM vary from 0.97 to 3.71. Thus, the
reported estimate of 3.61 in Table 1 is in the upper range of the diﬀerent monthly estimates.
    8
     This discussion uses covariances based on a DCC model estimated to all assets. We also estimate bivariate
DCC models of each test-asset and the market, which allows the mean-reversion dynamics to depend on the
test-asset. This only leads to minor diﬀerences as the point estimates of γ change by less than 0.05.


                                                     17
   When we use the 25 size and book-to-market sorted portfolios as test assets, the various
non-overlapping estimates of γM range from 1.54 to 4.64. The calendar month estimate
of 4.74 reported in Table 1 falls outside this range since all months do not have the same
number of trading days, such that the standard monthly returns do not correspond to a ﬁxed

22 day forecast interval for any starting date. In general, the estimates based on the usual
non-overlapping calendar monthly sampling are at the upper range of the diﬀerent estimates
obtained from varying the sampling start date. Due to the sensitivity of the estimates to the
sampling start date, we also consider the ODIN estimation, in which we maximize the sum of
the 22 likelihood functions associated with the 22 diﬀerent possible starting datesassociated

with the 22 diﬀerent possible starting datesassociated with the 22 diﬀerent possible starting
dates to derive the parameters of the DCC model and the conditional covariances and then
minimize the sum of the 22 constrained OLS objective functions to estimated the price of
market risk.

   The ODIN estimates are all positive, but they are less signiﬁcant than their non-overlapping
counterparts. The standard errors for the ODIN model are always smaller than the stan-
dard errors for the non-overlapping estimations, illustrating the increased precision that the
ODIN estimation oﬀers. However, the point estimates are also smaller in magnitude because

ODIN average across all the starting dates, and it is the diﬀerences across the starting dates
that results in less signiﬁcant estimates. The ODIN estimates of γM are signiﬁcant at the
10% level for 5 portfolios, while the estimate of γM is signiﬁcant at the 1% level for the 10
beta-sorted portfolios. Overall, the evidence in favor of a risk-return tradeoﬀ at the 1-month
horizon remains relatively weak, but as we demonstrate below, it becomes very strong at the

2-month to 3-month horizon.




                                             18
4.1    Cross-Sectional Implications

We also examine the cross-sectional implications of the model by testing the hypothesis that
all intercepts jointly equal zero, using a Wald test. The model is generally rejected when

including multiple test assets.
   Nevertheless, although the model is rejected, the conditional CAPM explains a large part
of the time-series variation in returns. To demonstrate the partial success of the model, we
focus on the market portfolio and the 25 size and book-to-market sorted portfolios as test

assets. The top plot in Figure 1 shows the average returns on each of the 26 test assets
along with two standard deviation intervals. These are the pricing errors under the null
hypothesis of γM = 0, that is, the pricing errors that would arise if there were no risk-return
relationship and the estimated value of γM were zero. The standard deviations are based on

average returns, and the standard deviations would be larger if γM were estimated. The usual
patterns in average returns across size and book-to-market are clearly visible—on average,
value stocks outperform growth stocks, and small stocks outperform large stocks.
   The bottom plot in Figure 1 shows the constants from the estimated model with their
two standard deviation intervals. Although the usual patterns across book-to-market are

still clearly visible, the conditional CAPM explains the average returns across portfolios
very well. The conditional model overadjusts the expected returns for low book-to-market
stocks as the constant terms are negative.
   Note that the constants are parameters of the model that are not directly minimized by

the estimation. As in any time series regression, the constants pick up the average of the
dependent variable minus the slope coeﬃcient times the average of the regressor. Nothing in
the model or the estimation procedure makes the constants close to zero. If there were no risk-
return tradeoﬀ in the time series, the estimated value of γM would be zero and the constants

would equal the average returns in the top plot. In particular, even if there were a cross-
sectional relation between average returns on portfolios and the portfolios’ unconditional

                                              19
covariance with the market, but no time-series relation, the estimated γM would be zero,
and the constants would pick up the average returns on the diﬀerent portfolios. The estimate
of γM will only be non-zero if a time series relation exists between the future returns on the
portfolios and their conditional covariances with the market. In this sense, the conditional

CAPM is a success.
      While the conditional CAPM is useful in explaining the average time series variation in
returns, it clearly fails to explain the time-series and cross-sectional variation jointly. As
noted above, the bottom plot in Figure 1 shows the usual patterns across book-to-market
sorted portfolios. This ﬁnding is similar to the results in Lewellen and Nagel (2006), who

ﬁnd that the conditional CAPM captures the variation in size-portfolios, but that it does
not explain the variation in book-to-market sorted portfolios. We thus agree with Lewellen
and Nagel (2006) that the conditional CAPM does not fully explain asset pricing anomalies.


                                            [Figure 1 about here.]


4.2       Alternative Horizons

To explore if the risk-return relationship of the conditional CAPM is present at alternative
horizons, we vary the forecast interval from 1 to 60 days and estimate the model based
on the 25 size and book-to-market sorted portfolios.9 Figure 2 shows the point estimates
of γM as a function of the forecast interval, along with a band indicating plus and minus

two standard deviations. The estimated risk-return tradeoﬀ increases as a function of the
forecast interval, up to about a 2 month horizon. It is insigniﬁcant at horizons shorter than
1 month, at which point it is signiﬁcant at the 10% level, and becomes signiﬁcant at the 1%
level at a 2 month forecast horizon. The ODIN estimation methodology ensures that the
estimations are robust even for long forecast intervals. With quarterly observations we only
  9
      The results are similar for the other data sets.



                                                         20
have 236 non-overlapping intervals, but using overlapping data results in stable parameter
estimates. When estimating the ODIN model in Table 1 using two month returns instead
of one month returns, four speciﬁcations are signiﬁcant at the 1% level and the remaining
three speciﬁcations are signiﬁcant at the 5% level. Hence, while the evidence in favor of a

risk-return tradeoﬀ at the one-month horizon is relatively weak, it is very strong at longer
horizons.
       There are several reasons why the risk-return tradeoﬀ may not be detectable at shorter
horizons. First, aspects of the trading process induced by market microstructure frictions,
non-synchronous portfolio investment decisions, and individual stock illiquidity that are out-

side the theory dominate the autocorrelations in short-horizon returns. More importantly,
when more volatile trading environments arise, theory predicts that stock returns are ex-
pected to be contemporaneously negatively correlated with the increase in volatility because
prices must fall to provide an increase in expected returns, as in Campbell and Hentschel

(1992). If the adjustment of expected returns to news that increases the conditional variance
is not precisely contemporaneously correlated with the increase in the conditional variance
because of market illiquidity or the non-synchronous trading of investors, using a short hori-
zon for testing the conditional risk-return tradeoﬀ may ﬁnd a negative relation as volatility

increases and prices fall slightly later.10


                                         [Figure 2 about here.]
  10
    Müller, Durand, and Maller (2011) discuss estimation of the risk-return relation at the daily horizon,
with the market as the only test-asset. They argue that in this case one must explicitly account for weekend
eﬀects which they include in a COGARCH framework. When ignoring weekend eﬀects, they ﬁnd a positive
and signiﬁcant risk-return relation, but adjusting for weekend eﬀects the signiﬁcance disappears, and they
conclude that using daily data does not provide support for Merton’s ICAPM. Bali and Engle (2010) use
daily data, and we discuss their results below.




                                                    21
4.3    The OLS Panel Data Estimator

Appendix A.2 shows that the constrained OLS estimator of γM is a weighted average of the
individual estimates, γi,M obtained by OLS estimation using a single portfolio. Speciﬁcally,

                                                  
                                                  N
                                                    V̂ (σ̂iM,t ) γ̂i,M
                                          γ̂M =          N
                                                                              .                  (15)
                                                  i=1    k=1   V̂ (σ̂kM,t )

                cov
                 ˆ (σ̂iM,t ,Ri,t+1 )
where γ̂i,M =       V̂ (σ̂iM,t )
                                       is the estimate of γM based on portfolio i only, and V̂ , cov,
                                                                                                  ˆ

and σ̂ denote sample moments. The weights are determined by the sample variances of the
conditional covariances of each asset return with the return on the market, and the estimate
associated with the asset with the highest variation in the conditional covariance with the
market receives the highest weight.

                                            [Figure 3 about here.]

   The top panel of Figure 3 presents the individual γ̂i,M ’s from the one asset case for each
of the 26 test assets. The ﬁrst asset is the market portfolio, and the other assets are the

25 size and book-to-market sorted portfolios ordered within size quintiles from low to high
book-to-market beginning with the smallest quintile. The circles indicate the point estimates
and the vertical lines indicate the two standard error bounds. One sees that while estimating
with just the market portfolio implies an insigniﬁcant risk-return tradeoﬀ, most of the γ̂i,M ’s

for the four smallest size quintiles are larger than the point estimate from the market only,
and the vast majority are more than two standard errors from zero.                The horizontal line
is the weighted average of the individual estimates, which is the constrained OLS estimate,
and this is signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from zero.
   The bottom panel in Figure 3 presents the weights that the 26 individual estimates receive

in the constrained estimation. Within each size quintile, the estimate of γM based on growth
stocks receives the highest weight. Interestingly, these are the point estimates of γM with the

                                                        22
lowest values. Despite this, since most of the individual estimates of γM are larger than the
estimate based on the market only, the constrained estimate from the system of equations
is signiﬁcant. Importantly, one sees that the signiﬁcance of the constrained estimate is not
driven purely by small stocks. An individually signiﬁcant risk-return relation exists for all

portfolios except for those in the largest quintile.
   estimator from the panel data regression will be more eﬃcient than the estimator using
the market alone.


4.4    GMM Estimations of the Panel Data System

As Cochrane (2005) notes, using a weighting matrix in GMM estimation of asset pricing

models can be interpreted as forming portfolios of assets, and GMM estimation can be
interpreted as choosing the parameters to minimize the pricing errors on these statistical
portfolios. The counterpart of this point in our framework is found by taking the Cholesky
decomposition of W −1        
                   t = C t C t , in which case one sees that GMM estimation minimizes the

sum of squared pricing errors on the N portfolios


                                       C t (Rt+1 − X t δ).                             (16)


The estimation method with W t = diag(h1,t , . . . , hN,t ) simply scales the observations by
their conditional standard deviations and then minimizes the squared errors of the resulting
standardized pricing errors. The SUR and CGLS methods both exploit the correlation struc-
ture of the assets to extract statistically orthogonal components with the lowest variance.

Because the diﬀerent portfolios used as test assets are highly correlated, H N N,t and Σ are
close to singular, and the resulting priced portfolios consequently have extreme long/short
weights on the original test assets. Although CGLS and SUR may asymptotically improve
the eﬃciency of the estimator, the weighting matrix may in practice put a lot of weight on


                                               23
portfolios with little economic relevance. We analyze the diﬀerent methods using simulations
below, but we ﬁrst discuss the results of the alternative estimations.
   Our ﬁrst ﬁnding is that standardizing the time-t observations by their conditional stan-
dard deviations (but not using correlations) does not change the estimation results in any

economically or statistically signiﬁcant way. This ﬁnding is important because it demon-
strates that the previous results are not spuriously driven by large returns in periods with
high volatility.
   Next, we turn to the SUR and CGLS estimation procedures which both use the correlation
structure of the test assets to standardize the system (4). Table 2 shows the results for

the CGLS estimation (the results for the SUR estimation are similar). The estimates of
γM are systematically lower than for the constrained OLS estimation, and they are now
all insigniﬁcantly diﬀerent from 0 at traditional marginal levels of signiﬁcance. To better
understand the SUR and CGLS estimations, we examine the Cholesky decomposition of

Σ−1 for the SUR estimation with the market and the 10 book-to-market sorted portfolios,
and we ﬁnd that the ratio of the largest absolute weight to the smallest absolute weight for
the 11 rows is generally above 100. Using the market and the 25 size- and book-to-market
sorted portfolios the ratios of absolute weights are again above 100, and for several moment

conditions the ratio exceeds 1000. As a result, the SUR procedure chooses the parameters
of the model to minimize the squared pricing errors on highly levered portfolios that are
not economically meaningful. We further examine the statistical properties of the SUR and
CGLS estimators below using simulations.


                                    [Table 2 about here.]




                                             24
4.5      Simulations

As seen in Table 1 with the actual data, the standard error of γM generally does not decrease
as we add more test assets. To understand why, in this section we analyze the estimation

procedure in more detail using simulations. Our goals are to determine the degree of bias that
is introduced by the multistep estimation, to determine the accuracy of the standard errors
that do not account for the ﬁrst stage estimation, and to examine if there is an increase in
power from using additional returns. Moreover, we compare the diﬀerent ways of estimating

the constrained system of equations.
   For each of the data sets described above, we estimate a DCC model as described in
steps one and two above. We then assume a value of γM and simulate from the GARCH-in-
Mean model of equation (3). We perform 1,000 simulations, and for each one we draw the

innovations randomly with replacement from the original standardized residuals. For each
of the simulated data sets we repeat the four step estimation procedure above to estimate
the price of risk, γM . Finally, we test the null hypothesis that γM = 0. We focus ﬁrst on the
constrained OLS estimation of the system, and we then turn to the alternative estimations
below.

   Figure 4 presents the mean of γM in Panel A on the left side. The estimates only have
small biases, which are larger for higher values of γM . The online appendix presents QQ-
plots of the t-statistics under the null hypothesis γM = 0 indicating that they are very well
behaved (nevertheless, we also use the empirical distributions of the t-statistics under the

null for inference).
   Panel B on the right side presents plots of the power of the test of the null hypothesis
γM = 0 against the alternative hypotheses γM = 2, 4 or 6, for the diﬀerent data sets. Note
that the empirical size of the test is exactly 5%, since we use the empirical distribution of

the t-statistic under the null. Somewhat surprisingly, though, we see essentially no increase
in power from including additional test assets.

                                             25
                                    [Figure 4 about here.]

   To understand in more detail why the power of the test does not increase as more test

assets are included, we perform additional simulations. Instead of using the correlation
structure from the actual test portfolios, we consider scenarios in which the assets have
a lower or higher correlation. When the assets display a low correlation with each other,
adding more test assets clearly improves the power to reject the null. However, as we increase

the correlation between assets, the power increase gradually disappears. Intuitively, when
the correlation between test assets is very high, the returns move closely together and the
additional assets fail to increase the precision of the estimation in these sample sizes.
   We also analyze the SUR and CGLS methods using simulations. Whereas the constrained
OLS method produces estimates of γM that were nearly unbiased for all simulations, both

the SUR and CGLS methods result in a downward bias for γM . This bias is around −0.5
when the true value is γM = 0 and increases to −2 when γM = 6. The distribution of the
t-statistics also deteriorates when using 25 and 100 test assets. Interestingly, the power of
the test of γM = 0 against a given alternative value of γM increases as more test assets are

included. The SUR and CGLS methods both have the ability, at least for simulated data,
to improve inference when using highly correlated portfolios. The reason is, as described
above, that the two methods are able to extract orthogonal portfolios from the original test
assets.

   We thus face a tradeoﬀ between constrained OLS, which prices economically interesting
portfolios and produces unbiased estimates of γM with larger standard errrors, and SUR and
CGLS which price economically uninteresting portfolios, and produce severely biased, but
more eﬃcient estimates. We have chosen to focus mainly on the constrained OLS estimator,
since it is unbiased and directly minimizes the pricing errors on the original test assets.

Ultimately, in the data, adding additional test assets allows us to reject the null of no risk-
return relation using constrained OLS, not because of an increase in power, but because

                                              26
of an increase in the point estimate of γM . As noted above, this increase is driven by all
stocks except those the largest quintile (all but the largest decile when using the 100 size-
and book-to-market sorted portfolios).



5     The ICAPM with Additional State-Variables

5.1     The Market and the Long-Term Yield as State Variables

We now add the yield on a long-term bond as a second risk factor. Merton (1973) notes
that “. . . there exists at least one element of the opportunity set which is directly observable:

namely, the interest rate, and it is deﬁnitely changing stochastically over time.” This makes
the interest rate a prime candidate for a state variable. In Merton’s model, the yields on
all bonds are perfectly correlated because they are driven by a one-factor model with a
stochastic instantaneous risk-free rate. When yields are not perfectly correlated, we must
decide on a speciﬁc maturity. We use the yield on the 10-year Treasury bond as the state

variable, since indexed bonds are not available for a suﬃciently long time period, and we
ﬁrst-diﬀerence the yields when estimating the GARCH model in equations (10) and (11).
    Since we use stock portfolios as test assets, the price of risk for the covariance with the
10-year Treasury yield is only identiﬁed if the correlations between the portfolio returns and

innovations in the yield are non-zero. The conditional correlation of the return on the market
and the change in the 10-year Treasury yield is negative between 1960 and 2001, after which
the correlation becomes positive. The magnitude is sizable and varies from −0.45 to 0.4.11
    A decrease in the bond yield is a deterioration in investment opportunities, since a long-

term investor will earn a lower return on long-term bonds (which are risk-free to the long-
  11
     When we estimate the DCC GARCH model on the diﬀerent data sets, the estimates of the DCC GARCH
parameters change. Consequently, the precise estimate of the conditional correlation between the market
and the innovations in the Treasury yield are diﬀerent for the diﬀerent data sets. However, the diﬀerences
are small.



                                                   27
term investor, ignoring inﬂation). Assets that do well when the yield falls (such as long-
term bonds) have a negative covariance with changes in the yield. Such assets provide
a hedge against deteriorations in investment opportunities and should command a lower
return. Thus, we would expect a positive price of risk for γF .

       Table 3 presents the results for both the non-overlapping estimations and the ODIN
estimations. The non-overlapping estimations use monthly data from 1954 to 2012, while
the ODIN estimations use daily data from 1962 to 2012 since daily observations on 10-year
Treasury yields are only available after 1962. The estimated values of γM for the standard
non-overlapping estimations are similar to the results for the univariate model in Table 1.

The estimates of γM vary from 3.47 using the market as the only test asset to 6.71 using
the 10 beta-sorted portfolios. The estimate of γM is insigniﬁcant when only the market is
used as a test asset, but it is signiﬁcant at the 5% level in 3 estimations and at the 1% when
using the 10 beta-sorted portfolios as test assets. The estimates of γF are all negative and

insigniﬁcant, as they are smaller than their standard deviations.12
       For the ODIN estimation, the estimates of γM are similar to the estimates from the
non-overlapping data, and the standard errors are always smaller despite the shorter sample
period, again illustrating the increased precision of the ODIN estimation. As a result, the

estimates of the risk-return tradeoﬀ are now signiﬁcant at the 10% level or better for all
portfolios, at the 5% level for 4 portfolios, and at the 1% level using the 10 beta-sorted
portfolios. As in the non-overlapping estimations, the ODIN estimates of γF are all negative
and insigniﬁcant.

                                         [Table 3 about here.]

       When varying the forecast intervals from one day to three months, we observe the same
  12
    As above, the covariances are based on a DCC model estimated on all test-assets and state variables. We
also estimate bivariate DCC models (for the test-asset and the market return, as well as the test-asset and
innovations in the yield), which allows the DCC parameters to depend on the test-asset, and in particular
allows for diﬀerent mean-reversion speeds for the correlation of a test-asset with the market return and the
the correlation of a test-asset with innovations in the yield. The results are similar.


                                                    28
patterns as for the conditional CAPM. For short forecast horizons, the estimate of γM is
small and insigniﬁcant, but it becomes signiﬁcant at the 5% at a two-week horizon and is
signiﬁcant at the 1% level for a two-month horizon. The estimate of γF is always negative
and never signiﬁcant.

   Scruggs (1998) shows that if the market is the only test asset, and the true model is a
two-factor model, the bias arising from omitting the yield factor is

                                                   2
                                             cov(σM,t , σM F,t )
                              γM − γM = γF           2
                                                                 .                     (17)
                                                 V (σM,t )

Scruggs reports that in his study, this bias is around −6.7. He reports an insigniﬁcant
estimate of γM in a model with only the market as a state variable, but a positive and
signiﬁcant estimate when including the risk-free rate as an additional state variable. Thus,

he concludes that the diﬀerences in the estimated parameters can be ascribed to an omitted-
variable bias.
   In our sample, on the contrary, the bias is much smaller, since the correlation between
stock returns and bond return has changed over time. For our estimation with multiple test

assets, we analyze the potential bias using simulations. By simulating from a two-factor
model estimated on the actual data sets, and then estimating a one-factor model in which
we omit the innovations in the yield, we ﬁnd that the bias in γM is between 0.1 and 0.2,
depending on the data set. That is, the bias has the opposite sign of the bias reported by

Scruggs (1998) and is much smaller in magnitude. As seen in Table 1 and 3, the estimates
of γM are actually smaller in the two-factor model, which again is contrary to the ﬁndings
by Scruggs. We report an update of Scruggs’s results below.




                                             29
5.2    Other State-Variables

Fama and French (1992) argue that the market return, and the excess returns on portfolios of
small minus big stocks, RSM B,t+1 , and of high minus low book-to-market stocks, RHM L,t+1 ,

are risk factors that explain the average returns on various portfolios. They run OLS re-
gressions of portfolio returns on the three risk factors, and they interpret the signiﬁcance of
the intercepts in these regressions as measures of the inability of the three risk factors to
explain the average returns. Grant (1977) was the ﬁrst to argue that such a methodology

encounters problems when the conditional means of returns and the conditional exposures of
the returns to the risk factors vary over time. Jagannathan and Wang (1996), Lewellen and
Nagel (2006), and Boguth et al (2011) subsequently expand on this issue. The fundamental
problem is that the intercepts in the regressions are not expected to be zero if the conditional

model is true. Hence, they do not represent pricing errors of the model.
   We are interested in whether RSM B,t+1 and RHM L,t+1 are conditional risk factors or state
variables in the Merton (1973) context. We therefore estimate the conditional covariances of
the test asset returns with RSM B,t+1 and RHM L,t+1 using the DCC model as above and then
perform constrained OLS on the following model:


           Ri,t+1 = μi + γM covt (Ri,t+1 , RM,t+1 ) + γSM B covt (Ri,t+1 , RSM B,t+1 )

                       +γHM L covt (Ri,t+1 , RHM L,t+1 ) + εi,t+1                          (18)


Table 4 presents the results. The sample period for the standard estimation in the top panel
is monthly data from February 1954 to December 2012.


                                     [Table 4 about here.]


   For the standard speciﬁcation we consistently ﬁnd that RM,t+1 and RHM L,t+1 are priced

risk factors. The estimates of γM are larger than in Table 1 and retain their signiﬁcance.

                                               30
The conditional covariances of returns with HML also produce in a signiﬁcant price of risk
in the standard estimation with estimates of γHM L ranging from 6.22 to 17.34 depending on
the test assets. Consistent with the results in Lewellen and Nagel (2006), we do not ﬁnd a
signiﬁcant price of risk for covariances with RSM B,t+1 . Any size eﬀect appears to be driven

out by the time variation in the conditional covariances.
    The ODIN estimation uses daily data from January 1, 1962 to December 31, 2012.
Inference about the signiﬁcance of γM is similar to Table 1, but the statistical signiﬁcance
of RHM L,t+1 is now much reduced. The coeﬃcient estimates of γSM B are generally smaller
than their standard errors.



6     Relation to the Literature

The papers in the literature most closely related to ours are Bali (2008), Bali and Engle
(2010) and Scruggs (1998). This section demonstrates that Bali (2008) and Bali and Engle
(2010) both severely understate the standard errors of their parameter estimates leading
to false statistical signiﬁcance. The results in Scruggs (1998), while also having impressive

test statistics, are found to be sample speciﬁc as extending the sample for another 15 years
results in insigniﬁcant prices of risks. This is consistent with the ﬁndings of Scruggs and
Glabadanidis (2003) who report reduced signiﬁcance of the original speciﬁcation of Scruggs
(1998) when adding more data.


6.1    The Bali-Engle (2010) Approach: Estimating the Risk-Return

       Tradeoﬀ with Seemingly Unrelated Regression

Bali (2008) and Bali and Engle (2010) use daily data and the SUR procedure described
above to estimate the prices of risks for various state variables. Bali (2008) estimates the
conditional covariances using a bivariate GARCH model, and Bali and Engle (2010) use

                                             31
bivariate DCC GARCH models to estimate the conditional covariances. After estimating
the conditional covariances, both papers estimate the risk-return tradeoﬀ using a traditional
SUR method. Both papers report highly signiﬁcant parameter estimates of the risk-return
tradeoﬀ. Since their estimation methods are similar, we focus on Bali and Engle (2010). For

the conditional CAPM, which is their simplest model, they do the following:


   i. Estimate AR(1) models for the conditional means of the individual asset returns and
         the market return, while simultaneously estimating GARCH (1,1) models for the con-
         ditional variances of the residuals. The model estimated is therefore


                            Ri,t+1 = α0i + α1i Ri,t + εi,t+1 ,   εi,t+1 ∼ N(0, hi,t )             (19)


                                       hi,t+1 = ωi + αi ε2i,t+1 + δi hi,t .                       (20)


   ii. Estimate the conditional covariances for each test asset and the market portfolio using

         the standardized residuals from step one and separate, bivariate DCC models

  iii. Use Zellner’s (1962) Seemingly Unrelated Regression (SUR) to estimate the common
         price of risk on the conditional covariances of the individual returns with the market
         return in a panel of returns that excludes the market return.


       In describing their methodology, Bali and Engle (2010, p. 382) state, “The panel esti-
mation method with SUR takes into account heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation as well
as contemporaneous cross-correlation of error terms.” In stark contrast to Bali and Engle,
we do not ﬁnd signiﬁcant estimates of the risk-return tradeoﬀ using a daily forecast horizon.
We therefore conjectured that the standard errors in Bali and Engle (2010) are incorrect.13

Because basic SUR estimation imposes an assumption of conditional homoskedasticity in a
  13
   Bali conﬁrmed in an email correspondence that the Bali and Engle (2010) panel estimation was done in
EVIEWS, which produces traditional SUR standard errors, as we duplicate below.


                                                    32
highly conditionally heteroskedastic model, the Bali and Engle (2010) standard errors are
too small, which severely biases the statistical evidence in favor of the signiﬁcance of the
asset pricing models.
       Bali and Engle (2010) use daily data on the Dow 30 stocks from July 10, 1986 to June

30, 2009 for 5,795 observations, as well as daily data on value-weighted decile portfolios
from sorts based on size, book-to-market, momentum, and industry portfolios from January
3, 1972 to June 30, 2009 for 9,462 observations. We downloaded the daily returns on the
size, book-to-market, momentum, and industry portfolios from Kenneth French’s online data
library, the same source used by Bali and Engle (2010).14

                                           [Table 5 about here.]

       Panel A of Table 5 provides the original estimates and standard errors from Bali and

Engle (2010), who ﬁnd quite reasonable estimates of γM that range from 1.85 for the industry
portfolios to 3.32 for the momentum portfolios. All their estimates seem highly signiﬁcant
when using the incorrect standard errors. Panel B of Table 5 reports our attempt to replicate
their results and provides corrected standard errors for the SUR estimation.                      Diﬀerences

between our replication and the original estimation no doubt mostly arise from the ﬁrst
stage DCC models given the variety of choices that must be made regarding the non-linear
estimation. Despite these diﬀerences, our point estimates are reasonably close to the original
results, except for the size-sorted portfolios.15 Note, though, that the correct standard
errors are much larger than the incorrectly calculated ones. The estimates of γM now range

from 1.74 for the industry portfolios to 3.84 for the Dow stocks (apart from the size-sorted
portfolios), and the estimates are no longer signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from zero. Panel C reports
  14
     We were unable to download the daily returns on the investment-to-assets IA and return-on-assets ROA
portfolios that Bali and Engle (2010) obtained from Long Chen’s and LuZhang’s online data library because
this data library no longer exists.
  15
     We ﬁnd it puzzling that our results for the size-sorted portfolios are so diﬀerent from the results in Bali
and Engle (2010). We use the same program for all of the replications, and we downloaded the data from
the same source.


                                                      33
the results from our constrained OLS methodology. Here, the diﬀerent weighting of the
pricing errors results in lower point estimates of γM , and all estimates are insigniﬁcant.
   We also explore the Bali and Engle (2010) SUR methodology with simulations. When
the simulations match the parameters from the size decile portfolios with daily data for

the range used in the estimation, we ﬁnd that the average, across the 1,000 simulations, of
the ratio of the standard deviations for the standard SUR estimation to its heteroskedastic
counterpart calculated on the same data is 0.23 indicating that the t-statistics are on average
inﬂated by a factor of 4.3 in these samples. Indeed, as shown in Panel B of Table 5, for the
actual data, we ﬁnd that the Bali and Engle (2010) t-statistics are generally more than four

times larger than the correctly calculated ones. This is enough bias to render the estimates
insigniﬁcantly diﬀerent from zero.
   Bali and Engle (2010) extend their tests to include additional state variables, such as
the default premium, the term spread, the federal funds rate, and the implied volatility of

the S&P500 index. They conclude that conditional covariances with the default premium,
the term spread, and the implied volatility are also sources of risk in addition to conditional
covariance with the market return. However, when we include the conditional covariances of
the ﬁrst three variables in addition to the conditional covariance with the market return as

risk factors, as in Bali and Engle’s (2010) Table 4, we ﬁnd that the signiﬁcance found by Bali
and Engle (2010) is due to the incorrectly calculated standard errors from the unconditional
SUR approach as none of the correctly calculated t-statistics is larger than 1.12. Further,
estimating the system using OLS instead of SUR lowers the magnitude and signiﬁcance of
the estimates. Similarly, including the conditional covariance with implied volatility along

with the conditional covariance with the market return, as in Bali and Engle’s (2010) Table
6, produces insigniﬁcant prices of risk as the absolute value of the largest t-statistic is 1.75
for the SUR estimation. These results are available in an online Appendix.




                                              34
6.2       Scruggs (1998)

Scruggs (1998) incorporates innovations to the risk-free rate as a state variable, allowing the
expected return on the market to depend on its covariance with innovations in the return on

long-term bonds. He uses a constant-correlation EGARCH model, and models the market
risk premium as a linear function of the conditional market variance and the conditional
market covariance with the return on a long-term government bond. The full model is16


                                 2
                 rM,t = γ0 + γM σM,t + γF σM F,t + εM,t                                                   (21)

                 rF,t = μF + εF,t                                                                         (22)
                 2                                    2
            log(σM,t ) = ωM + αM g(ψM,t−1 ) + δM log(σM,t−1 ),           ψM,t−1 = εM,t−1 /σM,t−1          (23)
                 2                                   2
            log(σF,t ) = ωF + αF g(ψF,t−1) + δF log(σF,t−1 ),         ψF,t−1 = εF,t−1 /σF,t−1             (24)

               σM F,t = ρM F σM,t σF,t                                                                    (25)

           g(ψM,t−1 ) = |ψM,t−1 | −        2/π + θM ψM,t−1                                                (26)

            g(ψF,t−1) = |ψF,t−1 | −       2/π + θF ψF,t−1                                                 (27)




                                           [Table 6 about here.]


       The estimates in Scruggs (1998) are reported in the second column of Table 6. Scruggs
uses the excess returns on the Ibbotson Associates long-term government bond total return

index from March 1950 to December 1994. Although we use the return on the Fama Bond
Portfolios for 61-120 months from CRSP over the period January 1952 to December 1994,
we are able to closely replicate his results, as shown in the third column of Table 6.17 Note
  16
      Scruggs (1998) also considers speciﬁcations where the volatility processes are functions of the short-term
risk-free rate. His ﬁndings for these speciﬁcations are similar to the ﬁnding for the model reported here,
which corresponds to his model 3a.
   17
      However, for his speciﬁcations 3b(i) and 3b(iii), we obtain opposite signs of both γM and γF .



                                                      35
that we now use the return on long term bonds as opposed to the change in yield, as we did
above. Thus, we now expect γF to be negative. Our point estimates of γM and γF are of
the same magnitude as the estimates reported by Scruggs, however, we ﬁnd that they are
not signiﬁcant.18 When updating the sample to 2012, the estimates of γM and γF are now

close to zero and insigniﬁcant.
       In fact, for the original sample period considered by Scruggs, the likelihood function has
multiple local minima. Scruggs reports the global minimum, but the likelihood function also
has a local minimum for which γM and γF are close to zero and insigniﬁcant. When updating
the sample, this local minimum becomes the global minimum, and the other local minimum

disappears. Also note that in our sample, the estimate of the unconditional correlation
between the return on the market and the bond return is close to zero and not statistically
signiﬁcant. As a result, the price of risk on the covariance with the bond return is poorly
identiﬁed, with a standard error which is several orders of magnitude larger than the point

estimate. This contrasts with the original ﬁndings in Scruggs (1998), who ﬁnds a positive
and signiﬁcant correlation between the return on the market and the bond return in his
sample.


                                          [Table 7 about here.]


                                          [Table 8 about here.]
  18
    The many parameters and the non-linearities of the model make it diﬃcult to precisely calculate standard
errors. We take care in evaluating the Hessian of the likelihood function. In particular, the Hessian returned
from the MatLab optimization routine is not reliable, as it is a so-called ‘pseudo-Hessian’ constructed with
the purpose of choosing sensible step-sizes, not to be a high-precision estimate of the second derivatives.
Instead, we use the DERIVEST suite by D’Errico (2011), an adaptive numerical diﬀerentiation toolbox that
provides high-precision ﬁrst-order and second-order derivatives. When basing the t-statistics on the Hessian
matrix returned by the MatLab optimization routine, they increase from 1.0 to 1.5 for γM and from −0.73
to −1.1 for γF .




                                                     36
7     Conclusion

This paper explores strategies for estimating the prices of risks in Merton’s (1973) ICAPM.
Our preferrred constrained OLS method is tractable, scales to allow multiple test assets, and
produces unbiased estimates and standard errors in our sample sizes. Whereas the previous
literature has mostly found insigniﬁcant estimates of the risk-return tradeoﬀ when using only
the market return in tests of the conditional CAPM, including test assets in addition to the

market return consistently produces positive and signiﬁcant estimates.
    The increased signiﬁcance of the risk-return tradeoﬀ does not arise from an increase
in statistical power from including more test assets, as might have been expected. Using
simulations, we demonstrate that the high correlation in stock returns mitigates the eﬀective

increase in power from adding assets. Instead, the increased signiﬁcance arises from higher
point estimates.
    We also analyze potentially more eﬃcient estimation methods such as seemingly unrelated
regressions and conditional generalized least squares. Although these methods are able to

extract more power from the highly correlated test assets, this comes at a great cost. The
SUR and CGLS methods eﬀectively minimize the pricing errors on orthogonalized portfolios,
which are linear combinations of the original test assets. Due to the correlation structure
in the original test assets, the orthogonalized portfolios have extreme long/short positions
and are not economically meaningful. Moreover, both the SUR and CGLS estimators are

severely biased in our sample sizes. We also demonstrate that the impressive test statistics
in Bali (2008) and Bali and Engle (2010) are shown to result from the use of incorrect
standard errors from the traditional SUR estimation which are four times too small in this
heteroskedastic environment.




                                             37
8     References

    Bali, Turan G., 2008, The intertemporal relation between expected returns and risk,
Journal of Financial Economics 87,101-131.
    Bali, Turan G., and Robert F. Engle, 2010, The intertemporal capital asset pricing model
with dynamic conditional correlations, Journal of Monetary Economics 57, 377-390.
    Boguth, Oliver, Murray Carlson, Adlai Fisher, and Mikhail Simutin, 2011, Conditional

risk and performance evaluation: Volatility timing, overconditioning, and new estimates of
momentum alphas, Journal of Financial Economics 102,363-389.
    Bollerslev, Tim, 1990, Modelling the coherence in short-run nominal exchange rates: A
multivariate generalized arch model, Review of Economics and Statistics 72, 498-505.

    Bollerslev, Tim, Robert F. Engle, and Jeﬀrey M. Wooldridge, 1988, A capital asset pricing
model with time-varying covariances, Journal of Political Economy 96, 116-131.
    Campbell, John Y. and Ludger Hentschel, 1992. No news is good news: An asymmetric
model of changing volatility. Journal of Financial Economics 31, 281-318.

    Cochrane, John, 2005, Asset Pricing: Revised Edition, Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univer-
sity Press.
    Cochrane, John, 2014, A mean-variance benchmark for intertemporal portfolio theory.
Journal of Finance 69, 1-49.
    DeSantis, Giorgio, and Bruno Gerard, 1997, International asset pricing and portfolio

diversiﬁcation with time-varying risk, Journal of Finance 52, 1881-1912.
    DeSantis, Giorgio, and Bruno Gerard, 1998, How big is the premium for currency risk?
Journal of Financial Economics 49, 375-412.
    Engle, Robert F., 2002, Dynamic conditional correlation: A simple class of multivariate

generalized autoregressive conditional heteroskedasticity models, Journal of Business and
Economic Statistics 20, 339-350.



                                             38
   Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1992, The cross-section of expected stock
returns, Journal of Finance 47, 427-465.
   Grant, Dwight, 1977, Portfolio performance and the ”cost” of timing decisions, Journal
of Finance 32, 837-846.

   Guo, Hui, and Robert F. Whitelaw, 2006. Uncovering the risk-return relation in the
stock market, Journal of Finance 61, 1433-1463.
   Hansen, Lars P., 1982. Large sample properties of generalized method of moments esti-
mators, Econometrica 50, 1029-1054.
   Hansen, Lars P., and Robert J. Hodrick, 1980. Forward exchange rates as optimal pre-

dictors of future spot rates: An econometric analysis, Journal of Political Economy 88,
829-853.
   Hedegaard, Esben, and Robert J. Hodrick, 2014, Estimating the conditional CAPM with
overlapping data inference, NBER Working Paper No. 19969.

   Jagannathan, Ravi, and Zhengyu Wang, 1996, The conditional capm and the cross-
section of expected returns, Journal of Finance 51, 3-53.
   Lanne, Markku, and Pentti Saikkonen, 2006, Why is it so diﬃcult to uncover the risk–
return tradeoﬀ in stock returns? Economics Letters 92, 118-125.

   Lettau, Martin, and Sydney C. Ludvigson, 2010. Measuring and modeling variation in
the risk-return tradeoﬀ, Chapter 11 in Yacine Ait-Shalia and Lars P. Hansen, eds., Handbook
of Financial Econometrics: Volume 1 - Tools and Techniques, Elsevier: Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.
   Lewellen, Jonathan, and Stefan Nagel, 2006, The conditional CAPM does not explain

asset-pricing anomalies, Journal of Financial Economics 82, 289–314.
   Maio, Paulo, and Pedro Santa-Clara, 2012, Multifactor models and their consistency with
the ICAPM, Journal of Financial Economics 106, 586-613..
   Merton, Robert C., 1973, An intertemporal asset pricing model, Econometrica 41, 867–


                                            39
887.
   Merton, R. C., 1980. On estimating the expected return on the market: an exploratory
investigation, Journal of Financial Economics 8, 323–361.
   Müller, Gernot, Robert B. Durand, and Ross A. Maller, 2011. The risk-return tradeoﬀ:

A COGARCH analysis of Merton’s hypothesis, Journal of Empirical Finance 18, 306–320.
   Newey, Whitney K., and Daniel McFadden, 1994, Large sample estimation and hypoth-
esis testing, in Robert F. Engle and Daniel L. McFadden, eds., Handbook of Econometrics:
Volume 4. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Elsevier Science B.V.
   Ng, Lillian, 1991, Tests of the CAPM with time-varying covariances: A multivariate

GARCH approach, Journal of Finance 46, 1507-1521.
   Nyberg, Henri, 2012. Risk-return tradeoﬀ in U.S. stock returns over the business cycle,
Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 47, 137-158.
   Scruggs, John T., 1998, Resolving the puzzling intertemporal relation between the market

risks premium and conditional market variance: A two-factor approach, Journal of Finance
53, 575-603.
   Scruggs, John T. and Paskalis Glabadanidis, 2003, Risk premia and the dynamic covari-
ance between stock and bond returns, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 38,

295-316.
   Shanken, Jay, 1992, On the estimation of beta pricing models, Review of Financial Studies
5, 1-34.
   Zellner, Arnold, 1962, An eﬃcient method for estimating seemingly unrelated regressions
and tests for aggregation bias, Journal of the American Statistical Association 57, 348-368.




                                            40
A     Estimation

A.1     Estimating Without a Constant

If asset speciﬁc constants are not included in the estimation, equation (7) becomes

                         
                         T
                                  (Rt+1 − H N K,tγ) W −1
                                                       t (Rt+1 − H N K,t γ)               (28)
                            t=1


The ﬁrst order condition with respect to γ is

                              
                              T
                                        H N K,t W −1
                                                   t (Rt+1 − H N K,t γ) = 0K              (29)
                                  t=1


where 0K represents a K−dimensional vector of zeroes. Thus, the solution for γ̂ is

                                                           −1
                            1                                   1 
                               T                                     T
                 γ̂ =            H     W −1 H N K,t                    H     W −1 Rt+1    (30)
                            T t=1 N K,t t                         T t=1 N K,t t

Notice that this estimator of γ does not test the prediction of the theory that the conditional
means of returns move with the conditional covariances of the returns with the risk factors.
Equation (30) is the multivariate risks analogue to the ﬁndings of Hedegaard and Hodrick

(2014) for the single factor conditional CAPM.


A.2     Estimating with Constants

When asset-speciﬁc constants are included in the estimation, equation (7) becomes

                   
                   T
                         (Rt+1 − μ − H N K,tγ) W −1
                                                  t (Rt+1 − μ − H N K,t γ)                (31)
                   t=1




                                                       41
The ﬁrst order conditions with respect to μ are

                                          
                                          T
                                                W −1
                                                  t (Rt+1 − μ − H N K,t γ) = 0N                                               (32)
                                          t=1


and the ﬁrst order conditions with respect to γ are

                                
                                T
                                          H N K,t W −1
                                                     t (Rt+1 − μ − H N K,t γ) = 0K .                                          (33)
                                    t=1


The solutions are


                               μ̂ = RW        W
                                      t+1 − H N K,t γ̂                                                                        (34)
                                                                             −1
                                      1 
                                          T
                                                                           
                               γ̂ =          H       W −1 H N K,t − H W                                                       (35)
                                      T t=1 N K,t t                   N K,t

                                                                           
                                         1 
                                            T
                                                                         
                                    ×         H        W −1 Rt+1 − RW          ,                                              (36)
                                        T t=1 N K,t t                 t+1



                                                                                                                     −1
                                                                                                        T                    T
where the weighted mean of a matrix process X t is deﬁned as X W
                                                               t ≡                                      t=1   W −1
                                                                                                                t            t=1   W −1
                                                                                                                                     t X t.

      If W t ≡ W is constant, the weighted means become sample means, and the solutions
are
                                                    μ̂ = Rt+1 − H N K,t γ̂                                                    (37)

and
                                                                  −1                                                  
                 
                 T
                                                                         
                                                                           T
                                                                                                                    
      γ̂ =             H N K,t W   −1
                                           H N K,t − H N K,t                     H N K,t W   −1
                                                                                                     Rt+1 − Rt+1              (38)
                 t=1                                                       t=1


Notice that γ̂ can only be signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from zero if weighted sums of the sample
covariances of the time t conditional covariances of returns with the risk factors and the

future returns at time t + 1 are signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from zero.


                                                                   42
   In the special case of constrained OLS, W = I, and if the only source of risk is the
covariance with the market return, equation (38) reduces to

                                                    T                                               −1  T                           
       
       T
                                                                                                                               
γ̂ =          H N M,t H N M,t − H N M,t                     H N M,t H N M,t − H N M,t                        H N M,t Rt+1 − Rt+1
        t=1                                            t=1                                               t=1
                               −1                                  
           
           N                            
                                        N
   =             V̂ (σ̂kM,t )                  ˆ (σ̂iM,t , Ri,t+1 )
                                              cov                                                                                 (39)
           k=1                          i=1



   where H N M,t is the vector of covariances with market, V̂ (σ̂kM,t ) is the sample variance of
                                 ˆ (σ̂iM,t , Ri,t+1 ) is the sample covariance of the conditional
the conditional covariance, and cov
covariance of asset i with the future return on asset i.                                 Multiplying and dividing within
the summation on the last term on the right-hand side by V̂ (σ̂iM,t ) and recognizing that
individual OLS regressions of Ri,t+1 on a constant and σ̂iM,t would produce estimates of the
                             cov
                              ˆ (σ̂iM,t ,Ri,t+1 )
risk-return tradeoﬀ, γ̂i,M =     V̂ (σ̂iM,t )
                                                  , demonstrates that the constrained OLS estimate
of γM is a weigthed average of the individual estimates:

                                                       
                                                       N
                                                         V̂ (σ̂iM,t ) γ̂i,M
                                               γ̂M =           N
                                                                                     .                                   (40)
                                                       i=1     k=1    V̂ (σ̂kM,t )


A.3     GMM Standard Errors

With the notation of Section 2.1, let


                                                  f t+1 = X t W −1
                                                                 t εt+1 .                                                (41)


Then, the GMM orthogonality conditions can be written as E(f t+1 ) = 0N +K . Denote these

sample orthogonality conditions by g T (δ) where δ = (μ , γ  ) is the (N + K)-dimensional
parameter vector. Because the model is just identiﬁed, the sample orthogonality conditions
can be set to zero exactly.


                                                              43
     Hansen’s (1982) GMM applied to this case provides the asymptotic distribution of the
parameter estimates:
                                         √                               
                                             T δ̂ − δ → N 0N +K , d−1 Sd−1 ,                              (42)

                      ∂f t+1                            
where d ≡ E            ∂δ 
                                   and S ≡ E f t+1 f t+1 . The sample counterparts of d and S are
       ∂g T                            T
dT =   ∂δ 
              and S T =        1
                               T       t=1   f t+1 f t+1 . For the general case,

                               ⎡                                                                      ⎤
                                                  T                           T
                          ⎢
                                        1
                                        T         t=1   −W −1
                                                           t
                                                                        1
                                                                        T     t=1   −W −1
                                                                                       t H N K,t      ⎥
                     dT = ⎣                                                                           ⎦   (43)
                                            T                           T
                                   1
                                   T        t=1   −H N K,t W −1
                                                              t
                                                                    1
                                                                    T   t=1   −H N K,t W −1
                                                                                          t H N K,t



A.4      Maximum Likelihood for the DCC Model

The log likelihood function of the DCC model assuming conditional normality with N assets
is

              1
                 T
L = −               (N ln(2π) + ln |H t | + εt+1 H −1
                                                    t εt+1 )                                               (44)
              2 t+1

         1
                 T
     = −       (N ln(2π) + 2 ln |Dt | + εt+1 D −1  −1                                    −1
                                                t D t εt+1 − ut+1 ut+1 + ln |P t | + ut+1 P t ut+1 )
         2 t+1


where the term εt+1 D −1  −1       
                       t D t εt+1 −ut+1 ut+1 is zero. As noted by Engle (2002), the likelihood

function separates into two parts where the ﬁrst depends only on the GARCH parameters
and the second depends only on the correlation parameters. Let θ denote the parameters in

the D t matrices, and let φ denote the parameters in the P t matrices. The volatility part


                                             1
                                                  T
                       LV (θ) = −                  (N ln(2π) + ln |Dt | + εt+1 D −1  −1
                                                                                  t D t εt+1 )            (45)
                                             2 t+1


is simply the sum of the individual GARCH likelihoods, which is maximized by separately
estimating the individual GARCH processes. Then, conditional on θ̂, the correlation pa-



                                                                   44
rameters are found by maximizing


                               1
                                   T
                LC (θ̂, φ) = −       (−ut+1 ut+1 + ln |P t | + ut+1 P −1
                                                                        t ut+1 ).   (46)
                               2 t+1




                                               45
               Figure 1: Average Returns and Estimated Average Pricing Errors

                                                     Average Returns (γ = 0)
                                                                       M

        0.02

        0.01

          0

       −0.01

       −0.02
               Mkt 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 2.5 3.1 3.2 3.3 3.4 3.5 4.1 4.2 4.3 4.4 4.5 5.1 5.2 5.3 5.4 5.5
                    G               V G                 V G                 V G                 V G                 V
                         Small                                                                             Big
                                                      Estimated μ (γ = 4.74)
                                                                     M

        0.02

        0.01

          0

       −0.01

       −0.02
               Mkt 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 2.5 3.1 3.2 3.3 3.4 3.5 4.1 4.2 4.3 4.4 4.5 5.1 5.2 5.3 5.4 5.5
                    G               V G                 V G                 V G                 V G                 V
                         Small                                                                             Big

The ﬁgure shows estimation results for the intercepts in the ICAPM with the return on the
market as the only state variable. The model estimated is

                        Rt+1 = μ + H N K,t γM + εt+1 ,                   εt+1 ∼ D(0, H N N,t )

The system is estimated using OLS, and H t is estimated in a ﬁrst stage using a DCC model.
As test assets, we use the market and the 25 size- and book-to-market sorted portfolios. The
top plot shows the average monthly returns on each of the 26 test assets along with two
standard deviation intervals. These are the pricing errors under the null of γM = 0. The
bottom plot shows the constants from the estimated model with their two standard deviation
intervals. Although the usual patterns across book-to-market are still clearly visible, the
conditional CAPM explains the average return across portfolios very well. Note that the
constants are not error terms that are minimized in the estimation, but parameters of the
model.




                                                              46
                  Figure 2: Estimate of γM as a function of the forecast interval

                                           OLS − 25 FF Portfolios
         12

         10

          8

          6

          4

          2

          0

         −2

         −4
              0           10          20           30               40         50   60
                                             Forecast Interval

The ﬁgure shows estimations results for the risk-return relation in the ICAPM with the
return on the market as the only state variable. The model estimated is

                       Rt+1 = μ + H N K,t γM + εt+1 ,       εt+1 ∼ D(0, H N N,t )

We vary the forecasting interval from one day to 60 days. The system is estimated using
OLS, and H t is estimated in a ﬁrst stage using a DCC model. As test assets, we use the
market and the 25 size- and book-to-market sorted portfolios. The solid line shows the point
estimate of γM and the grey area shows plus/minus two standard deviations. The estimation
uses daily data from February 1st, 1954, to December 31st, 2012.




                                                  47
       Figure 3: Estimates of γi,M and their Weights in the Panel Data Estimation

                                                       OLS Estimate of γ
                                                                          i,M
         15


         10


          5


          0


         −5
               Mkt1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 2.5 3.1 3.2 3.3 3.4 3.5 4.1 4.2 4.3 4.4 4.5 5.1 5.2 5.3 5.4 5.5
                   G               V G                 V G                 V G                 V G                 V
                        Small                                                                             Big
                                  Variance of Covariance with Market (Scaled to sum to 1)
        0.07

        0.06

        0.05

        0.04

        0.03

        0.02
               Mkt1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 2.5 3.1 3.2 3.3 3.4 3.5 4.1 4.2 4.3 4.4 4.5 5.1 5.2 5.3 5.4 5.5
                   G               V G                 V G                 V G                 V G                 V
                        Small                                                                             Big

The top plot shows estimations results for the risk-return relation in the ICAPM based
on individual portfolios. The return on the market is the only state variable. The model
estimated is
                                                                                                      2
               Ri,t+1 = μi + γi,M covt (Ri,t+1 , RM,t+1 ) + εi,t+1 ,                   εi,t+1 ∼ D(0, σi,t )

The solid horizontal line just below 5 indicates the panel data estimate, and the dashed lines
show the corresponding 95% conﬁdence intervals. The panel data estimate is a weighted
average of the individual estimates, and the bottom plot shows the individual weight that
each estimate receives in the panel data estimator.




                                                              48
                          Figure 4: Mean of Estimates and Power from Simulations

                     Panel A: Mean of γ                                                   Panel B: Power
                                               M                     0.8
     6                                                                                                                        0
                                                            0                                                                 2
                                                            2        0.7
                                                                                                                              4
     5                                                      4                                                                 6
                                                            6
                                                                     0.6
     4
                                                                     0.5
     3
                                                                     0.4

     2
                                                                     0.3

     1
                                                                     0.2

     0                                                               0.1


    −1                                                                0
         Mkt   FF6   10 B/M 10 Size FF25   FF100 10 BetaM                  Mkt   FF6   10 B/M 10 Size FF25   FF100 10 BetaM



Panel A shows the mean of the estimates and Panel B shows the power of the test γM = 0
against diﬀerent alternative values of γM , based on simulated data. For each of the seven data
sets, we ﬁrst estimate the parameters of a DCC model to real data. We then simulate from
the DCC-GARCH-in-mean model varying γM from 0 to 6. For the simulations, we draw
innovations randomly with replacement from the original residuals. Using the simulated
data, we then estimate a DCC GARCH model and ﬁnally we estimate γM using the OLS
procedure. We perform 1,000 simulations. The left plot shows the mean of the estimates
from the 1,000 simulations, for each data set and for each value of γM . The estimates are
unbiased. The right plot shows the power of the test γM = 0 against diﬀerent alternative
values of γM . As the true value of γM increases, the power naturally increases. However, the
power does not increase as more test assets are added.




                                                                49
            Table 1: Estimation Results for the ICAPM with One State-Variable
The table shows estimations results for the risk-return relation with the return on the market as
the only state variable. The model estimated is

                Ri,t+1 = μi + γM cov t (Ri,t+1 , RM,t+1 ) + εi,t+1 ,   εi,t+1 ∼ D(0, hi,t )

The system is estimated using OLS, and H t is estimated in a ﬁrst stage using a DCC model. Robust
standard errors are reported in parenthesis. As test assets, we use the portfolios in the ﬁrst column.
For the standard estimation, both asymptotic standard errors and bootstrapped standard errors
are shown in parenthesis. For the ODIN estimation, only asymptotic standard errors are reported.
We also report the test statistic from a Wald test of the hypothesis that all intercepts are jointly
            −1
zero, μ̂ Σ̂μ μ̂ ∼ χ2 (N ), where Σ̂μ is the estimated covariance matrix for the intercepts and N is
the number of test assets. Sample: Monthly observations from February 1954 to December 2012
(707 observations). The ODIN estimation uses daily data from February 1st, 1954, to December
31st, 2012, with a 22 day forecasting interval.
 Test-assets                                       γ̂M    σ̂(γ̂M ) p-value     Wald      p-value N
                                          Standard Estimation
 Market only                                     3.61    (2.14)     0.09       0.13       0.71      1
    Bootstrap                                            (2.58)     0.10
 Mkt & 6 Size- and BM                            4.46∗∗ (2.16)      0.04      62.72       0.00      7
    Bootstrap                                            (2.28)     0.05
 Mkt & 10 Size                                   4.77∗∗ (2.19)      0.03      28.39       0.00     11
    Bootstrap                                            (2.39)     0.03
 Mkt & 10 BM                                     3.91    (2.24)     0.08      18.51       0.07     11
    Bootstrap                                            (2.63)     0.10
 Mkt & 25 Size- and BM                           4.74∗∗ (2.22)      0.03    110.99        0.00     26
    Bootstrap                                            (2.64)     0.04
 Mkt & 100 Size- and BM                          4.71∗∗ (2.33)      0.04    175.34        0.00     90
    Bootstrap                                            (2.55)     0.04
 Mkt & 10 δM sorted                              6.86∗∗∗ (2.20)     0.00    154.01        0.00     11
    Bootstrap                                            (2.65)     0.00
                                           ODIN Estimation
 Market only                                     2.65∗   (1.59)     0.10       1.51       0.22      1
 Mkt & 6 Size- and BM                            3.15∗   (1.81)     0.08      65.79       0.00      7
 Mkt & 10 Size                                   3.48∗   (1.81)     0.05      23.94       0.01     11
 Mkt & 10 BM                                     2.76    (1.86)     0.14      23.91       0.01     11
 Mkt & 25 Size- and BM                           3.47∗   (1.89)     0.07    120.13        0.00     26
 Mkt & 100 Size- and BM                          3.70 ∗  (2.06)     0.07    207.49        0.00     90
 Mkt & 10 δM sorted                              5.37∗∗∗ (1.96)     0.01    195.84        0.00     11
∗∗∗ ,∗∗ ,
      and ∗ indicate signiﬁcance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively. For the standard
model, the signiﬁcance is based on bootstrapped p-values.




                                                   50
                    Table 2: Estimation Results for the CGLS estimation.
The table shows estimations results for the risk-return relation with the return on the market as
the only state variable. The model estimated is

                       Rt+1 = μ + H N K,tγM + εt+1 ,    εt+1 ∼ D(0, H N N,t )

The system is estimated using conditional generalized least squares (CGLS), and H t is estimated
in a ﬁrst stage using a DCC model. Both robust asymptotic standard errors and bootstrapped
standard errors are shown in parenthesis. As test assets, we use the portfolios in the ﬁrst column.
We also report the test statistic from a Wald test of the hypothesis that all intercepts are jointly
            −1
zero, μ̂ Σ̂μ μ̂ ∼ χ2 (N ), where Σ̂μ is the estimated covariance matrix for the intercepts and N is
the number of test assets. Sample: Monthly observations from February 1954 to December 2012
(707 observations). The ODIN estimation uses daily data from February 1st, 1954, to December
31st, 2012, with a 22 day forecasting interval.
 Test-assets                                      γ̂M     σ̂(γ̂M ) p-Value    Wald      p-Wald N
 Market only                                     2.97    (2.15)     0.17       0.00      0.95    1
    Bootstrap                                            (2.42)     0.12
 Mkt & 6 Size- and BM                          −0.43     (1.40)     0.76     81.31       0.00    7
    Bootstrap                                            (1.03)     0.93
 Mkt & 10 Size                                2.78∗∗∗ (1.36)      0.04      18.75      0.07     11
  Bootstrap                                           (1.09)      0.01
 Mkt & 10 BM                                  0.20     (1.32)     0.88      19.05      0.06     11
  Bootstrap                                            (1.02)     0.49
 Mkt & 25 Size- and BM                      −0.15      (1.13)     0.89     156.29      0.00     26
  Bootstrap                                            (0.89)     0.62
 Mkt & 100 Size- and BM                        0.31    (0.98)    0.75     246.41       0.00    90
     Bootstrap                                         (0.74)    0.29
 Mkt & 10 δM sorted                            2.01∗∗  (1.34)    0.13     201.17       0.00    11
     Bootstrap                                         (1.21)    0.02
∗∗∗ ,∗∗ , and ∗ indicate signiﬁcance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively. For the standard

model, the signiﬁcance is based on bootstrapped p-values.




                                                51
Table 3: Estimation Results for the ICAPM with the Market and the Long-Term Bond Yield
as State-Variables
The table shows estimations results for the ICAPM with the return on the market and the long-term
bond yield as state variables. The model estimated is

     Ri,t+1 = μi + γM cov t (Ri,t+1 , RM,t+1 ) + γF cov t (Ri,t+1 , Δyt+1 ) + εi,t+1 ,   εi,t+1 ∼ D(0, hi,t )

where Δyt+1 is the change in the long-term bond yield. The system is estimated using OLS, and H t
is estimated in a ﬁrst stage using a DCC model. Robust standard errors are reported in parenthesis.
As test assets, we use the portfolios in the ﬁrst column. We also report the test statistic from a
                                                                        −1
Wald test of the hypothesis that all intercepts are jointly zero, μ̂ Σ̂μ μ̂ ∼ χ2 (N ), where Σ̂μ is the
estimated covariance matrix for the intercepts and N is the number of test assets. Sample: Monthly
observations from February 1954 to December 2012 (707 observations). The ODIN estimation uses
daily data from January 1st, 1962, to December 31st, 2012, with a 22 day forecasting interval.
  Test-assets                                          γ̂M               γ̂F             Wald         N
                                        Standard Estimation
  Market only                                         3.47          −23.29               0.18         1
                                                     (2.22)           (56.81)           [0.67]
  Mkt & 6 Size- and BM                                4.34∗∗        −24.76             51.12          7
                                                     (2.21)           (50.19)           [0.00]
  Mkt & 10 Size                                       4.73∗∗           −6.24           29.94         11
                                                     (2.30)           (67.49)           [0.00]
  Mkt & 10 BM                                         3.77          −29.77             18.60         11
                                                     (2.32)           (64.58)           [0.07]
  Mkt & 25 Size- and BM                               4.65∗∗        −15.16           111.51          26
                                                     (2.36)           (87.28)           [0.00]
  Mkt & 100 Size- and BM                              4.69∗            −5.83         176.66          90
                                                     (2.70)         (163.37)            [0.00]
  Mkt & 10 δM sorted                                  6.71∗∗∗       −27.39           138.00          11
                                                     (2.35)           (89.43)           [0.00]
                                         ODIN Estimation
  Market only                                         3.22∗∗        −49.39               1.26         1
                                                     (1.55)           (50.30)           [0.26]
  Mkt & 6 Size- and BM                                3.82∗∗        −36.99             22.76          7
                                                     (1.80)           (42.40)           [0.00]
  Mkt & 10 Size                                       4.20∗∗        −37.08             80.30         11
                                                     (1.85)           (64.79)           [0.00]
  Mkt & 10 BM                                         3.35∗         −54.71             86.08         11
                                                     (1.81)           (50.90)           [0.00]
  Mkt & 25 Size- and BM                               4.08∗∗        −60.15             76.70         26
                                                     (1.90)           (90.81)           [0.00]
  Mkt & 100 Size- and BM                              3.85∗         −98.48           148.27          77
                                                     (2.11)         (143.79)            [0.00]
  Mkt & 10 δM sorted                                  5.77∗∗∗       −63.40           157.27          11
                                                     (1.97)           (82.07)           [0.00]
∗∗∗ ,∗∗ ,
      and ∗ indicate signiﬁcance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively. For the standard
model, the signiﬁcance is based on bootstrapped52p-values.
Table 4: Estimation Results for the ICAPM with the Market, SMB and HML as State-
Variables
The table shows estimations results for the ICAPM with the return on the market, SMB and HML
as state variables. The model estimated is

               Ri,t+1 = μi + γM covt (Ri,t+1 , RM,t+1 ) + γSM B cov t (Ri,t+1 , RSM B,t+1 )
                        + γHM L covt (Ri,t+1 , RHM L,t+1 ) + εi,t+1 ,   εi,t+1 ∼ D(0, hi,t )

The system is estimated using OLS, and H t is estimated in a ﬁrst stage using a DCC model. Robust
standard errors are reported in parenthesis. As test assets, we use the portfolios in the ﬁrst column.
We also report the test statistic from a Wald test of the hypothesis that all intercepts are jointly
            −1
zero, μ̂ Σ̂μ μ̂ ∼ χ2 (N ), where Σ̂μ is the estimated covariance matrix for the intercepts and N is
the number of test assets. Sample: Monthly observations from February 1954 to December 2012
(707 observations). The ODIN estimation uses daily data from January 1st, 1962, to December
31st, 2012, with a 22 day forecasting interval.
 Test-assets                                        γ̂M        γ̂SM B      γ̂HM L        Wald       N
                                       Standard Estimation
 Market only                                       7.90∗∗∗ −10.68        11.87∗∗         0.38       1
                                                  (2.81)       (6.86)     (5.79)        [0.54]
 Mkt & 6 Size- and BM                              5.48∗∗     −0.94        6.22∗        45.91       7
                                                  (2.58)       (3.37)     (3.48)        [0.00]
 Mkt & 10 Size                                     6.76∗∗     −1.98        8.38∗        13.52      11
                                                  (2.76)       (4.44)     (5.03)        [0.26]
 Mkt & 10 BM                                       5.52∗      −4.13        9.55∗         7.77      11
                                                  (2.98)       (5.95)     (5.03)        [0.73]
 Mkt & 25 Size- and BM                             6.64∗∗     −1.59      10.10∗         93.80      26
                                                  (2.88)       (4.77)     (5.73)        [0.00]
 Mkt & 100 Size- and BM                            7.54∗∗     −2.41      17.34∗∗∗ 158.30           90
                                                  (3.17)       (5.10)     (6.47)        [0.00]
 Mkt & 10 δM sorted                                9.38∗∗∗    −3.81      16.55∗∗      117.67       11
                                                  (3.59)       (6.35)     (7.52)        [0.00]
                                         ODIN Estimation
 Market only                                       3.81∗        0.28       5.62          0.25       1
                                                  (2.10)       (6.71)     (4.68)        [0.62]
 Mkt & 6 Size- and BM                              3.59∗        0.68       2.78         15.07       7
                                                  (2.07)       (3.92)     (3.38)        [0.04]
 Mkt & 10 Size                                     4.46∗∗       0.19       4.69         70.75      11
                                                  (2.25)       (4.89)     (5.18)        [0.00]
 Mkt & 10 BM                                       3.14         1.14       3.25         88.11      11
                                                  (2.28)       (6.05)     (4.40)        [0.00]
 Mkt & 25 Size- and BM                             4.37∗      −0.08        5.14         64.34      26
                                                  (2.29)       (5.04)     (5.65)        [0.00]
 Mkt & 100 Size- and BM                            5.16∗∗     −0.74        9.61       138.77       77
                                                  (2.57)       (5.76)     (6.45)        [0.00]
 Mkt & 10 δM sorted                                5.39∗        2.75       7.80       110.62       11
                                                  (2.85)       (6.82)     (6.52)        [0.00]
∗∗∗ ,∗∗ ,                                          53
      and ∗ indicate signiﬁcance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively. For the standard
model, the signiﬁcance is based on bootstrapped p-values.
                    Table 5: Replication of Bali and Engle (2010) Table 1
The table shows the original results from Table 1 in Bali and Engle (2010) in Panel A, as
well as our replications in Panel B and Panel C. The return on the market is the only state
variables, and the model estimated is

                    Rt+1 = μ + H N K,t γM + εt+1 ,     εt+1 ∼ D(0, H N N,t )

The system is estimated using seemingly unrelated regressions (SUR) in Panel A and Panel
B, and using OLS in Panel C. H t is estimated in a ﬁrst stage using a DCC model. In Panel
B, the SUR standard errors correct for contemporaneous (i.e., cross-equation) correlation
and heteroskedasticity, but not for time-series heteroskedasticity. The GMM standard errors
correct for both contemporaneous correlation and heteroskedasticity, as well as for time-
series heteroskedasticity. As test assets, we use the portfolios in the ﬁrst column. We also
report the test statistic from a Wald test of the hypothesis that all intercepts are jointly
            −1
zero, μ̂ Σ̂μ μ̂ ∼ χ2 (N), where Σ̂μ is the estimated covariance matrix for the intercepts and
N is the number of test assets. Sample: Daily observations from January 3, 1972 to June 30,
2009 (9,462 observations). The estimation for Dow 30 stocks is based on daily observations
from July 10, 1986 to June 30, 2009 (5,795 observations).
  Test-assets                                          γM         Wald         p-value     N
                  Panel A: Original Results in Bali and Engle (2010) Table 1
  10 Size                                             1.86∗∗∗     13.29         0.21       10
                                                     (0.37)
 10 Book-to-Market                                    2.05∗∗∗     15.73        0.11       10
                                                     (0.39)
 10 Momentum                                          3.32∗∗∗     36.71        0.00       10
                                                     (0.38)
 10 Industry                                          1.85∗∗∗       9.53       0.48       10
                                                     (0.38)
 30 Dow Stocks                                        2.21∗∗∗     18.17        0.96       30
                                                     (0.29)
 Continued . . .




                                             54
Table 5 continued. . .
 Test-assets                                           γM        Wald            p-value   N
                                  Panel B: Replication using SUR
 10 Size                                             −0.18
   SUR Standard err.                                  (0.39)     9.10            0.52      10
   GMM Standard err.                                  (1.41)     9.25            0.51
 10 Book-to-Market                                     1.78
   SUR Standard err.                                  (0.37)       15.74         0.11      10
   GMM Standard err.                                  (1.63)       16.10         0.10
 10 Momentum                                           3.04∗
   SUR Standard err.                                  (0.37)       34.89         0.00      10
   GMM Standard err.                                  (1.57)       38.25         0.00
 10 Industry                                           1.74
   SUR Standard err.                                  (0.37)         9.71        0.47      10
   GMM Standard err.                                  (1.60)         9.66        0.47
 30 Dow Stocks                                         3.84∗
   SUR Standard err.                                  (0.42)       21.43         0.87      30
   GMM Standard err.                                  (2.19)       22.52         0.83
                                  Panel C: Replication using OLS
 10 Size                                             −0.43           8.08        0.62      10
                                                      (2.04)
 10 Book-to-Market                                     0.23        18.06         0.05      10
                                                      (2.00)
 10 Momentum                                           1.06        34.57         0.00      10
                                                      (1.93)
 10 Industry                                           0.62        10.48         0.40      10
                                                      (2.00)
 30 Dow Stocks                                         1.63        21.25         0.88      30
                                                      (2.18)
∗∗∗ ∗∗       ∗
   , , and       indicate signiﬁcance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.




                                                 55
                          Table 6: Replication and Update of Scruggs (1998)
This table shows the original results from Scruggs (1998) in the second column, as well as our
replication in the third column and updated results in the fourth column. The model estimated is
                                   2
                   rM,t = γ0 + γM σM,t + γF σM F,t + εM,t
                  rF,t    = μF + εF,t
                  2                                      2
            log(σM,t )    = ωM + αM g(ψM,t−1 ) + δM log(σM,t−1 ),      ψM,t−1 = εM,t−1 /σM,t−1
                   2                                     2
             log(σF,t )   = ωF + αF g(ψF,t−1 ) + δF log(σF,t−1 ),    ψF,t−1 = εF,t−1 /σF,t−1
                  σM F,t = ρM F σM,t σF,t
            g(ψM,t−1 ) = |ψM,t−1 | −        2/π + θM ψM,t−1

            g(ψF,t−1 ) = |ψF,t−1 | −        2/π + θF ψF,t−1

Scruggs’ original study uses monthly data from March 1950 to December 1994 (538 observations)
and the return on long-term government bonds from Ibbottson Associates, whereas we base our
replication on data from January 1952 to December 1994 (516 observations) and use the return
on the Fama Bond Portfolios for 61-120 months from CRSP. The updated results are based on
data from January 1952 to December 2012 (732 observations). Heteroskedasticity robust standard
errors are reported in parenthesis.
 Parameter                                         Original      Replication         Update
                         Panel A: Conditional Mean Equation Parameters
 γ0 × 100                                           −0.11           −0.07              0.54
                                                    (0.55)           (0.74)           (0.92)
 γM                                                         10.57∗∗               7.62          −0.30
                                                            (4.48)               (7.59)         (12.96)
 γF                                                        −49.75∗∗            −61.58             0.20
                                                           (23.47)              (63.87)        (417.97)
 μF × 100                                                   −0.08∗              −0.03             0.02
                                                            (0.04)              (0.04)           (0.04)
 Continued. . .




                                                      56
 Table 6 continued. . .
               Panel B: Conditional Second Moment Equation Parameters
 ωM                                            −0.49∗∗         −0.52            −0.87
                                                (0.25)          (0.39)           (1.50)
                                                      ∗∗∗
 αM                                              0.19            0.18∗∗∗          0.19∗∗
                                                (0.05)          (0.04)           (0.09)
                                                      ∗∗∗
 δM                                              0.92            0.92∗∗∗          0.86∗∗∗
                                                (0.04)          (0.06)           (0.24)
 θM                                            −0.17           −0.27            −0.89
                                                (0.24)          (0.48)           (1.92)
                                                      ∗∗
 ωF                                            −0.18           −0.14            −0.14∗
                                                (0.07)          (0.11)           (0.08)
 αF                                              0.38∗∗∗         0.31∗∗∗          0.27∗∗∗
                                                (0.05)          (0.10)           (0.06)
 δF                                              0.97∗∗∗         0.98∗∗∗          0.98∗∗∗
                                                (0.01)          (0.01)           (0.01)
 θF                                            −0.27∗∗         −0.41∗∗∗         −0.25∗
                                                (0.12)          (0.15)           (0.14)
                                                      ∗∗∗
 ρM F                                            0.24            0.19∗∗∗          0.05
                                                (0.05)          (0.05)           (0.07)
 L                                           3318.53         2892.40           4050.01
 N                                                538             516              732
∗∗∗ ∗∗     ∗
   , , and indicate signiﬁcance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.




                                           57
