                    NBFR WORKING PAPER SERIES




               COMPARING THE GLOBAL PERFORMANCE OF
                 ALTENATIVE EXCHANGE ARRANGEMENTS




                       Warwick J. McKibb-in


                         Jeffrey 0. Sachs




                      Working Paper No. 2024




                NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                         Cariibr-dge, MA 02138
                           September 1986




The numerical analysis in this paper was implemented on a PC using
the GAUSS program from Applied Technical Systems. We thank Lee
Edlefsen and Sam Jones at Applied Technical Systems for their
excellent technical support of this program. We also thank Max
Corden for many interesting discussions and Ralph Bryant, Michael
Emerson and Nouriel Roubini for comments, Warwick McKibbin thanks
the Reserve Sank of Australia for financial support. The views
expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the institutions with which they are affiliated. The
research reported here is part of the NBER's research program in
International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the
authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                 NBER Working Paper #2024
                                                 September 1986



     Comparing the Global Performance of Alternative Exchange Arrangements



                                   ABSTRACT


     The volatility of the world economy since the breakdown of the Bretton

Woods par value system of exchange rates has led many pol-icymakers and

economists to call for reform of the international monetary system. Many

critics of the current "non—system" call for tighter international rules of

the game in macroeconomic policy making. The proposed systems cover a wide

spectrum of measures including maintaining the current flexible exchange rate

system but with increased consultations between the major economies; a "target
zone " system as advocated by John Williamson; or a full return to a system of

fixed exchange rates as advocated by Ronald McKinnon

     This paper presents and applies a methodology useful for studying the

operating characteristics of a number of alternative monetary arrangements using

a large-scale simulation model of the world economy. We consider the

performance of the regimes when policymakers do or do not observe the shocks,

and when policymakers infer the shocks using an optimal filtering rule.

Although the results are model specific and at best illustrative of the issues

involved, the approach does have the advantage of providing a richer framework

of analysis than is possible in simple models of international interdependence.




Warwick J. McKibbin                        Jeffrey D. Sachs
Department of Economics                    Department of Economics
Harvard University                         Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138                        Cambridge,   MA 02138
I.   Introduction


     The volatility of the world economy since the breakdown of the Bretton

Woods par value system of exchange rates has led many policymakers and

economists to call for reform of the international monetary system. Many

critics of the current "non-system" call for tighter international rules of

the game in macroeconomic policy making1. The proposed systems cover a wide

spectrum of measures including maintaining the current flexible exchange rate

system but with increased consultations between the major economies; a "target

zone " system as advocated by Williamson (1985) and Roosa (1984); or a full

return to a system of fixed exchange rates as advocated by McKinnon (1984).

     This paper presents and applies a methodology useful for studying the

operating characteristics of a number of alternative monetary arrangements

using a large-scale simulation model of the world economy. The model

developed in Sachs and McKibb-in (1985) and McKibbin and Sachs (1986) is

attractive for policy analysis because of several desirable features,

including rational expectations in the asset markets, and careful

specification of stock-flow and long-term growth relations. Using a numerical

technique described below, we examine the asymptotic variances of key

macroeconomic target variables for a range of stochastic disturbances, and

under a variety of exchange regimes. We consider the outcomes when policymakers

do or do not observe the shocks, and when policymakers infer the shocks using an

optimal filtering rule. Although the results are model specific and at best

i11utrative of the issues involved, the approach does have the advantage of




    1See Corden(1983) for an interesting description of the operating
characteristics of this so-called non-system.
                                        —2--




 providing a richer framework of analysis than is possible in simple models of

 international interdependence.

     The McKibb-in-Sachs Global (MSG) model, which provides the framework for

 the analysis, is summarized -in Section II.   In Section III we discuss a

methodology which -is useful for analysing the performance of alternative rules

under different assumptions about the observab-ility of shocks hitting the

world economy. Section IV contains a discussion of the regimes that we

investigate including the practical implementation of these regimes.     ifl


Section V the simulation results are examined. Conclusions are contained in

Section VI.



II. The MSG Model


     The MSG model was developed in Sachs and McK-ibb-in (1985). The reader is

also referred to recent papers by Ishii, McKibbin and Sachs (1985), McKibbin

and Sachs (1986) and Sachs (1985) for several applications of the model. The

MSG model is a general equilibrium macroeconomic model of the world economy.

A detailed description of the model can be found -in Sachs and McKibb-in (1985).

Here we briefly summarize some of the main features of the model.

     The world economy is divided into five regions consisting of the U.S.,

Japan, the rest of the OECD (hereafter ROECO), OPEC and the developing

countries. The regions are linked via flows of goods and assets. Stock-flow

relationships and -intertemporal budget constraints are carefully observed.

Budget deficits cumulate into a stock of government debt which must eventually

be financed, while current account deficits cumulate into a stock of foreign
                                        —3—


debt. Asset markets are forward looking so exchange rates and long-term

interest rates are conditioned by the expected future path of policy, as

governed by alternative policy rules.

     The internal macroeconomic structure of the three industrialized regions of

the U.S., ROECO and Japan is modelled, while the OPEC and developing country

regions have only their foreign trade and financial structures incorporated.

Each region produces a good which is an imperfect substitute in the consumption

basket of each other region, where the consumption of each good depends on

income and relative prices. Private absorption depends positively on wealth,

disposable income and negatively on long and short term ex ante real interest

rates, along conventional lines. Wages are predetermined in each period, with

the nominal wage change across periods a function of consumer price inflation,

the output gap and the change in the output gap. With the assumption that the

GOP deflator is a fixed markup over wages, we derive a standard Phillips curve.

Residents in different countries hold their own country's assets as well as

foreign assets (except foreign money) based on the relative expected rates of

return. Money demand is assumed to be determined by transactions motives, so

that real balances are a function of real income, nominal interest rates and

lagged money balances.

    Trade shares and initial asset stocks are based on actual data for 1983.

Behavioral parameters are chosen based on our interpretation of the empirical

literature. A sensitivity analysis of the selected parameters is not

incorporated in this paper although it is under investigation.

    We have analyzed both non-linear and linearized versions of the model,

and have found that the two versions have very similar properties. In the
work presented here, we use the linear version, primarily because our

implementation of dynamic game theory requires the linearized model. The

model -is simulated using numerical techniques which take into account the

forward-looking variables in the model. The technique we use is discussed -in

detail below.




III. Methodology for Analysing Exchange Regimes


     There are several ways to analyze the properties of exchange regimes.

One way is to analyze the short-run dynamic adjustment to various shocks. An

alternative is to follow the approach in Taylor (1985) -in which the average

operating characteristics of the global economy are analyzed by calculating

the stochastic steady state variances of a set of targets given a set of

stochastic shocks to the system. The variance measures can then be examined

and, given a utility function, the performance of the rules can be analyzed.

We follow the second of these approaches in this paper. In addition we

provide a summary measure of the performance of each regime using a welfare

function. We do not totally avoid the problem of having to select an arbitrary

welfare function because in deriving the rules for some regimes we assume that

the authorities follow optimizing behavior according to a specific welfare

function. This part of the analysis seems to be unavoidable.

     This section is divided into two parts. The first explains our procedures

for deriving a set of rules in a model with forward-looking agents.

The second part discusses the methodology used to analyze the stochastic

properties of alternative regimes.
                                                    —5.-



A.      Deriving Alternative Rules

        The MSG model can be reduced to a minimum state—space representation.


 (1)              =         +         +         +          +
                      a1X       a2e       a3u       a4E        a5e

 (2)     (e1) =             ÷         +         +          + a5
(3)
            Tt    = •yiXt + Y2e       ÷         +
                                                    Y4Et
                                                           +



(4)         (e+1) = E(e+1f

where             is a vector of state variables (in this case 37x1);

            Et
                  is a vector of exogenous variables;

            Ut    is a vector of control variables (monetary or fiscal policy

                  instruments in this model);

                  is a vector of non-predetermined (or "jumping") variables

                  such as the exchange rates and long term interest rate;

                  is a vector of target variables;

                  is a vector of stochastic shocks;

                  -is the expectation taken at time t of the jumping variables at

                  time t+1 based on information available at time t

       We make several assumptions about the stochastic disturbances. They all

enter additively so that certainty equivalence holds. All shocks are

temporary although the model dynamics make the effects of the shocks

persistent. Where the model dynamics do not add much persistence to

particular shocks, as is the case with shocks to portfolio preferences and

aggregate demand, we assume that the shocks follow an AR1 process of the

following form:
                                          -6-


                  =         +


The autoregressive shocks (J.L) are then added to the vector of state variables.

Note that shocks to prices and money demand inherently have persistent effects

in the model, because the price shocks get built into a wage-price spiral,

while the structural money demand relationship is specified with a lagged

adjustment process.

       The shocks also satisfy the following conditions:


                      = o
            t_i(t)


            t_i(€tEt) = E



            t_i(xtct) = 0


In   addition, we consider three cases about observability of the shocks,

relative to the timing of policy choices:


(1) the shocks are observed —-   the   realization of       occurs before Ut is

      selected;

(2) the shocks are unobserved -- the realization of           occurs after U is
      selected;

(3) the shocks are partially unobserved --      the   policymakers use their

      knowledge of the underlying variance-covariance of the shocks and

      observations on a subset of variables at time t, to infer the underlying

      shocks from an optimal filtering rule.    U is then selected after the

      filtering is performed.
                                                 —7-


        We use three alternative procedures to select possible rules for the policy

variables, hereafter referred to as control variables (U). In the first

procedure we assume that each country chooses its control variables to maximize

an intertemporal utility function, taking as given the reactions of the other

countries and given the structure of the model. The second procedure is similar

to the first except we assume that a global planner undertakes the optimization,

in order to maximize a weighted average of the utility functions of the

individual countries. In the third procedure we directly specify an explicit

policy rule which is not derived from an explicit optimization problem.

        Consider the first procedure in which countries optimize individually. The

outcome of this is a familiar Nash equilibrium of a dynamic, linear-quadratic

game. The welfare function is specified as:



(5)         w =                                        +      +
                            {w1(Tit)2 + w2(T2t)2



                 =   -E    T'gT
                     t=o

where       W is the level of social welfare;

                  is 1/(1'-o) and o   is   the social rate of time discount;

                  is a weight on target i;

            ci    ia a diagonal matrix with each w on the diagonal;

            T1 15 target 1.


The targets are assumed to be macroeconomic targets such as the output gap,

inflation, current account, budget deficit, nominal income or the nominal
                                                   -8W-




exchange rate. The specific targets depend on the regime we are simulating.

The rule we find is optimal for the given country (in that it minimizes the

dynamic social loss function), taking as given the rules that are being

employed in the other regions.

        A direct application of optimal control techniques could be used to solve

this policy optimization problem. As is well known, under optimal control

techniques, the policymaker at time zero is assumed to choose the complete path

of policy instruments at the time of the initial optimization. However, as

pointed out by Kydland and Prescott (1977), the optimal policy rules will not in

general be time consistent. Future governments will not find it optimal to

follow the same policies as envisioned by earlier governments. Instead, we look

for a time consistent policy rule, that is, a rule that is optimal, taking as

given that the same rule will be followed by future governments. The time

consistent solution will yield a different path for the policy instruments than

does a direct application of optimal control techniques.

        The problem that we solve can be written formally as follows. Consider a

single controller in the simplest case of no exogenous variables or stochastic

shocks (in order to avoid unnecessary complexity). The structure, from (1) -

(4)    is thus:

(1')                   =
                               + a2e     +
                                             a3U

             e+1 =                       +
(2')
                           f3iXt + 2e
(3')              Tt   = iXt   +
                                   72e   +



The objective function is:


                  =
(5')                   - tOtnIQT
                                              —9—


The policymaker maximizes (5') subject to (1') —          (3),   subject to the constraint

of time consistency.

       We search for a solution of the following form. We are looking for a

time-invariant policy rule Ut =             a quadratic value function Vt =       XSX,   and

a matrix linking e to X of the form e =
                                                    I-I1X, such that I', S. Ht have the
following properties.

       First, U =       rx solves the problem:
       max - T'QT       +
       I'
                               t+1
            t


with            =               Tt as in (3'), X÷ as in (1), and e =
                     X1SX.J                                             H1Xt.     Second,



       XSXt -TQTt + XiSXt+i

for Ut =
                rx   and e =         Third, e = H1X    is the stable manifold of the

difference equation system (1'), (2') when Ut =          rx.
       In words, we are looking for a time-invariant rule Ut =         rx   linking

the policy instruments to the states. This rule is optimal taking as given that

the same rule will be applied in the future. Given this rule, there is a

corresponding matrix S such that XSX =           - t0tTT.        Thus, XSX is the

value of the objective function following the policy rule Ut            I'X. Third,
given the dynamic model of the economy, and the policy rule Ut =                  the
                                                                            FX,
jumping variables must lie on a stable manifold given by e =

       For the case of many controllers, the conditions can be rewritten with

country subscripts and the additional constraint that each controller takes as

given the policy rules of the other controllers. The inclusion of exogenous
                                                  —10--



 variables and stochastic shocks is straightforward. With exogenous variables

and stochastic shocks included, the solution is a set of rules for the control

variables of the form (see (AlO) n appendix A):


          Ut =   fiXt   +
                            f2Et   +         + cit

and a set of rules for the jumping variables such that the model solution is on

the unique stable manifold (see (A12) in appendix A):


          e = HiX       +
                            H2Et
                                   +
                                       H3c   +
                                                 C2

Note that C1 and C2 are intercept terms (shifting over time) that depend on

the time path of the exogenous variables.

     In general, it is not possible to find closed—form analytical solutions for

F, S, and H1 (in the muiticontroller game, we look for F, S, and H1 for each

of the countries i).        In our study we employ the technique of numerical dynamic

programming for linear quadratic systems, as in Oudiz and Sachs (1985) and

Currie and Levine (1985a). The details of the solution method, which rely

basically on a backward recursion procedure, are provided in Appendix A.

     Another procedure that we use for calculating policy rules is similar to

the first. Instead of assuming that each policymaker maximizes a

country-specific objective function, we assume that a single, global planner

chooses policy rules for each region to maximize a welfare function that is a

weighted sum of the welfare functions of the individual countries. As many

authors have shown (e.g. see Sachs and McKibbin (1985)), this cooperative

solution may avoid the inefficiencies of the Nash equilibrium found by assuming

that each each country chooses its policy rules non--cooperatively.
                                                         —11—


      It is useful to identify "candidates" for policy rules by maximizing an

explicit objective function. However, many rules are asserted to be "good" or

"robust" without reference to a particular objective function. Thus, in

addition to choosing rules through formal dynamic programming procedures, we

also directly specify some rules linking Ut and X, using suggestions from the

policy literature. Thus, we study choices for f that:           (1) fix exchange rates

across countries; (2) stabilize nominal GOP; etc. Even though such rules do not

expressly maximize a given objective function, they are often asserted to be

desirable, and are therefore worthy of our attention. Note that once we have

specified a rule f, we must use (1) and (2) to find a stable manifold for the

jumping variables et.


B.    Analyzing the Stochastic Properties of Alternative Regimes

      In this section we explore the implications of the observability of shocks

and describe the procedures followed to calculate the variance of target

variables in a stochastic steady state. We incorporate stochastic shocks to

the equations for aggregate demand, prices, money demand, and portfolio

preferences in the U.S., Japan and ROECD. There are 12 shocks in total.


      1.     Shocks Observed

      First consider the procedures used to calculate the variances of the

targets when the shocks are observed. A complete derivation is given in

Appendix A. The key point is that any rule which is chosen is converted into

the form:


                          +                    +
(6)         Ut =   fiXt       f2Et   +
                                         f3e       C1.
                                                          —12—


Note that since the shocks are "observed" prior to setting the policies, the

control variables depend explicitly on the shocks. We also find the

corresponding stable manifold for the jumping variables:


(7)        e = H1Xt     +
                            H2Et
                                   +
                                       H3ct      +
                                                     C2

We can now find the target variables as a function of the states, the exogenous

variables, and the stochastic shocks. Using a procedure set out in Appendix A,

section 2 we are able to find the variance of the target variables as a function

of the variance—covariance matrix of the shocks.


      2.   Shocks Unobserved When Policy is Selected

      When the shocks are unobserved at the time of selecting the control

variables, we set r3 in (6) to zero. Note that H3 will still be non-zero

because the shocks will affect the jumping variables despite the lack of any

policy response. This can be seen from equation (All) in Appendix A. In the

case of unobserved shocks, equations (6) and (7) would become (using notation

from appendix A):


           u = r'1x     +              +
                            r2E            c1.

           e = (J   +
                        Kri)xt     +
                                           (Q)e      +
                                                         (z+Kr2)e   +
                                                                        C2

We can then use the procedures described in Appendix A for the case of observed

shocks, to calculate the variances of the target variables.
                                       —13—


     3.     AFilterin9 Approach When Shocks are Unobserved

     A common prescription for policy setting in a stochastic environment is

for policymakers to follow a rule which links policy to a set of

contemporaneously observed variables, or intermediate targets in an attempt to

reach ultimate objectives. We formalize this approach in this section.

Consider the case in which the conditional var-iance-covarjance matrix of a set

of shocks is known but in any period the policymaker cannot directly observe

the shocks hitting the system. The approach which we develop here -is to observe

several variables and infer the underlying nature of the shocks by an optimal

Kalmari filtering rule (see Sargent (1979), p.209 for an illustration of this

process).

     The procedure we develop here is completely general, though we illustrate

it in this paper for a single special case. We assume that the monetary

authorities observe the exchange rate and decide on monetary policy based on

this observation as well as knowledge of the underlying model and the properties

of the underlying shocks. This gives a rule linking monetary policy to the

exchange rate which will indicate whether the authorities should optimally "lean

with the wind" or "lean against the wind" (i.e. whether a monetary contraction

or expansion should follow an observed appreciation of the currency).

    To make the procedure a little more transparent, -it -is worth considering a

simple example first. Let Mt be an observed variable related to two underlying

shocks in the following way (dropping time subscripts for convenience):


            M =          +
                  a1c1
                                                          —14-


 where      a =
                    [a1 a2]

                     1 2     ]




                           (a)

                       =   0                  for ij


Suppose that M is observed, but that €1 and                         are not. To find the expected

values of       and €2 given M, we want to find the projections of                     and €2 on M:


                           J     = y1a€


            P{c2      ae }       = y2ac


                                     2

where
            1
                =          a1a1
                       2                  2
                           +
                                 a       a2


                                 2
            2
                =       a2a2
and
                       2                 2
                                 a2 a2

We can now find t(ctIMt) = y Mt =                          where )' =

      Thus, we can describe the expectations of the shocks conditional on the

observation of M. Now let us turn to the multidimensional case. Suppose that

at any time t, a set of observed variables M is related to the states, lagged

states, jumping variables, control variables, exogenous variables, and the

unobserved shocks in the following way:


(8)      Mt =                             cz2 X +   a3e   +
                                                              a4U   +
                                                                        a5E   +
                                                     -15-


Using the same backward recursion technique as outlined in Section lILA, above,

we can find a set of rules for U where, in this case, the rules will be a

function not of the actual shocks, but of their expectation (i.e. projection)

given Mt:


                          +
(9)         Ut =   fiXt       r'2E   +
                                         r3 tIMt) +          cit
There is also a corresponding stable manifold for e, of the form:


(10)       e = HiX        +          +                   +          +   C2t
                              H2Et            t(etIMt)       H4ct

       Compare (9) with (6). Because of the linearity of the model and the

additivity of the disturbances, we can appeal to certainty equivalence to show

that the coefficients r1, r, and                    are the same whether or not the shocks are

observed. We can substitute for                      in (8) from equation (1) and for the rules

for e and Ut from (9) and (10). Simplifying gives:


(11)        Mt =      i       X +             +3

We are trying to find t(ctIMt) Equation(].1) can be rewritten

       t(€tIMt) =              — lt       —


This expression has the actual value of the shock on the right hand side. We
can appeal to the Law of Iterative Projections to find

       Formally, we need to fine the projections:



             P{cI 2 J                                for i =        1,2,3,.. .,12

                      12                 12'
where          =
                    [e €
                                                             —16—


Assume the conditional variance-covariance matrix of the shocks is E, where:


               =



Each projection will produce a vector of coefficients (-y') such that:

                               =
            P{I

By stacking these coefficients we find:


               =     [123            .                  =




                           2t
Now
(12)               Mt) =

or
                                                    —
(13)       t(€tIMt) =


Equation (13) now can be solved to give the conditional expectation of the
shocks based on observed variables and states


(14)        t(€tlMt) =         [I   +    )'3J'y{Mt —
       The policy rules can be stated in a number of different ways. In (9) we

stated the rule for the control variables as a function of the state variables

and the expectation of the shock conditional on M. We can also state the rule

as a function of the shocks themselves or as a function of the vector of

observed variables. Equation (12) can be substituted into (9) and (10) to find

new rules for the control and jumping variables as a function of the underlying

shocks:


(15)       Ut =            + 1'Et        +              +c
(16)
                           *        +
                                         *      +
                                                        *   +
                                                                *
               e = H1Xt                  H2Et       H3t
                                                             —17--




where
             *                                                 *
            r1=r1                                             H1=H

            12                                                 2     H2;

             *                                                 *
                  = F3)'/3;                                   H3 = H4 +

The rules for the control var-lables can also be written as a function of the

observed variables by substituting (14) into (9) and simplifying to find:

                           **           **           **        **
(17)        U     =
                          Ti Xt
                                    +
                                        2 Et +   13   Mt +


where
             **       =         -               -i
                           11       T3[I+)'3]
             **
            13 =                         -i y
                          F3fI+-yf3]
Given these new rules for the control variables and the jumping variables we

can proceed to calculate the variance of the targets by using the same

procedures outlined above.



IV. Design and Implementation of Monetary Regimes


       We can now use the methodology developed in Sect-ion III to examine the

performance of alternative monetary regimes. Before turning to the specific

rules, we make some general observations about alternative monetary regimes.

       The large literature that has emerged from the debate about fixed versus

flexible exchange rates has produced several helpful insights on choosing a

monetary regime. In the simple theoretical models generally used, it is found

that the appropriateness of any monetary regime depends on the nature of the

shocks impinging on the economy. For example, in a Mundell-Fleming world with
                                       —18--



capital mobility, if the shocks to the domestic economy are in the money demand

equation, then a fixed exchange rate will dissipate the shock to the rest of the

world and be beneficial to the domestic economy. If shocks emanate from the

real economy, then a flexible exchange rate will generally assist in dampening

the effects of the shocks on the domestic economy. If foreign price level

shocks are the main source of disturbance, then a flexible exchange rate is

better for insulating the domestic economy; and if the foreign shocks are shifts

in demand for the home good, a flexible exchange rate is better. A second set

of issues involves the incentive effects of any regime. Problems of

beggar-thy—neighbor policies can emerge under flexible exchange rates where

countries think they can manipulate a bilateral exchange rate to gain some

advantage (see Sachs and Oudiz (1985)). A fixed exchange rate regime may

provide a constraint on national policymakers to prevent beggar-thy-neighbor

policies.

     The case for return to more managed exchange rates is examined in more

detail in Sachs (1985b) and Obstfeld (1985). The case for exchange rate rules

is quite attractive and includes arguments about increased predictability of

national authorities and preventing beggar-thy-neighbour behavior. These gains

must be balanced, however, against the argument that a set of international

rules can lead all participants to make the same mistakes on a global scale.

     Our study focuses on regimes for monetary policy rather than regimes for

both monetary and fiscal policies. With two, policy instruments the analysis of

strategic interactions becomes more complex, as shown in McK-ibbin and Sachs

(1986). We consider seven alternative monetary regimes in this paper under

various assumptions about the observability of the shocks.

    We define a regime as money supply rule for each region in the form
                                                            —19—


       U. =
        i     r ii.xt + r2i.E t   +   r 3i.€ t   +c
                                                      lit
where   U -is a vector of control variables for country i (in this case containing

the money supply).

(1) Pure Float

       Our first case, a pure floating exchange rate, is an obvious base case to

choose. In this case, the money supplies in the various regions are held fixed,

and do not respond to exogenous shocks or changes in the state variables.

(2) Noncooperation

       A model such as the MSG model is particularly useful for analyzing the

problems of beggar-thy-neighbor policies. This is done in the second regime

in which we specify a social welfare function for each of the three OECD

regions. Social welfare in each region is specified as a function of various

macroeconomic targets, such as the inflation rates, the GOP gap, the current

account deficit, and the budget deficit. The social welfare functions are made

intertemporal, by assuming that the level of social welfare depends on the

discounted values of the targets in the current and all future periods.

The specific form of the social welfare function that we employ is quadratic,

as follows:


(18)          W =        12             +
                                            1T + O.5CA
                                                               +
                                                                   o.1D]

where: W is the level of social welfare,

        Q   is   the GDP gap,

        it is the CPI inflation rate,

        CA is the current account-GDP ratio,
                                          —20-


        O is the domestic budget deficit-GOP ratio,

       o   is   the social rate of time discount.

 Clearly, macroeconomic "bliss" is achieved when the GOP gap is zero, CPI

 inflation is zero, the current account is in balance, and the budget is in

balance.

     Using the techniques discussed in Section III, we calculate a set of

monetary policy rules in the three OECO regions that have the following

"equilibrium" property: each set of rules is optimal for the given country

(in that it minimizes the dynamic social loss function), taking as given the

rules that are being employed in the other regions. We have shown elsewhere

(see Sachs and McKibbin (1985)) that such an equilibrium does not necessarily

yield very attractive outcomes. These rules will likely contain some types of

beggar-thy-neighbor policies, and will therefore show some of the disadvantages

of the classic prisoners' dilemma. For example, Oudiz and Sachs (1985) have

shown that the equilibrium rules are likely to produce excessively tight

monetary policies and high real interest rates in an inflationary environment.

(3) Cooperation

     It is very likely the case that the social welfare of all of the

countries can be enhanced by a different set of policies, that provides for

cooperatively selected rules of the game. We can find such a set of rules

by assuming that a single "world" planner maximizes a single social welfare

function, which is a weighted average of the social welfare functions of the

U.S., Japan, and the ROECO. With some arbitrariness, we select these weights to

be GNP shares. The result of this global optimization is a new set of rules

that avoids the problem of beggar-thy-neighbor policies.
                                        —21—


 (4) N9jflDfjarejg
      An alternative regime that is frequently proposed is to target a measure

 of nominal GOP. We implement this rule by assuming that each of the OECD

 regions choose monetary policy non-cooperatively to minimize the variance of

 its own nominal GOP, taking as given the rules of the other countries.    Exchange
 rates are left free to fluctuate. This is the fourth and final of the floating

 exchange rate regimes that we consider.

 (5) McKinnon Rule

      We now come to the regimes of fixed exchange rates. Of course, saying that

 a regime has fixed exchange rates does not completely specify the monetary

arrangements of the regime because there are many ways of allocating the

responsibility across the countries for keeping the exchange rates constant.

The first case we consider is that proposed by Ronald McKinnon (1984). Under

the McKinnon rule, exchange rates within the OECD region are held fixed with an

additional constraint that a weighted average of the OECD nominal money stocks

remains fixed (or has a fixed, low rate of growth).

(6)    obal Nominal GDP Targeting

      The second fixed exchange rate regime is the global nominal GOP

targeting regime. In this regime we find a set of money supply rules for

each of the three regions which:    (a) fixes the cross-exchange rates; and

(b) fixes the expected nominal GDP of the world economy. The operational

difference of this rule and the McKinnon rule can be best understood with

respect to particular shocks. Suppose a pure velocity shock occurs in the

U.S., which reduces the demand for U.S. money for several periods. In the

McK-innon plan, the world stock of money would remain constant, but the U.S.
                                       —22—


money stock would decline while the money supplies in the rest of the OECO

would increase (these shifts would be necessary to keep the exchange rate

fixed). On balance, an excess supply of money, at initial interest rates and

pr-ices, would develop in the world economy. The result would be an increase in

world output and eventually in prices. Under the nominal GOP targetting plan,

however, the fall -in U.S. money demand will be fully compensated by a

fall in the U.S. money supply. There will be no need for a sustained period

of higher output or prices. The key distinction is that the GOP targetting

rule does not require that the global money stock remains fixed.

(7) Leaning With or Against the Wind

     Neither the cooperative rules nor the non-cooperative rules are likely to

produce purely fixed exchange rates as the first best optimum. However, the

rules that do emerge are likely to be too complex for actual implementation.

An alternative set of rules may be easy to implement, although they do not

perform as well as the optimum rules. One such set of proposals has been called

"leaning with the wind" or "leaning against the wind." This is implemented in

this paper as the third technique outlined in Section III. We assume that

policymakers know the variance—covariance matrix of a range of shocks, although

the specific realization of the shocks in any period is not observed. The

authorities in each region maximize a welfare function of the form given in

equation (5') and are assumed to infer the realization of any shocks by

observing movements in the exchange rate. They then apply an optimal rule to

determine the expected value of each shock and adjust policy accordingly. The

rules which arise from this regime depend crucially on the variance—covariance

matrix of the shocks.
                                      —23—


     An exhaustive analysis of the seven different rules would require the

study of many types of shocks, with alternative assumptions about their

variances and covariances. In this preliminary study, we consider twelve

temporary shocks in all: shocks to money demand in the U.S., Japan, and

ROECD; shocks to aggregate demand in each region; shocks to prices in each

region including OPEC prices; and shocks to portfolio preferences. We

primarily restrict our attention to stochastically independent shocks. However,

we do consider one case of negatively correlated velocity shocks.



V.   Simulation Results


     Impulse responses to 7 of the shocks (of unit size) are illustrated in

figures 1 to 7 in appendix B. The reader is referred to this appendix for

more discussion of the results. These figures contain the responses of U.S.

output, inflation, the current account, exchange rate and short interest rates

for shocks -in the case of a flexible exchange rate with no policy response.

To save space, only the results for shocks to U.S. and ROECO aggregate demand,

prices and money demand are presented. These figures illustrate the dynamics

of the model and the nature of the various shocks under the alternative regimes.


A.   Shocks Observed or Unobserved

     Using the procedures outlined in Section III, we calculate the standard

deviations of a set of targets given the set of stochastic shocks under the

first six exchange regimes (the case of leaning with/against the wind is

discussed in the next section). Tables 1 to 12 contain the results for each

of the shocks where the shocks are assumed to be independent. Table 13
                                      -24-


illustrates the results for a negatively correlated monetary shock. Within

each table are the results for the standard deviations of output, inflation,

and the current account, and the budget deficit, for both the U.S. and ROECO,

in the case of observed and unobserved shocks. In order to save space, we do

not include the results for Japan, as they are qualitatively similar to the

ROECD and U.S. results. To read these tables note that each column

corresponds to a rule being followed by the major regions and each row

corresponds to the standard errors of the target variables. Therefore -in

Table 1, with a stochastic portfolio shock (with unit variance) in a flexible

exchange rate regime with no policy reaction, the standard deviation of U.S.

output is 0.323. In the noncooperative regime the standard deviation of U.S.

output is .265 if the shock is unobserved by policymakers and .050 if the

shock is observed. Table 14 contains a calculation of welfare loss for each

region using the intertemporal utility function shown -in equation (27).

     Before examining the consequences of each shock in detail, there are

several general points to note about the implications of the observability of

any shock. First, whether or not a shock is observed does not affect the

results for the flexible exchange rate regime or the fixed exchange rate

regimes since monetary policy is set to maintain the fixed exchange rate

independently of the shocks. There is no policy response under the floating

exchange rate case and so observing or not observing the shock makes no

difference. Second, observing a shock generally reduces the variances of

the targets. This is not a general proposition because for a range of welfare

functions, it is possible that when shocks are observed, policymakers could

use that information to choose a rule that raises the variance of some targets
                                       —25—


while lowering the variance of other targets. For example, if a policymaker

cares about targets other than output or inflation, it is possible that -in

minimizing the variance of some other target, the variance of output and

inflation may increase if the shock is observed and the policymaker acts

quickly to offset the effect of the shock on his target variable.

     Tables 1 and 2 contain the results for a shock that shifts the demand by

private portfolio holders for dollar assets relative to ECU- or Yen-dominated

assets, respectively. The cooperative rule dominates the other regimes -in

terms of minimizing the variance of the target variables presented. Note that

the difference between the cooperative and noncooperative rules are very

small. This is the case for each of the shocks considered below, and suggests

that the gains to coordination are small in this empirical model. In Sachs

and McKibbin (1985) we also found that policy coordination yielded rather

small gains for the industrialized countries, but that the gains to the developing

countries from coordination of the industrialized countries were potentially

quite large. We do not consider this aspect of policy coordination here.

     Depending on the weight one places on the various targets, the nominal

GNP targetting performs about as well as the flexible exchange rate system if

the portfolio shocks are unobserved and better if the policymakers can observe

the shocks and act quickly to offset them. The two fixed exchange rate

regimes perform poorly for this type of shock.

     The results for aggregate demand shocks in the U.S., Japan and ROECD are

presented in Tables 3 to 5.   In the case of the U.S. demand shock, cooperation

dominates for the country that does not directly experience the demand shock,

but is worse for the U.S. In the case of the ROECD and Japanese shocks,
                                      -26-


cooperation benefits each region. This result depends on the weights each

region receives in the global planner's objective function. We assume GNP

weights in this analysis. Presumably a set of weights can be found for the

U.S. shock in which cooperation benefits each country.

     Nominal GNP targeting now performs marginally better than a flexible

exchange rate in the case of unobserved demand shocks and much better.if the

shocks are observed. The McKinnon rule is again dominated by the other

regimes. The added flexibility of the global GNP targeting shows to be

beneficial. It reduces the variance of targets relative to the McKinnon rule

and reduces the variance of targets relative to the other regimes for the

ROECD. This property is the result of the weights placed on each country in

creating the average measure of world GNP. No weighting will make every

country better off relative to the cooperative regime.

     Results for an OPEC oil price shock are shown in Table 6. Cooperation is

again the dominant regime. The McKinnon rule now performs well and dominates

the country-specific and global GNP targeting regimes. This occurs because

the world money supply does not accommodate the price shock and there is

little need for exchange rate adjustment between the U.S. and ROECO. Although

the results are not shown, this is not the case for Japan. This can be seen

in the summary welfare calculations in Table 14. Japan requires a

depreciation relative to the other major regions when oil prices rise (and an

appreciation when oil prices fall) and is hurt by the nonadjustment on nominal

exchange rates.

     Tables 7 to 9 contain the results for uncorrelated price shocks in each

region. The small difference between cooperation and noncooperation is
                                       —27—


 again seen here. The McKinnon rule and global GNP targeting again stand out as

accentuating the variance of the targets.

     To this point the fixed exchange rate regimes have performed poorly

relative to the other regimes. This is not altogether surprising because the

shocks have been from the real economy and real exchange rate adjustment is

required. In our model with sticky prices, no initial adjustment of the real

exchange rate can occur when the nominal exchange rate is also fixed.

Tables 10 to 12 illustrate the results for an uncorrelated shock to money

demand in each region. Compared to the regimes with unobserved shocks, the

McKinnon rule works well for the country in which the shock occurs because the

shock is dissipated to the rest of the world. The other countries suffer from

greater variance of targets relative to the other regimes. This is a familiar

result in which a domestic monetary shock is best handled by a fixed exchange

rate because it dissipates the shock throughout the world economy. Other

countries would prefer a flexible exchange rate to aid in insulating their own

economies against the shock. However, when compared to the case of the

observed shocks the McKinnon rule performs less well because in other regimes

the authorities can directly offset the shock in the money market. Under the

McKinnon rule the constraint on global money supplies necessitates the

transmission of the shock to other money markets. This highlights a problem

with the McKinnon rule even in the case of money demand shocks for which it

was designed. For the shock to be totally offset -it would require a rise in

the world money stock with the only change to national money stocks being in

the region where the money demand shock occurs. If the shocks are negatively

correlated across countries (i.e. money demand rises in one country while it
                                      -28-


falls in another) then the McKinnon rule would totally offset the shocks.

There would not be any need for a change in the global money stock. This is

illustrated in Table 13 which shows the consequences of a negatively

correlated money demand shock in the U.S. and ROECD. This shock assumes that

the unit shocks to the demand for money are perfectly negatively correlated in

the two regions. The McKinnon rule performs very well compared to the other

regimes when the shocks are unobserved. The small deviations result because

the weights on each country in calculating the global money stock are not

equal, yet the shock is the same size in each country. With observed shocks

the other regimes can again completely offset the shock in the money markets

and so the McKinnon rule is marginally outperformed.

     In Table 14 we apply the welfare function given in equation (27) to

calculate a summary measure of welfare loss for the U.S., ROECO and Japan under

each regime. The results conform with the discussion on individual variances

above.

     In summary, the cooperative and noncooperative regimes under a floating

exchange rate perform better than any of the fixed exchange rate regimes

except in the case of an unobserved negatively correlated velocity shock.

This shows the main advantage of the McKinnon rule. In general, the global

nominal GOP targetting regime outperforms the McKinnon rule because it allows

some flexibility in adjusting the world stock of money when required. This

additional flexibility is not enough to offset a problem with the fixed

exchange rate regimes. With sticky prices, a fixed exchange rate initially

prohibits the adjustment of the real exchange rate when it is required. The

reader is referred to Roubini (1986) for a discussion of the conditions under
                                       —29-


 which a fixed exchange rate can lead to the optimal cooperative outcome in a

 theoretical three country model.

      The analysis so far may be unfair to the McKinnon proposal. There are

many issues which we have not addressed and circumstances which would favor a

rule such as the McKinnon proposal. We have ignored the problems with

uncertain parameter values that would hinder the implementation of any of the

"optimal" rules. One of the appealing features of the McKinnon proposal is the

ease of implementation of the rule. The other rules we investigate are very

complicated functions linking the control variables to the conditions of the

economy and would be difficult to implement.


B.   Leaning With the Wind or Leaning Against the Wind and Optimal Filtering

     Many economists have advocated the use of intermediate targets and

indicators to set policy. One such application is the prescription to set

monetary policy by observing movements in the nominal exchange rate. This has

been called "leaning with the wind" -if the policy is to relax monetary policy

when the exchange rate is depreciating and "leaning against the wind" if the

policy is to relax monetary policy when the exchange rate is appreciating. In

the former policy the objective is to push the exchange rate in the direction

that it is already moving and in the latter case it is to dampen any movement.

In this section we formalize the policy using the third technique outlined in

Section III above. We assume that policymakers observe the exchange rate and

apply an optimal filtering rule to find an appropriate feedback rule linking

monetary policy to the exchange rate. To illustrate the key point of this

section we make different assumptions about the underlying nature of the shocks
                                      —30-


and derive the best rule linking the control variables (monetary supplies) to

the observed variable (the effective nominal exchange rate).

     Consider the problem faced by the U.S. when the underlying shocks are

known to be either aggregate demand or money demand shocks. Consider how the

policymakers should act if they know which of the two shocks has occurred.

In the case of a known positive aggregate demand shock, without a policy

response, the exchange rate would appreciate and output and inflation would rise

above the desired levels. The appropriate response is to contract monetary

policy to offset the demand shock. In the case of a rise in money demand, with

no policy response, there would be falling output and an appreciating exchange

rate as the result of rising interest rates. The policymaker can completely

offset the effect of the money demand shock by a money supply expansion. There

would then be no spillover effects from the money market to the rest of the

economy. Now suppose that the shocks themselves are unobserved, but that the

the exchange rate is observed to be appreciating. Given a conditional

variance—covariance matrix, the authorities apply the filtering rule to

determine the best rules to link policy to the exchange rates. As an

illustration suppose that shocks have zero covariance. Table 15 shows the

optimizing rule linking the monetary policy to the exchange rate for a range

of variances of the shocks. The calculation of expected value is based on

actual shocks of unit value.

     This table illustrates the proposition that if the shock causing the

appreciation is more likely to be an increase in aggregate demand, the

policymaker should contract monetary policy. In this case a rise in aggregate

demand is accompanied by an appreciating currency. The contractionary monetary
                                      —31—


policy will reinforce the appreciating currency and so will be a policy of

"leaning with the wind." If the shock is more likely to be a rise in the demand

for money, the policymaker should accommodate the shock by expanding monetary

policy. In this case, a rise in money demand is also accompanied by an

appreciating currency. The appropriate policy response is to "lean against the

wind" and adopt an expansionary monetary policy which will offset the

appreciating currency. The reason for the large offset coefficient when the

shock is a monetary shock comes from the property that a monetary shock can be

completely offset in the money market. The exchange rate will be independent of

the shock in this case.

     The example illustrates a proposition that is central to this paper. The

appropriate policy rule depends crucially on the nature and observability of

the shocks hitting the world economy. This general principal clearly needs

further detailed investigation.



VI. Conclusion


     This paper has presented techniques for examining the operating

characteristics of alternative rules for the world monetary system. We have

shown that the performance of each regime depends crucially on the nature of the

shocks impinging on the economy using a dynamic general equilibrium simulation

model of the world economy. For the country-specific shocks considered

above, the fixed exchange rate regimes perform poorly in the sense of leading

to a large variance of a set of macroeconomic target variables. When a shock

requires adjustment of the real exchange rate, a regime of fixed nominal
                                      —32—


exchange rates in a sticky price world, leads to short term nonadjustment of

the real exchange rate which results in increased variance of target

variables. For global shocks, such as a change in OPEC prices, the fixed

exchange rate regime performs tolerably well. For other shocks, such a

negatively correlated monetary shocks, the fixed exchange rate regime proposed

by McKinnon performs quite well.

     Although the results are model specific, the techniques we have developed

allow us to more fully explore the implications of any proposal for reforming

the world monetary system than is possible in simple theoretical models of

international interdependence. We are now continuing this work in a more

complete empirical model.
                                    Table   1:     Increase   in   the Demand for Ecu Assets
                                                   (standard deviation of targets)
                                            Unobserved Shocks                                       Observed Shocks
                    float     noncoop            coop nominal        McKinnon   Global y       noncoop    coop nominal y
US      output      0.323      0.265         0.263      0.347         1.240     0.838           0.050   0.044    0.148
        inflation   0.182      0.159         0.158      0.157         0.535     0.379           0.068   0.065    0.092
        CA          0.085      0.094         0.095      0.079         0.258     0.153           0.087   0.087    0.078
        budget      0.005      0.005         0.005      0.004         0.013     0.007           0.006   0.006    0.005
ROECD   output      0.419      0.360         0.360      0.442         2.178     0.327           0.059   0.040    0.155
        inflation   0.192      0.204         0.204      0.189         1.119     0.119           0.079   0.076    0.096
        CA          0.115      0.132         0.129      0.119         0.368     0.171           0.128   0.123    0.120
        budget      0.001      0.001         0.001      0.001         0.003     0.002           0.001   0.001    0.001
                            Table   2:   Increase in the Demand for Yen Dominated Assets
                                            (standard deviation of targets)
                                            Unobserved Shocks                                       Observed Shocks
                    float     noncoqp                 nominal
                                                            y        McKinnon   Global y       noncoop    coop nominal y
US      output      0.105     0.087          0.084      0.106         0.264     0.245          0.032    0.017    0.055
        inflation   0.056     0.055          0.053      0.047         0.151     0.113          0.028    0.023    0.031
        CA          0.025     0.031          0.028      0.021         0.072     0.043          0.028    0.024    0.020
        budget      0.001     0.002          0.002      0.001         0.003     0.002          0.002    0.002    0.001
ROECD   output      0.108     0.089         0.083       0.113         0.372     0.032          0.048    0.019    0.060
        inflation   0.058     0.056         0.053       0.054         0.194     0.031          0.035    0.025    0.035
        CA          0.036     0.049         0.045       0.046         0.104     0.061          0.057    0.051    0.048
        budget      0.000     0.000         0.000       0.000         0.001     0.000          0.000    0.000    0.000
                                      Table   3:   U.S. Aggregate Demand Shock
                                         (standard deviation of targets)
                                     Unobserved Shocks
                    float   nonco2     coop nominal v       McKinnon   Global                         nominal
                                                                                y   noncoop    coop
US      output      2.163   1.442     1.446        1.574     6.654     3.668         0.182    0.214    0.638
        inflation   0.929   0.483     0.497        0.455     3.256     1.667         0.280    0.274    0.381
        CA          0.672   0.666     0.667        0.690     1.437     0.935         0.709    0.706    0.675
        budget      0.010   0.008     0.008        0.011     0.044     0.024         0.008    0.008    0.006
ROECD   output      1.053   0.805     0.803        1.280     4.896     1.086         0.093    0.096    0.397
        inflation   0.627   0.486     0.486        0.617     2.508     0.429         0.192    0.191    0.259
        CA          0.550   0.547     0.546        0.568     1.088     0.687         0.595    0.592    0.576
        budget      0.002   0.002     0.002        0.002     0.009     0.005         0.002    0.002    0.001
                                      Table   4:   ROECD Aggregate Demand Shock
                                         (standard deviation of targets)
                                     Unobserved Shocks                                   Observed Shocks
                    float   nonco      coop nominal y      McKinnon    Global   y   noncoop    coop nominal     y
US      output      1.054   0.646    0.643         1.062    2.774      2.388        0.130     0.120
        inflation   0.655   0.420    0.420         0.517    1.091      1.087        0.184     0.178
        CA          0.248   0.24:3   0.240         0.223    0.666      0.419        0.196     0.196
        budget      0.017   0.01:3   0.013         0.011    0.034      0.016        0.011     0.011    0.008
ROECD   output      2.126   1.366    1.364         1.509    7.423      1.001        0.167     0.135
        inflation   0.936   0.448    0.447         0.456    3.730      0.350        0.251     0.247    0.318
        CA          0.304   0.342    0.330         0.321    0.963      0.423        0.283     0.272    0.261
        budget      0.004   0.00:3   0.003         0.002    0.007      0.003
                                     Table   5:   Japanese Aggregate Demand Shock
                                             (standard deviation of targets)
                                                                                            Observed Shocks
                    float   noncoop       coop      nominal y    McKinnon   Global y   noncoop    coop nominaly
US      output      0.323    0.228      0.210           0.368     0.551     0.875      0.097    0.054    0. 100
        inflation   0.210    0.162      0.155           0.184     0.285     0.409      0.091    0.078    0.103
        CA          0.072    0.095      0.083           0.069     0.192     0.148      0.083    0.071    0.058
        budget      0.006    0.006      0.006           0.005     0.007     0.006      0.006    0.006    0.004
ROECO   output      0.344    0.257      0.217           0.393     0.781     0.117      0.141    0.059    0.191
        inflation   0.217    0.174      0.158           0.203     0.428     0.101      0.106    0.082    0.113
        CA          0.149    0.178      0.159           0.159     0.355     0.200      0.177    0.160    0.147
        budget      0.001    0.001      0.001           0.001     0.002     0.001      0.001    0.001    0.001
                                         Table     6:    OPEC Oil Price Shock
                                          (standard deviation of targets)
                                       Unobserved Shocks                                    Observed Shocks
                    float   noncoop      coop nominal y         McKinnon    Global y   noncoop    coop nominal y
US      output      0.029   0.010       0.008           0.050    0.030      0.048      0.011    0.009    0.044
        inflation   0.025   0.017       0.017           0.030    0.024      0.024      0.015    0.015
        CA          0.002   0.003       0.003           0.003    0.004      0.003      0.004    0.004    0.003
        budget      0.001   0.001       0.001           0.001    0.001      0.001      0.001    0.001    0.001
ROECO   output      0.049   0.019       0.017           0.078    0.063      0.069      0.020    0.017    0.069
        inflation   0.038   0.033       0.033           0.048    0.042      0.045      0.027             0.044
        CA          0.011   0.010       0.011           0.011    0.012      0.010      0.009    0.010    0.010
        budget      0.000   0.000       0.000           0.000    0.000      0.000      0.000
                                              Table   7:   U.S. Price Shock
                                         (standard deviation of targets)
                                     Unobserved Shocks                                    Observed Shocks
                    float   nonc       coop nominal y          Mckinnon   Globaly    noncoop    coop nominal y
US      output      2.769   1.819     1.813      3.144         4.783      3.717      1.630    1.626    2.946
        inflation   1.257   1.441     1.447      1.353         2.594      1.848      0.954    0.960    1.249
        CA          0.390   0.232     0.233      0.479         0.946      0.642      0.216    0.217    0.458
        budget      0.014   0.0108    0.008      0.019         0.035      0.025      0.007    0.007    0.019
ROECD   output      0.630   0.152     0.160      0.691         3.419      0.453               0.057
                                                                                     0.041             0.484
        inflation   0.422   0.140     0.141      0.374         1.697      0.083      0.073    0.068    0.276
        CA          0.319   0.191     0.190      0.352         0.727      0.443      0.178    0.178    0.337
        budget      0.003   0.002     0.002      0.004         0.007      0.005      0.001    0.002    0.004
                                           Table      8:   ROECO Price Shock
                                         (standard deviation of targets)
                                     Unobserved Shocks                                    Observed Shocks
                    float   noncg      coop nominal y         McKinnon    Global y   noncoop    coop nominal y
US      output      0.734   0.199     0.202      0.699         1.734      1.222      0.065    0.074    0.449
        inflation   0.474   0.158     0.159      0.372         0.626      0.455      0.077    0.064    0.257
        CA          0.147   0.100     0.082      0.123         0.422      0.210      0.069    0.055    0.111
        budget      0.010   0.004     0.004      0.010         0.021      0.009      0.001    0.001    0.009
ROECO   output      3.087   1.941     1.952      3.398         5.627      3.222      1.629    1.630    2.980
        inflation   1.380   1.522     1.528      1.536         2.992      1.478      0.936    0.934    1.324
        CA          0.169   0.139     0.121      0.187         0.584      0.247      0.097    0.082    0.168
        budget      0.002   0.001     0.001      0.002         0.004      0.002      0.000    0.000    0.002
                                         Table      9:   Japanese Price Shock
                                        (standard deviation of targets)
                                      Unobserved Shocks                                    Observed Shocks
                    float   noncoop     coop nominal y         McKir,non   Global y   noncoop    coop nominal y
US      output      0.321    0.126     0.092        0.350       0.434      0.935       0.083   0.047    0.224
        inflation   0.227    0.095     0.082        0.198       0.186      0.415       0.063   0.045    0.143
        CA          0.064    0.065     0.048        0.059       0.157      0.128       0.056   0.042    0.055
        budget      0.005    0.003     0.003        0.004       0.007      0.004       0.002   0.002    0 .004
ROECD   output      0.339    0.172     0.107        0.369       0.810      0.262      0.125    0.058    0.234
        inflation   0.232    0.113     0.087        0.214       0.406      0.190      0.080    0.050    0. 153
        CA          0.143    0.128     0.103        0.153       0.347      0.200      0.112    0.092    0.153
        budget      0.001              0.001        0.001       0.001      0.001      0.001    0.001    0.001
                                      Table   10;    U.S. Money Demand Shock
                                        (standard deviation of targets)
                                      Unobserved Shocks                                    Observed Shocks
                    float   noncoop     coop nominal y         McKinnon    Global     noncoop    coop nomijy
US      output      1.681   1.574     1.573         1.729       0.706      0.001      0.000    0.000   0.000
        inflation   0.518   0.621     0.624         0.565       0.277      0.000      0.000    0.000   0.000
        CA          0.166   0.165     0.165         0.190                  0.000      0.000    0.000   0.000
        budget      0.002   0.001     0.001         0.004       0.003      0.000      0.000    0.000   0.000
ROECD   output      0.315   0.143     0.145         0.155       1.075      0.000      0.000    0.000   0.000
        inflation   0.133   0.056     0.057         0.089                  0.000      0.000    0.000   0.000
        CA          0.159   0.162     0.162         0.176      0.095       0.000      0.000    0.000   0.000
        budget      0.000   0.000     0.000
                                           Table 11:      ROECD Money Demand Shock
                                             (standard deviation of targets)
                                                                                                 Observed Shocks
                         float   nonc        coop      nominal   y   McKinnon   Global ,j   noncoop    coop nominal y
     US      output      0.260   0.043      0.023        0.241        0.734     0.000        0.000   0.000    0.000
             inflation   0.151   0.052      0.053        0.141        0.290     0.000        0.000   0.000    0.000
             CA          0.061   0.037      0.027        0.057        0.083     0.000        0.000   0.000    0.000
             budget      0.004   0.004      0.004        0.005        0.003     0.000        0.000   0.000    0.000
     ROECD   output      2.259   1.995      2.002        2.254        1.121     0.000        0.000   0.000    0.000
             inflation   0.705   0.799      0.803        0.773        0.404     0.000        0.000   0.000    0.000
             CA          0.069   0.056      0.047        0.070        0.099     0.000        0.000   0.000    0.000
             budget      0.001   0.001      0.001        0.001        0.001     0.000        0.000   0.000    0.000
03
                                         Table   12:    Japanese Money Demand Shock
                                             (standard deviation of targets)
                                           Unobserved Shocks                                     Observed Shocks
                         float   nonc        coop nominal y          McKinnon   Global y    noncoop    cooj nominalj
     US      output      0.082   0.072     0.043        0.033         0.243     0.000       0.000    0.000    0.000
             inflation   0.052   0.040     0.021        0.033         0.084     0.000       0.000             0.000
             CA          0.018   0.034     0.017        0.014         0.025     0.000       0.000    0.000    0.000
             budget      0.001   0.001     0.001        0.001         0.001     0.000       0.000    0.000    0.000
     ROECD   output      0.073   0.101     0.040        0.034         0.367     0.000       0.000    0.000    0.000
             inflation   0.057   0.054     0.019        0.033         0.121     0.000       0.000    0.000    0.000
             CA          0.022   0.066     0.026        0.027         0.032     0.000       0.000    0.000
             budget      0.000   0.000     0.000        0.000         0.000     0.000       0.000
                 Table 13:   Negatively Correlated Money Demand Shocks in the U.S. and ROECD
                                        (standard deviation of targets)
                                                                                        Observed Shocks
                    float    noncoop    ci     nominal y   McKinnon   Global y     noncoop    coop norninaly
US      output      1.587    1.564     1.557     1.580      0.024     0.000        0.000       0.000   0.000
        inflation   0.426    0.598     0.593     0.461      0.009     0.000        0.000       0.000   0.000
        CA          0.163    0.170     0.166     0.196      0.003     0.000        0.000       0.000   0.000
        budget      0.000    0.005     0.004     0.008      0.000     0.000        0.000       0.000   0.000
ROECD   output      2.409    2.139     2.146     2.304      0.037     0.000        0.000               0.000
        inflation   0.694    0.836     0.839    0.742       0.014     0.000                    0.000   0.000
        CA          0.122    0.160     0.155    0.169       0.035     0.000                    0.000   0.000
        budget      0.001    0.001     0.001    0.002       0.000     0.000
                                        Table 14:      Welfare Calculation
                                      Portfolio Shift towards Ecu Assets
U.S.

          float   noncoop     c       Unobserved Shocks
                                     nominal y McKinnon        Global y
                                                                                  Observed Shocks
                                                                             noncoop    coop nominal y
         0.977     0.712     0.702     0.965         11.965     5.572         0.107    0.099   0.248
ROECO    1.442     1.267     1.261     1.547         40.629     0.903         0.177    0.155   0.313
Japan    0.656     0.687     0.478     0.823          5.146     1.095         0.562    0.240   0.396
                                         Portfolio Shift Towards Yen Assets
          float   noncoop     c       Unobserved Shocks
                                     nominal y McKinnon        Global y
                                                                                  Observed Shocks
                                                                             noncoop    coop nominal y
U.S.     0.098     0.080     0.075     0.089          0.663     0.481         0.011    0.011   0.029
ROECO    0.108     0.091     0.080     0.113          1.235     0.037         0.023    0.023   0.046
Japan    1.737     1.801     1.597     2.740         20.638     0.874         0.384    0.384   0.775
                                              U.S.   AgreQate Demand Shock
                                      Unobserved Shocks                           Observed Shocks
          float   noncoop            nominal y Mckinnon        Global y      noncoop    coon nominal y
U.S.    37.714    16.436    16.656    18.519         371.487   109.380       3.804     3.820   6.336
ROECD   12.079     7.808     7.791    14.978         207.562    11.100       2.398     2.374   3.433
Japan    7.503     4.408     4.517     8.722          41.692    33.315       1.526     1.540   2.371
                                           ROECO AgQregate Demand Shock
                                      Unobserved Shocks                          Observed Shocks
          float                      nominal y McKinnon        Global   j    noncoop   coop nominal y
U.S.    11.172     4.559     4.528    9.413           57.865    45.323       0.678     0.639   1.638
ROECO   34.993    13.122    13.038   15.381          461.234     7.844       1.290     1.178   2.946
Japan    8.547     5.488     3.691    7.753           28.083     7.960       3.093     1.347   2.457
                                     Table 14:   Welfare Calculation (contd.)
                                          Japanese Aggregate Demand Shock
                                      Unobserved Shocks                          Observed Shocks
          float   noncoop            nominal y McKinnon        Global y     noncoop    coop nominal y
U.s.     1.091     0.625     0.544     1.145        2.767       6.171           0.181    0.110    0.313
ROECO    1.291     0.869     0.670     1.438        6.064       0.410           0.407    0.233    0.460
Japan   14.720     9.240     6.101     6.805      259.563      10.222           6.664    3.878    8.689
                                                 pc    Price   Shock
                                      Unobserved Shocks                          Observed Shocks
          float   noncoop     2Q2    nominal y McKinnon        Global y     noncoop    coop nominal       v
U.S.     0.011     0.004     0.004     0.023        0.011       0.019           0.003    0.003    0.019
ROECD    0.029     0.014     0.014     0.059        0.042       0.049           0.011    0.010    0.048
Japan    0.068     0.054     0.047     0.122        0.125       0.087           0.048    0.037    0.137
                                                 U.S. Price Shock
          float   noncoop     c       Unobserved Shocks
                                     nominal y McKinnon        Global y
                                                                                 Observed Shocks
                                                                            noncoop    coop nominal y
u.s.    60.393    41.338    41.404    75.769      204.73].   115.848        24.884      24.922   66.040
ROECO    4.697     0.559     0.557     4.843       98.887      2.286         0.240       0.245    2.754
Japan    2.855     0.333     0.365     2.045       17.770      7.558         0.147       0.169    1.206
                                                 ROECD Price Shock
                                      Unobserved Shocks                          Observed Shocks
          float   noncoop     cg     nominal y McKinnon        Global   y   noncoop    22QJ
U.S.     5.547     0.546     0.540     4.292       21.827      10.722        0.114       0.092    1.902
ROECD   73.520    46.301    46.721    89.639      274.489      81.481       24.273      24.242   68.302
Japan    4.161     1.368     0.668     3.305       11.151       5.502        0.666       0.217    1.754
                                             Table   14:     Welfare Calculation (Contd.)
                                                           Japanese Price Shock
                                               Unobserved Shocks                             Observed Shocks
                  float   noncoop     co      nominal y McKinnon        Global y        noncoop    coop nominal y
     U.S.        1.155     0.210     0.133     1.122            1.550    6.799           0.098      0.044   0.518
     ROECD       1.334     0.393     0.204     1.384            6.078    0.996           0.225      0.093   0.688
     Japan      43.170    36.367    33.698    45.555          228.572   36.295          25.924
     24.004   50.688
                                                       U.S. Money Demand Shock
                                              Unobserved Shocks                              Observed Shocks
                 float    noncoop     co     nominal y McKinnon         Global y        noncoop    coop nominal y
     U.S.      18.641     18.014    18.043    20.136           3.626     0.000              0.000   0.000   0.000
     ROECD      0.880      0.291     0.294     0.391           8.046     0.000              0.000   0.000   0.000
     Japan      0.432      0.174     0.171     0.333           1.889     0.000              0.000
(N                                                                                                  0.000   0.000
                                                     ROECD    Money Demand Shock
                                              Unobserved Shocks                              Observed Shocks
                 float    noncoo      co     romThal y McKinnon         Global y        noncoop    coop nominalji
     U.S.       0.642      0.047     0.038      0.555          3.921     0.000              0.000   0.000   0.000
     ROECD     33.575     28.930    29.146     34.525          8.755     0.000              0.000   0.000   0.000
     Japan      0.458      0.554     0.095      0.490          2.046     0.000              0.000   0.000   0.000
                                                 Japanese Money Demand Shock
                                              Unobserved Shocks                              Observed Shocks
                 float    noncoop    coop    nominal y McKinnon         Global   .y     noncoop    coop nominaly
     u.S.       0.068      0.052     0.017     0.019           0.405     0.000              0.000   0.000   0.000
     ROECD      0.068      0.113    0.0:17     0.022           0.908     0.000              0.000   0.000   0.000
     Japan     11.325     13.441    12.309    17.489           0.212     0.000              0.000   0.000   0.000
                                    —43—



Table 15:        Rules for Monetary Policy Given an Observed Exchanae Rate


                                      t(lMt)            t(IMt)
    1.00                0.00            1.33             0.00            0.240
    0.90                0.10            1.32             0.05            0.230
    0.75                0.25            1.29             0.14            0.209
    0.50                0.50            1.20             0.40            0.145
    0.25                0.75            1.00             1.00           -0.047
    0.10                0.90            2.00             1.08           -0.620
    0.00                1.00            4.00             3.00            large-


note:        =   variance   of aggregate demand shock

         2
        Cm
             = variance     of money demand shock


 t((Mt)
             =   conditional   expectation of the aggregate demand shock.


t(€tlMt)
             =   conditional   expectation of the money demand shock.
             =   coefficient linking monetary policy to the exchange rate. A
                 positive value implies a contractionary monetary policy in
                 response to an appreciating currency or "leaning with the
                 wind".
                                                      —44—


                              Appendix A: Technical Derivations



1. Solution of Dynamic Programming Problem


        This section presents the solution algorithm for the following problem:



(A5) Max         W.=
                    1
                                    T.Q.T.
                                     1 1 1



   c'            .I_-.



(Al)             X÷1 = a1X          +
                                        a2e   +       + a4E   +
                                                                  a5€
(A2)             e+1 = 3iXt +           2e + 133U.t +         + 5t
                         =          +         +       ÷
(A3)             Tt          YiXt       72e                   +
                                                                  5€t
(A4)             (e+1) =        E   [
                                        e+1
               where the subscript i refers to country i.

The trick to solving the infinite horizon case is to assume that the problem is

really of finite-time, with a horizon 1. As is usual with dynamic programming,

we use a process of backward recursion. We first solve the maximization problem

in period T, assuming that period I is the final period. Assuming e11 = eT and

using (A2) gives the jumping variables as a function of the state, control and

exogenous variables. This can be substituted into (A3) to give targets as a

function of state, control and exogenous variables as well as the stochastic

shocks. The problem becomes:


         Max      W
                     1   -T.QT.
                           11 1 aT

        s.t.             =          + M2iUjT      +       + 4t
where          is a diagonal matrix containing the utility weights. The solution

gives a rule for the control variables and jumping variables of the
                                                      —45—


 following form:


 (A6)            U1 =              + r2TET      +
                                                    13iTT

 (A7)            e1 =          + H21E1 + I-I3TeT


These rules can be substituted into the equation for the targets given in (A3),

to find the value of the welfare function in period I as a function of the state

and exogenous variables and the shocks in period T.


               WiT =   V1(X1,E1,c1)

To clarify the procedure, consider period t. The problem becomes:


(A8) Max               =                    +
                           T.tLT.t                  tV1t+i(Xt+i,c3t+i)

        s.t.       Tt =    IliXt   +
                                       IL2iUit +          + 4t
where C31 is a constant depending on the path of all future exogenous

variables. We can use (Al) to solve out for X.1 and to write the problem in

terms of period t variables and constants. The problem can then be solved as we

did for period I.          In terms of the recursion steps we have:


               e+1 =                   + H2t+iEt+i    +
                                                          H3t+1c   +


Taking expectations of both sides gives:


               e+1 =                   +              +



where C21 is a constant containing the accumulation of all future exogenous

variables. Substituting for e+1 from (A2) and                          from (Al) gives:
                                                          —46—



                                    +
 1X+           3U.+ j3E                  35e= Hit 1(iXt÷a2e+a3U. +aE+ae) + H2t iEt i+ C21
 which can be solved for
                                    et:


 (A9)         e = JX          + KUt + ZEt + Qct + C4t;



 where       J =
                       (2_Hit+1a2)1(H1+1a1_1)

             K =
                       (2_Hit+1a2)1(H1+1a3_3).

             Z =



               =


This    rule for e given in (A9) is substituted into the equation for the target

variables given in (A3) to find:


            Tt =       u1X   +
                                 JL2Ut
                                         +
                                             3t   +


Substituting into the welfare function given in (A8) and differentiating with

respect to the control variables (U) gives a set of first order conditions

which can be solved to find:


(AlO)              =
                       cit   X. +   r2E       +
                                                  f3tet    +
                                                               C1

Now we can substitute this rule for the control variables into (A9) to find a

rule for the jumping variables as a function of the state variables and

exogenous variables as given in (A12).
                                                             —47—


(All)         e = (J         +
                                  Kri)Xt     +
                                                   (z+Kr2)E    + (Q +
                                                                        Kf3)e   +
                                                                                    C4   +
                                                                                             KC1

(A12)         e = Hit                              +
                                 X. +      H2tE        C2

This procedure is then repeated until a stable rule for the F and H matrices

is found. We then let T -÷

2. Derivation of the Target Variance


        Given the rules for the jumping variables and the control variables, we

substitute these into (Al) to find:


              X41 =                +         + BE,
(A13)
                             Ax
where        A =         +             +
                    a1       a2H1          a3F1

             B =         +             +
                    a4       a2H2          a3r2

and          Z =
                    a    +
                             a2H3
                                       +
                                           ct3r3

We   next decompose A into its e-igenvalue matrix and eigenvector matrix:

             AP = PA

or


             A = PAP


where A is a diagonal matrix with characteristic roots along the diagonal

Note that P, A, P1 are complex matrices. Then, (All) may be rewritten as:

(A14)          Yt+i = AYt +             P1             +
                                                           P'BEt
where           =
                    P—lxt

        Several of the eigenvalues will have unit values because we do not

constrain the level of prices or level of debt in the steady state but only
                                                   —48—


 their rate of change. The V's corresponding to these unit roots have infinite

 variances. Thus, we take the subset of V's that have finite variance in the

 their rate of change. The V's corresponding to these Unit roots have infinite

 variances. Thus, we take the subset of V's that have finite variance in the

 next steps. Call this reduced vector y.                  A and P1Z are adjusted to conform

 with y.

         Define Q =                    where y signifies the complex conjugate of y. Since

y is a stationary process,                          =                 for   all s.

Then from (A14) and assuming constant exogenous variables:


 (A15)             =   MiX     + P'ZrZ(1)

Equation (A15) implicitly defines Q which is the unconditional variance of y.

This equation is solved by an iterative procedure to find Q. The target vector

Tt is given in         (A3).       Given the rules for e and Ut in (AiD) and (A12) we find:

(A16)         T    =           +
                         MXt

where        M =   y     + y3f1 + y2H1


             0 =         + y3r3 +
                   )'4                 72H3


        Since V =
                       P1X,        this implies


(Al?)         Tt = (MP)V           +


Very importantly, all V's having unit roots have no effect on Tt. For m

unit roots, the first m columns of (MP) are zero. Thus, by eliminating

the first m columns of MP, equation (Al?) may be rewritten as:

(Al8)
              Tt       (MP)y +
                                                    —49—


        (the -m is now dropped for notational convenience).

The variance covar-lance matrix of i can then be written as:


(A19)           t(T) =                 +   OO

We can also calculate the expected utility loss given some arbitrary

welfare function.

                                                    00
        Let II =     (TT   ),   and utility U            j T WT
                   t
                                                t=o

where W is a matrix with weights for each target along the diagonal.

        Then,

                                       = Tr(Wri).
            t(TWT) =       Tr(WT)
        Thus we find

(A20)           t(u) = Tr(Wfl)/(1—13)
                                        —50—


                     Appendix B: Impulse Response to Shocks



         To assist the reader in understanding the nature of the shocks facing

the policymakers, we present results for shocks under a floating exchange rate

regime with no policy response. Figures 1 to 7 contain the impulse responses of

us,   output,   inflation, current account, interest rate and exchange rate to

each of the shocks. The shocks examined are a 1% increase in the demand for ECU

denominated assets, a 1% increase in U.S. and ROECO aggregate demand, a 1% rise

in U.S. and ROCED prices and a 196 fall in U.S. and ROECD money demand. The

results for Japanese shocks are not shown but are similiar (apart from scaling)

to the ROECD shocks. To read the figures note that the results are presented

as: percentage deviation of output and exchange rate from base; change in infla-

tion and interest rates from base; and deviation of the current account from

base as a percent of potential U.S. GNP.

         Figures la and lb contain the results for a temporary increase in the

demand for ECU denominated assets. The shock is imposed as an exogenous risk

premium in the portfolio balance equation which is sufficient to lead to a 1.396

impact depreciation of the nominal dollar/ecu exchange rate. The depreciation

improves the U.S. current account immediately by 0.08% of U.S. GNP and leads to

a rise in output of .22%. The output stimulus is quickly crowded out by rising

interest rates and an initial inflation rise, resulting from the depreciation.

         The results for exogenous shifts in aggregate demand in the U.S. is

given in figures 2a and 2b. The 1% shock in the U.S. is sufficient to raise out-

put by 1.596 in the first period due to multiplier effects. Interest rates rise

by 1.25 percentage points in the first year. Inflation actually declines in the
                                       —51-


first   year due to our assumption of sticky domestic prices. The exchange rate

appreciation of 2.796 leads to an initial decline 'in consumer price inflation

which quickly rebounds as excess demand pushes up the domestic price component

-in subsequent years. The current account deteriorates by 0.3796 of GNP in the

first year due the the strong domestic demand and an appreciated currency.

          Figures 3a and 3b give the effects on U.S. variables of a corresponding

shock to aggregate demand in the ROECO. The foreign demand shock equal to 196 of

ROECO GNP improves the U.S. current account by .1996 of U.S. GNP. The dollar

depreciates 2.696 on impact. The U.S. is faced with rising interest rates,

strong demand and rising inflation. The major difference (apart from scale

effects) between the foreign and the U.S. demand shocks are that a deteriorating

current account and strong dollar accompanies the U.S. shock and improved

current account and depreciated dollar accompanies the ROECO shock.

           The results for a U.S. price shock are given in figure 4a and 4b and

for the ROECO price shock in figure 5a and 5b. The shock is implemented by

adding an exogenous term to the Phillips curve -in each country. Note that the

shock affects prices in the second period although the presence of forward

looking asset prices causes some adjustment in the first period. U.S. output

falls by 1.396 when the U.S. price shock -is realized, and the current account

deteriorates for several years following the shock. Global inflation and higher

world interest rates follow each price shock. The nominal exchange rate

appreciates initially and depreciates over time. The jump appreciation follows

from the anticipated nature of the shock. Since nominal U.S. interest rates

exceed foreign interest rates in the first year, by the interest arbitrage

condition, the U.S. dollar must be expected to depreciate. A similar line of
                                        —52—


reasoning applies to the jump depreciation following the ROECO price shock.

           Figures Ga, 6b, 7a and 7b contain the response to an exogenous

reduction in money demand in the U.S. and ROECD respectively. For the U.S shock,

the initial excess supply of money causes a fall in nominal and real interest

rates and a rise in output. The exchange rate depreciates in the period of the

shock due to the low interest rate. The strong first period output effect feeds

into inflation in the second period. The rise in prices swings the money market

into an excess demand for real money balances in the second period by which time

the exogenous demand for money has dropped. This leads to a sharp rise in

interest rates and a fall of output. The role of sticky prices in our model is

apparent once again.    The ROECO shock is transmitted very slightly. In this

case the positive effect of strong initial ROECD demand is offset by an exchange

rate depreciation which results in very slight improvement of the U.S. current

account.
                                                    —53—




Figure   la ncrease in Demand for ECU                                    assets
              output %            inflation D   current account   %gnp


             0.25


            0.1875


             0.125


          0.0625

                    n


         —0.0625


          —0.125



                                                             years




Figure lb           tncrease in Demand for ECU                           assets
          exchange rate S/ECU '        interest rate D

              1.5

             1.25




            0.75

             0,5

            0.25

              0

         —0.25



                                                            years
                                                          —54—




Figure 3a       ncrease in OECD Aggregate Demand
               output %           inflation D   current account %gnp


            0.625

              0.5

         0.375

            0.25

            0.12 5

                0

        —0.125

        —0.25

       —0.375


                                                           ye or s




 Figure 3b Increase in ROECD Aggregate Demand
            exchange rate 1/ECU         interest rate D


                3

              2.5

                2

               1.5




              0.5

                0

            —0.5



                                                            years
                                                   —55--




Figure 2a ncrease in U.S. Aggregate Demand
            output %       inflation D current account %gnp


      1.5




                  ——                                            —
     -0.5 -
                           _cç___>Y..
                       I                     I         I    I
       —1




                                                   years




Figure 2b        Increase in U.S. Aggregate Demand
       exchange rate $/ECU %     interest rate D

            2


            1




            0




       —2



       —3



                                                    years
                                                 —56—




 Figure                  ncrease in U.S. Prices
        output %         inflation D     current account %gnp



                   I.-
  0.5k-        / N. N
                          .


   0                                             —
                                       —


-°5b


—1.5 L      ILJL_I                                          I   I




                                                  years




 Figure 4b               ncrecse in U.S. Prices
exchange rate 8/ECU '         interest rate D

  1.5




 0.5


   0

—0.5


  —1



—1.5



                                                  years
                                                      —57—




 Figure 5a Increase in POECD Prices
     output   %            inflation D        current account %gnp

 0.375

  0.25

 0.125


     0

—0.125


 —0.25


—0.375


                                                        years




  Figure 5b increase in ROECD Prices
 exchange rate $/ECU 7°         interest rate D


   1.25




  0.75
      1 j\
    0.5

              /   ..                     ••
  0.25
     0                                           N                   ..   — .. -

 —0.25

  -0.5 L
 —0.75 —      I        I    I                            ITIT III
                                                         years
                                               —58—




Figure 6a Reduction in U.S. Money Demand
            output %       inflation D   current account %gnp
                       -

      1.5




     0.5


       0


    —0.5


      —1



                                                  years




Figure 6b       Reduction                n     U.S. Money Demand
   exchange rate 8/ECU %     interest rate D


    0.75
      0.5

     0.25

        0
   —0.25

     —0.5

    —0.75



    —1.25


                                                      years
                                                                  —59--



Figure 7a Reduction in ROECD Money Demand
         output %            inflation D         current account     %gnp

       0.125

     0.0938

     0.0625

      0.0313

           0

    —0.0313

    —0.0625

    —0.0938

     —0.125


                                                              years




Figure 7b Reduction in ROECD Money Demand
    exchange rate s/ECU %            interest rate D


     0.375



      °•25L
      0.125 —         .1-



                     II
                            \\



    :: '\\ /
    -0.375k-    \/
       —0.5                      I     I     I     I          I             I   I   I_I
                                                              years
                                         —60—



                                 References



Buiter, W. and R. Marston (1985) International Economic Policy Coordination,

           Cambridge University Press.


Corden W.M. (1983) "The Logic of the International Non—System" in F. Machiup

          et.al. (eds) Reflections on a Troubled World Economy (MacMillan).


Curr-ie, 0. and P. Levine (1985a) "Macroeconomic Policy Design in and

          Interdependent World" in Buiter and Marston (1985), pp228—267.


Currie, 0. and P. Levine (1985b) "Credibility and Time Inconsistency in a

          Stochastic World", PRISM Research Discussion Paper no 36. November.


Ishii N., McKibbin W., and J. Sachs (1985) "The Economic Policy Mix, Policy

          Cooperation, and Protectionism: Some Aspects of Macroeconomic

          Interdependence Among the United States, Japan, and Other OECD

          Countries", Journal of Policy Modeling 7(4) pp533-572.


McKibbin W. and J. Sachs (1986) "Coordination of Monetary and Fiscal Policies in

          the OECD" NBER Working Paper 1800, forthcoming in J. Frenkel (ed)

          International Aspects of Fiscal Policy.


McKinnon, R. (1984) "An International Standard for Monetary Stabilization,"

          Policy Analyses in International Economics, No. 8, Institute for

          International Economics, March


Obstfeld, M. (1985) "Floating Exchange Rates: Experience and Prospects",

          Bookings Papers on Economic Activity 2; pp 369-450.
                                      —61—


Oudiz, G. and Sachs, J. (1985) "International Policy Coordination in Dynamic

          Macroeconomic Models" in Buiter and Marston (1985).


Rogoff K. (1983) "Productive and Counterproductive Cooperative Monetary

          Policies", International Finance Research Discussion Paper 233,

          December (Board of governors of the Federal Reserve System, Washington).


Roubini N. (1986) "Strategic Interactions between Europe and The U.S.: A Three

          Country Model" mimeo Harvard University.


Roosa, R. (1q84) "Exchange Rate Arrangements in the Eighties" in The

          International Monetary System, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston

          Conference Series No 28.


Sachs, J. (1985a) "The Dollar and The Policy Mix: 1985" Brookings Papers on

          Economic Activity, 85:1 pp 117-185


Sachs, J. (1985b) "The Case for More Managed Exchange Rates" Paper presented to

          the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Conference on the U.S. Dollar,

          Jackson Hole Wyoming, August 1985


Sachs, J., and W. McKibbin (1985) "Macroeconomic Policies in the OECD and LDC

          External Adjustment" NBER Working Paper 1534, January, forthcoming in

          F. Colaco and S. van Wijnbergen, eds (1986) International Capital Flows

          and the Developing Countries.


Sargent T. (1979) Macroeconomic Theory , (Academic Press).


Taylor J. (1985) "International Coordination in the Design of Macroeconomic

          Policy Rules", European Economic Review, 28, pp53-81.
                                      —62—



Williamson, 3. (1983) "The Exchange Rate System," Policy Analyses in

          International Economics, No. 5, Institute for International Economics,

          September
