                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           GEOGRAPHIC BARRIERS TO COMMODITY PRICE INTEGRATION:
            EVIDENCE FROM US CITIES AND SWEDISH TOWNS, 1732–1860

                                          Mario J. Crucini
                                          Gregor W. Smith

                                        Working Paper 20247
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20247


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2014




Crucini gratefully acknowledges the financial support of the National Science Foundation (SES-0524868).
Smith thanks the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada and the Bank of Canada
research fellowship programme for support of this research. The opinions are the authors' alone and
are not those of the Bank of Canada. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Mario J. Crucini and Gregor W. Smith. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Geographic Barriers to Commodity Price Integration: Evidence from US Cities and Swedish
Towns, 1732–1860
Mario J. Crucini and Gregor W. Smith
NBER Working Paper No. 20247
June 2014
JEL No. F61,N70

                                           ABSTRACT

We study the role of distance and time in statistically explaining price dispersion for 14 commodities
from 1732 to 1860. The prices are reported for US cities and Swedish market towns, so we can compare
international and intranational dispersion. Distance and commodity-specific fixed effects explain a
large share—roughly 60%—of the variability in a panel of more than 230,000 relative prices over
these 128 years. There was a negative "ocean effect": international dispersion was less than would
be predicted using distance, narrowing the effective ocean by more than 3000 km. The absolute effect
of distance declined over time beginning in the 18th century. This process of convergence was broad-
based, across commodities and locations (both national and international). But there was a major
interruption in convergence in the late 18th and early 19th centuries, at the time of the Napoleonic
Wars, stopping the process by two or three decades on average.


Mario J. Crucini
Department of Economics
Vanderbilt University
Box 1819 Station B
Nashville, TN 37235-1819
and NBER
mario.j.crucini@vanderbilt.edu

Gregor W. Smith
Department of Economics
Queens University
Kingston, Ontario
K7L 3N6, Canada
smithgw@econ.queensu.ca
“Stockholm therefore, for the purposes of the argument may be considered as within fifty
miles of Philadelphia.” —Daniel Webster, Philadelphia, 1824.1

1. Introduction

The Law of One Price (LOP) is the theoretical proposition that in the absence of oﬃcial and
natural barriers to trade, common currency prices of identical goods are equated. Deviations
from LOP, so defined, represent unexploited gains from trade. It turns out to be almost
impossible to test the proposition in this form since it requires both common currency prices
of identical goods and also measures of oﬃcial and natural barriers to trade in these same
goods, which are typically more diﬃcult to come by than the prices themselves.
    Consequently, virtually all empirical work on the subject measures the deviations of com-
mon currency market prices of commodities across markets and then attempts to indirectly
infer the contribution of oﬃcial and natural barriers to their geographic variation. The most
popular method is due to Engel and Rogers (1996). They computed the variance of LOP
deviations for city pairs within the US, within Canada, and across the border and regressed
this measure on the distance between the city pairs and a dummy variable that takes the
value one if the cities lies on opposite sides of the US-Canada border. Using 15 sub-indices of
the CPI across 14 US and 9 Canadian cities, from 1978 to 1994, they found that the border
crossing added an economically significant amount of price dispersion over and above the
estimated eﬀect of geographic distance. In particular, the implied width of the border was
estimated to be an astonishing 75,000 miles.2
    This paper adapts the Engel-Rogers method to study deviations from the LOP within
    1
       This is a stylized version of the Congressional record. According to Taussig (1892) the statements related
to this quote, which took place during Congressional debates on proposed tariﬀ legislation in 1824, were:
“the US should accept vast multitudes of persons willing to labor in the production of articles at the rate of
7 cents per day when our labor is five or six times that level and thus leave our labor to other manufacturers
to earn its greater reward rather the impose a tax on consumers to produce goods similar to that which are
presently imported from Sweden,” and that “the money required to ship one ton of merchandise by ocean
freight from Stockholm to Philadelphia could alternatively be used to purchase about fifty miles of overland
transport from Philadelphia to points inland.”
     2
       This estimate has been subject to both criticism and revision as discussed further below. However,
large positive border eﬀects remain typical in post World War II era estimates.



                                                       1
and across the United States and Sweden during a much earlier historical period, 1732—1860.
The choice of Sweden is due to the availability of market prices spanning a similar time span
and commodity set to what exists in the Cole data archive for the US, described in more
detail below. What is interesting about the quote from Daniel Webster (above) is that it
implies that the economic width of the border (or, perhaps we should say, the width of the
ocean) in the early 1800’s was a large negative number. If Webster’s estimate is of the correct
sign, it suggests a dramatic increase in the impediments to international trade relative to
intranational trade from the 18th century to the present day. Thus, our goal in this paper is
to shed light on the impediments to trade within and across countries in historical times by
studying what is arguably the best available panel of micro-price data currently available,
spanning the years 1732 to 1860, 14 commodities, and 38 locations.
   The U.S. data was originally published in the Statistical Appendix to the volume edited
by Arthur Harrison Cole (1938). The data span 6 cities: Boston, Charleston, Cincinnati, New
Orleans, New York and Philadelphia. Charleston, New Orleans and Cincinnati are important
for us because of their distance from the 3 cities in the northeast and the fact that Cincinnati
was a developing region in the early stages of westward migration. The Swedish micro-price
data archive is drawn Lennart Jörberg (1972) who led a team of Swedish researchers. They
studied a total of 32 towns or regions at various times. Reflecting the objectives of our
study, we collected annual prices from the Swedish historical sources for commodities that
are closely matched to the goods also found in the Cole micro-archive: bar iron, beef, butter,
copper, hops, pig iron, pork, salt, saltpetre, tallow, tallow candles, wax candles, wheat and
wool.
   We have two sets of results. The first set of results averages the price deviations across
time to address two related questions. The first asks what role geographic distance plays, in
sustaining price deviations across cities, over the long-term. The second question we ask is
what, if any, role is played by the ocean after controlling for distance between cities. This
analysis is aimed at estimating time-invariant barriers to trade that are expected to increase


                                               2
with distance (such as shipping cost and freight insurance) as well as the possibility that
these costs are diﬀerent for movements of goods by land and by sea.
   On average, over the sample, 1000 km of distance adds about 6% to the median absolute
deviation of relative prices. The eﬀect ranges from a low of 2.76% for wheat to a high of 20%
for butter, indicating some caution in extrapolating from existing studies of the global wheat
market to the broader commodity basket. The ocean eﬀect is indeed negative as Webster
surmised. The eﬀective distance between Stockholm and Philadelphia was 2884 km, 3561
km less than the great circle distance of 6445 km. Thus, the estimated width of the ocean is
-3561.
   The second set of results allow the quantitative role of distance and the ocean in sustaining
price deviations to change over time. There are a number of reasons to expect this to occur.
Historians have emphasized secular declines in trade costs as possible explanations for both
intranational and international commodity price convergence. The modern international
finance literature has argued that currency arrangements and business cycles may lead to
large and persistent deviations in prices from their long-run parities. There were also a
number of obvious disruptions to trade and commerce over this period, the Seven Years
War, the Revolutionary War, wars between Sweden and Russia, a trade embargo on British
goods initiated by Thomas Jeﬀerson, as well as British and French naval blockades during
the Napoleonic Wars.
   Price dispersion is estimated to be falling gradually over time with a brief reversal during
the War of 1812. Evidently this decline is not due to a fall in the marginal cost of shipping
since we fail to find a systematic decline in the slope coeﬃcient on distance in our analysis.
Rather, the declines are captured through fixed time-eﬀects. Since the time eﬀects are
estimated with less precision than either the distance or ocean eﬀects, additional data may
be necessary to reaﬃrm this finding. One possible explanation for the decline in price
dispersion consistent with its not interacting with distance is the process of development.
That is, as locations in the hinterlands (such as Cincinnati) develop over time their price


                                               3
levels may converge toward the levels in major, developed, cities even in the absence of a
downward trending marginal cost of shipping.

2. Related Research

Our goal is to study the geography of price dispersion both internationally and intranation-
ally, back to the 18th century and using a range of commodities. While we are not aware
of directly comparable work for this time span, we can draw on a wealth of recent research
that provides benchmarks. This work looks at the extent of price convergence between lo-
cations, its evolution over time, and the causes of and obstacles to that convergence. Jacks,
O’Rourke, Williamson (2011) provide a broad review of this literature.
   First, several studies assess the LOP internationally. For example, Rogoﬀ, Froot and Kim
(2001) describe the price diﬀerences between London and Amsterdam for 7 commodities over
many centuries. O’Rourke and Williamson (1994) study 13 commodities traded between the
US and UK from 1870 to 1913, and report a convergence trend. Klovland (2005) studies
39 commodities in Britain and Germany for a similar period, from 1850 to 1913, and again
studies the persistence of LOP deviations.
   Second, several studies examine LOP deviations intranationally. For example, Dobado
and Marrero (2005) document how corn prices converged across 32 Mexican states from
1885 to 1908. Trenkler and Wolf (2005) study wheat flour prices across Polish cities in the
interwar period. The work of Slaughter (1995) is of particular relevance to our study, as he
studies prices in the 19th-century US. He finds annual averages for 1820—1860 for 10 goods
in the Cole data and describes how prices across cities tended to converge over time. And
he describes the roles of canals, steamboats, and railroads in the convergence.
   Third, a number of studies compare international and intranational price dispersion but
for a single commodity: wheat. Studying wheat has four distinct advantages: (a) it is
storable (and was so historically); (b) it is internationally traded; (c) in some cases its
price is recorded according to standardized varieties; and (d) in some cases shipping costs


                                             4
can be collected. These features suggest that arbitrage could operate, with the passage
of time, as emphasized by Pippenger and Phillips (2008) in their study of wheat prices in
the late 20th century. Shiue (2005) describes the diﬀerences in grain prices across cities
in Germany and its neighbors as the zollverien customs union spread between 1815 and
1855. She compares these diﬀerences with those between German and non-German cities
and finds a small border eﬀect. Keller and Shiue (2008) use annual wheat prices for the 19th
century in 68 central European cities, mostly in Germany, to investigate the conduits for
price convergence. Jacks (2004, 2005, 2006, 2009) examines wheat prices for a wide range of
time periods and cities. For example, Jacks (2005) studies the period 1800—1913 for up to
100 cities in 10 countries including the US, where quotations come from up to 11 cities. He
documents price convergence using several diﬀerent statistics. Jacks also discusses the causes
of convergence and the impediments to it. He considers such factors as transport costs, other
transactions costs or improvements such as the rise of bills of exchange, price manuals, marine
insurance, the eﬀects of wars, and mercantilist policy (such as the 17th century Navigation
Acts in Britain). He also compares trade costs for wheat to price diﬀerentials, finding that
the diﬀerentials are up to twice as large as reported trade costs. He also regresses measures of
price dispersion on variables such as distance, exchange-rate volatility, and dummy variables
for borders, port and railway status, or a common currency. He finds a positive eﬀect of
borders and a negative eﬀect of water transport, as well as declines in the eﬀects of both
distance and border-crossing over time. Jacks observes that the secondary literature on
the US suggests that there was considerable convergence in prices internationally, but not
intranationally, in keeping with Webster’s suggestion. We can directly make this comparison
for 14 commodities.
   Several key studies also document interruptions in the process of convergence. Jacks
(2011) documents the increase in commodity price dispersion within England during the
Napoleonic Wars. He cites sources on the international eﬀect of the wars as interrupting
and then reversing commodity-market integration. He studies 4 grain prices in 52 counties


                                               5
from 1771 to 1815 and shows that intranational dispersion also increased. Jacks, O’Rourke,
and Williamson (2011) study historical and contemporary data sources since 1700. They
also document the increases in price volatility during 1776—1819 when trade in the Atlantic
economies was disrupted by the Revolutionary War and the French Wars.

3. Commodity Price Data

The commodity price data used here are drawn from original sources. Each source consists
of an extensive panel of local currency prices of individual commodities sold in diﬀerent
locations with the United States and Sweden. We supplement this data with data on the
great circle distances between locations.
   The U.S. panel data is taken from Cole (1938). The volume summarizes a number of
independent scholarly eﬀorts on US price history under the auspices of the International
Scientific Committee on Price History, funded by the Rockefeller Foundation. While this
data is not exhaustive of the commodity price data available for the US, it is the single
largest collection of such data in terms of commodity, city and time span.3 The commodity
price data were drawn mostly from newspapers and business accounting records and invoices.
The frequency of the data is monthly; spanning 46 goods and six cities: Boston, Charleston,
Cincinnati, New Orleans, New York and Philadelphia. In total there are 549 varieties of
goods, ranging from 26 varieties of cotton to 2 types of potash. Each city’s prices were
compiled by or under the direction of a diﬀerent researcher.
   Jörberg (1972) describes the Swedish price data, which apply to 32 towns or regions at
various times and to many commodities. For some commodities quality could vary from
county to county, though goods were supposed to be of suﬃcient quality to satisfy payments
due in kind. Scholars have used them to study the cost of living and real wages, but
apparently not LOP deviations. The numbers come from market price scales that were
used for taxes, tithes, and other payments. The prices were averages of current annual prices
   3
    The details of data collection, unit conversions and monetary arrangements are elaborated in a com-
panion Data Appendix to this paper.


                                                  6
in market towns within each region.
   One of our goals is to put US price dispersion in context by comparing US prices with
those in a European country. We chose Sweden because its data overlap with those from
Cole in both time span and commodity composition is greater than for other countries.
Other potential sources of price data exist because of the work of the International Scientific
Committee on Price History in the 1930s and 1940s, described by Cole and Crandall (1964).
These sources include the monographs by Posthumus (1946) on Holland, Elsas (1936, 1949)
on Germany, Hauser (1936) on France, Hamilton (1947) on Spain, and Pribram (1938) on
Austria. The Danish price history project begun by Friis and Glamann (1958) is another
rich source. But data for these countries involve significantly less overlap with the US data
in terms of matching commodities or years and fewer intranational locations. Coincidentally,
the Swedish data also allow us to assess Daniel Webster’s observation.
   Table 1 presents the commodities that we have matched across the US and Swedish
archives, along with the units of measure and the number of bilateral city pairs available.
The commodity list includes six agricultural commodities (beef, butter, hops, pork, wheat
and wool), five non-agricultural commodities (bar iron, copper, pig iron, salt and saltpetre)
and three candle-related commodities.4 This mix of foodstuﬀs and manufactures is typical
of price history datasets.
   Since the number of cities in the US archive is 6 and the number of towns in Sweden is
32, the maximum number of location pairs are 15 within the US, 496 within Sweden and 192
internationally. Given the historical period, it is not surprising that the number of available
location pairs diﬀers substantially by commodity, ranging from a high of 480 for butter in
Sweden to a low of 2 for tallow candles in the United States.
   We turn, now, to the time dimension of the sample to provide some historical context to
the analysis and explain how we convert prices to common currency units in pounds sterling.
   4
    Tallow is rendered beef or lamb fat processed from suet, it is solid at room temperature and was used
to make candles as an alternative to wax.




                                                   7
4. Monetary and Exchange Rate History

During our historical period of study, a number of remarkable changes in monetary arrange-
ments took place. In the earliest part of the sample, US prices are quoted in units of Colonial
currency. The individual Colonial governments issued fiat currency which they used to pay
expenses, often of armed conflicts, and accepted as payment for taxes. Colonial currencies
were also used in everyday transactions, though they did not serve as the exclusive medium
of exchange. The Spanish silver dollar circulated widely, particularly in Charleston, Cincin-
nati and New Orleans, until the US silver dollar was first minted in 1792. Prices quoted
in USD quickly emerge and come to dominate the Cole data by the early 1800s. Thus, to
convert commodity prices into common currency units we need sterling exchange rates for
each of the following media of exchange: individual Colonial currencies, the Spanish silver
dollar and the US silver dollar.
    From 1732 to 1775, we use the Handbook, McCusker (1978), which provides monthly
exchange rates of Colonial currencies into pounds sterling.5 For example, the conversion
from Pennsylvania pounds to pounds sterling is:

                            PA pounds        1          $
                                       ×           =            
                            metric unit PA pounds$ metric unit

The price quotes in pounds after 1775 are not spanned by McCusker’s exchange rate tables.
For these observations, we use the exchange rates Cole provides for Colonial currencies in
terms of the Spanish silver dollar.6 At inception, the US silver dollar was declared equal
in value to the Spanish silver dollar. The oﬃcial mint parity of sterling to the Spanish
silver dollar was 4.444 Spanish silver dollars per pound sterling. Thus currency conversions
   5
       These tables have missing observations. To fill in months that are missing exchange rates, we use the
first exchange rate available preceding the month with no data. All prices in the original Cole data are
assumed to be quoted in local colonial pounds.
     6
       These rates are in a table on page six of his statistical appendix. The date ranges of the Cole data
that require currency conversions are: i) Boston (1776-1798); ii) Charleston (1780-1812); iii) New Orleans
(1805-1824); iv) New York (1776-1797) and v) Philadelphia (1784-1805). Unfortunately we have no solution
for converting local currency prices in Charleston that occurred during the revolutionary war (1776 — 1783).
Those observations are dropped from the sample.



                                                     8
between 1776 and 1791 are accomplished as follows:
       PA pounds Spanish silver dollar                1                    $
                   ×                                                  =            
       metric unit   PA pounds         4444 Spanish silver dollars $ metric unit
From 1792 onward, prices quoted in USD are converted to sterling prices using the annual
GBP/USD exchange rate series originally assembled by Oﬃcer (2006):
                       US silver dollar            1             $
                                        ×                   =            
                         metric unit      US silver dollar$ metric unit
    Sweden adopted a series of unusual monetary arrangements during the 18th century.
From 1732 to 1775 prices are quoted in silver dalers (daler silvermynt) (with unit öre, with
32 per daler).7 From 1776 to 1802 they are quoted in riksdaler specie (with units shilling,
with 48 per riskdaler). During this period there were two internal units of account: riksdaler
banco and riksdaler riksgälds, that had a varying relative value. Jörberg (1972, p 79) notes
that market price scales were quoted in riksdaler riksgälds. After 1803 all prices are in kronor
(singular: krona) per metric unit. Weights and measures also varied over time.
    To express prices in common units over time we take two steps. First, we convert weights
and measures to common metric units using Jörberg’s guide (1972 p 95). After this step,
prices are quoted in daler silvermynt for 1732—1775, riksdaler riksgälds for 1776—1802, and
kronor for 1803—1860. Second, we then use the historical exchange-rate series assembled by
the Sveriges Riksbank to convert each of these prices into pounds sterling.8 Their series for
1732—1775 is quoted in daler kopparmynt per pound sterling.
    As each such coin was worth one-third of a daler silvermynt we calculate prices as follows:
                    daler silvermynt              1            $
                                     ×3×                  =
                       metric unit       daler koparmynt$ metric unit
Their series for 1776—1803 is quoted in riksdaler banco per pound sterling. The Riskbank
also provides a series on the internal exchange rate between riskdalers banco and riskgälds,
   7
      For several items the prices were fixed between 1735 and 1756. At that point they were unfrozen because
the state was losing revenue due to inflation. Prices were collected at Thomasmäss (December 21) each
year. But then in 1775 the oﬃcials were allowed to forecast prices for grains over the next few months if they
thought the Thomasmäss price was abnormal. The time of the year for collection was changed to November
in 1803. The coverage and averaging across districts within a county changed several times. Jorberg (1972,
page 12) summarizes the various refinements over time.
    8
      We obtained this at: www.riksbank.com/templates/Page.aspx?id=27399.

                                                      9
so we calculate prices as follows:

        riksdaler riksgälds     riskdaler banco            1            $
                            ×                    ×                 =            
            metric unit       riksdaler riksgälds riskdaler banco$ metric unit

Their external exchange-rate series for 1803—1861 is quoted in kronor per pound, so we
calculate prices as:
                            kronor         1        $
                                      ×        =            
                           metric unit kronor$ metric unit
Each of these series is available annually, with two exceptions. The Riksbank provides the
banco/riskgälds exchange rate and the kronor/sterling exchange rates at monthly frequency.
We calculated prices in sterling first using annual averages for these two series and then again
using the December values prior to 1803 and the November values after that, reflecting the
months in which the market price scales were recorded.
   Having converted prices to common currency (pounds sterling) and physical units, we
are in a position to construct price indices and relative price levels for a common commod-
ity basket using our archival data. The Laspeyres formula to construct price indices from
common currency commodity prices,  is:
                                       P
                                           0 X        
                                 = P             =   0                             (4.1)
                                         0 0   
                                                               0

where  (0 ) is the price (quantity) of commodity  in city  and year  and the
zero denotes a choice of base year. The second expression expresses the price index as the
expenditure-weighted average of price ratios (current prices relative to base prices). The
expenditure weights (0 ) are are common across locations, time-invariant and measured at
a base year (see the Appendix for further details).
   Figure 1 shows the price levels (in units of pounds sterling) from 1732 to 1860 in Stock-
holm and Philadelphia with the commodity price level in Stockholm normalized to 100 in
1733.   The most striking feature of the price levels is how closely they appear to follow
common inflationary and deflationary trends. Moderate inflation during the 18th century is
followed by a pronounced acceleration during the Napoleonic Wars, particularly in Stock-


                                                 10
holm. The price levels drop suddenly at the end of the Napoleonic Wars, and inflation does
not re-emerge in a systematic fashion until the 1830s.
   A more direct measure of the extent to which price levels are equated in common currency
units is the real exchange rate, which we define as the ratio of the price level in Stockholm
( ) relative to Philadelphia ( ):
                                                       
                                             =                                    (4.2)
                                                       
Figure 2 plots the real exchange rate, the price level in Stockholm relative to Philadelphia.
As might be inferred from figure 1, prices were typically lower in Philadelphia than in
Stockholm. What is surprising in light of contemporary research on the topic is the lack
of an obvious trend in the real exchange rate. Long-run purchasing power parity appears
to hold, at least when confined to this common basket of commodities. More in line with
20th century evidence, we see large and persistent deviations from parity. Two obvious
exceptions arise from very sharp declines in commodity prices in Stockholm that drive the
relative price in Philadelphia from modestly lower than Stockholm to a multiple of the price
level in Stockholm. These episodes are as short-lived as they are dramatic, with parity
being re-established in the following year. The other notable episode is a large and highly
persistent swing in the real exchange rate in the early 1800s with US commodities declining
in relative price by almost 100% and then rising in relative price by about the same amount
as the Napoleonic Wars draw to an end.
   Figures 3 and 4 present prices of beef and wheat for all cities in the panel. The pairing
of the US and Sweden is non-standard given the volume of trade between the two countries
was quite small. And while both countries traded with England, international trade in these
particular commodities overall was also quite small, particularly at the start of our sample
period. Despite the moderate trade linkages as measured by the volume of trade, figures 3
and 4 show that there was indeed a shared international component to commodity prices.
   As was true of the price levels, there are periods in which prices move in a very idiosyn-
cratic fashion. The case of beef prices in Sweden during the Napoleonic Wars is illuminating.

                                                 11
There is a five-fold increase in beef prices at the start of the conflict, which completely dwarfs
the movements in prices of other goods in either country. That is, the price of beef in Sweden
rises relative to everything else: to wheat in Sweden, beef in the US and wheat in the US.
This example makes clear that we need to allow for the possibility that major historical
events such as wars and trade embargoes result in large persistent deviations from the LOP.
Furthermore, it may be that the impact is heterogenous across commodities. For example,
a trade embargo would be expected to increase the price of imported goods and reduce the
domestic price of goods that are exported.

5. Geographic Barriers to Commodity Price Integration

The Law of One Price is the theoretical proposition that, in the absence of natural and
oﬃcial barriers to trade, identical goods will sell at exactly the same price when converted
to common units. Having converted all of our local currency units into pounds sterling and
common physical units of measure, we are in a position to consider this proposition.
   Our analysis proceeds in two stages. First we consider time invariant barriers, conceptu-
ally, the notion that distance between cities is constant and gives rise to a constant wedge
between source and destination prices. The width of the ocean is the notion that the wedge
is either greater or less depending on which mode of transportation is less costly. Second,
we consider the possibility that the economic impact of distance changes over time. Ob-
vious candidates are improvements in transportation technology that reduced the cost per
kilometre of shipments. Less obvious, but also plausible, is the notion that expansions of
the transportation network gave rise to new trading linkages where trade costs were initially
prohibitive.
   When the focus is time-invariant barriers, we work with the median of the absolute value
of LOP deviations, where the median is taken over all time periods for which the bilateral
relative price observations are available. Begin with the log relative price:

                                    ≡ ln  − ln                           (5.1)

                                                 12
for good  between locations  and . Formally, the time-varying measure then is defined as:

                                      = 100| | ,                          (5.2)

while taking the median over time gives the time-invariant measure,

                                 =  ( ) .                         (5.3)

In each sub-section of our analysis we present both pooled and good-specific results. This is
important for three reasons. First, much of the historical literature focuses on grain prices
and since wheat is one of our commodities the disaggregated analysis provides a point of
contact with an existing literature. Second, since the question of interest is market integra-
tion broadly defined, it is important to know if results for wheat hold for other commodities
in the cross-section. Third, pooling enables us to estimate parameters more precisely and
to broaden the time period and geographic scope of the analysis relative to a study focused
exclusively on a single commodity.

5.1. Time-Invariant Trade Barriers

The empirical trade literature provides robust evidence of a negative relationship between
bilateral trade volumes and the distance separating country pairs. The structural basis of
this relationship is a gravity model of trade where the product of the economic mass of the
two countries increases the propensity to trade while trade costs (proxied by distance) reduce
that propensity. Head and Mayer (2013) provide a meta-analysis of the empirical work on
the relationship between distance and border and bilateral trade volumes.
   The historical literature has tended to focus on international relative prices where eco-
nomic theory places directly testable restrictions. In contrast, the relationship between the
volume of trade and trade costs depends on the elasticity of substitution between home and
foreign goods. Specifically, our work follows a popular approach first developed by Engel
and Rogers (1996) who studied real exchange rates across 14 U.S. and 9 Canadian cities.
They computed the time series variance of bilateral real exchange rates for each city pair

                                                13
and estimated the following regression equation:

                                                          X
                    =  +   ln( ) +    +             +            (5.4)
                                                           =1


where  is the standard deviation of the two-month change in the logarithm of the bilateral
real exchange rate for sub-index  across city pair  and ,  is the great circle distance
between locations  and , and  is a dummy variable taking the value 1 if the locations
are in diﬀerent countries.  is a dummy variable equal to 1 if city  is included in the
computation of the variance. The implied border eﬀect in units of distance is: exp(b    b ).
                                                                                     
Their baseline estimate of the Canada-US border was 75,000 miles.
   We modify the equation specified by Engel and Rogers to reflect two problems pointed
out in the subsequent literature and two amendments of our own. The first problem, pointed
out by Parsley and Wei (2001) is that the implied width of the border is not invariant to the
units in which distance is measured. The second problem, pointed out by Gorodnichenko and
Tesar (2009) is that the width of the border depends on the intranational point of reference.
For example, dispersion is lower within Canada compared to within the United States, after
controlling for distance is each case, so that the border appears larger when extrapolated
from Canadian price dispersion than when the US is the benchmark. The first problem is
solved by moving the dummy variable into the logarithm function. The second problem is
solved by adding a dummy variable for one of the two intranational location pairs.
   We make two additional modifications. The standard deviation is replaced by the mean
absolute deviation in the computation of real exchange rate volatility to mitigate sensitivity
to outliers as may arise due to measurement error. Second, the city fixed-eﬀects are replaced
with good fixed-eﬀects. In the context of this historical study using micro-data, good-specific
fixed eﬀects are more compelling. A third modification would be to study actual travel
distances and shipping costs. Unfortunately neither of these types of data are available for
the locations and time period of our study. Work in progress by Hung (2014) suggests a high
correlation between great circle distance and minimum cost routes in the United States.


                                               14
   The modified specification is thus:

                                                              
                     =  +   ln( +   +    ) +  .             (5.5)

 
 is a dummy variable taking the value 1 if the locations are in diﬀerent countries ( is
for ocean to indicate the most obvious geographic barrier between the United States and
             
Sweden) and  is a dummy variable taking the value 1 if both locations are in Sweden.
   Figure 5 presents the mean absolute deviation plotted against bilateral distance in kilo-
meters, with US city pairs in the left panel, Swedish town pairs in the middle panel and
international location pairs in the right panel. An upward sloping curve is evident in each
panel. This is most visible when looking at the lowest levels of dispersion at each distance in
the middle panel. Also apparent is the fact that the last panel does not exhibit substantially
more price dispersion than the first two. Given the much greater distances on the axis of
the international pairs due to the ocean, it appears that extrapolation from the intrana-
tional relationships would over-predict international price dispersion, a negative ocean eﬀect
consistent with Daniel Webster’s oratory.
   Table 2 reports the pooled regression results with coeﬃcients on distance and the ocean
constrained to be the same across commodities (these restrictions are relaxed in table 3).
Estimation is by non-linear least squares. The row of results labelled  allows each com-
modity to have a diﬀerent constant term in the regression (not reported) whereas the row
labelled  forces all regressions to have the same constant term. The restriction on the
constant does not appear to measurably aﬀect the coeﬃcients, though these intercepts are
clearly important since the fraction of variance explained drops from 75% to 21% when
a common intercept is imposed.      Standard errors are robust to heteroskedasticity (found
using method HC2). We also constructed standard errors based on clustering by distance
(or, equivalently, by location pair) to be sure we did not overstate the precision by ignoring
error correlation for a given location. The clustered standard errors were very similar to the
traditional heteroskedasticity-consistent ones and so are not shown.
   Table 2 shows the results of estimating equation (5.5) with 3607 observations on 14

                                               15
commodities, 6 US cities, and 32 Swedish towns. Consistent with the visual impressions of
figure 5, distance is statistically significant and the ocean eﬀect is negative. The fact that
price dispersion is rising in distance is consistent with research studies that use modern data
whereas the negative ocean eﬀect contrasts with the positive border eﬀects.
                                          b show that distance is statistically significant
   Turning to specifics, the estimates of 
at the 1% level. The coeﬃcient on the ocean dummy variable is negative which implies
that, after controlling for distance, shipping goods across the ocean was less expensive than
shipping goods overland. Since distance is measured in kilometers, and the functional form
                  b  is in the same units, the coeﬃcient on the dummy variable that measures
is chosen so that 
the width of the ocean is also in kilometers. Thus, on average, the ocean had the eﬀect of
reducing the land travel distance by 3761 kilometers (b
                                                       ), with a 95% confidence interval of
(3065, 4457) kilometers. In turn, this implies that the eﬀective distance between Stockholm
and Philadelphia was 2884 km (6445 km less the estimated impact of the ocean) with a 95%
confidence interval of (3380, 1988). Thus we are able to validate Webster’s estimate that
ocean shipping costs were less than overland equivalents, but apparently not his guess at
the magnitude. That is, our interval does not include the 50 miles (80 km) mentioned by
Webster.
            b  , the coeﬃcient on the intra-Sweden dummy variable is positive and significant
   Finally, 
at conventional levels. The interpretation is that price dispersion within Sweden was higher
than one would expect given intra-US price dispersion, so that eﬀective distances using the
US as the benchmark exceeded actual geographic distances between Swedish market towns.
   While the commodities are relatively standard it is worth noting what the eﬀect would
be of a diﬀerence in varieties that was systematic between the United States and Sweden
over the time period. Suppose for example that Swedish copper was of higher quality than
American copper and so sold at a higher price. The international relative price diﬀerences
would then be larger than otherwise, as would their medians. This measurement error would
then tend to make the ocean eﬀect positive. Since we find a large, negative ocean eﬀect our


                                              16
findings thus are conservative; they may understate the size of the negative eﬀect.
   A number of international pairs of locations involve inland centers such as Cincinnati or
Uppsala. In those cases, international transport involved a mixture of land and sea shipping.
By including all international pairs, then, we may underestimate the scale of the (negative)
ocean eﬀect. However, we do not have data on shipments that would allow us to refine these
measurements and, as noted earlier, direct trade between the US and Sweden was relatively
limited.9
   There are also reasons to expect diﬀerences across goods in price dispersion and for
these diﬀerences to relate to factors correlated with shipping costs and ocean eﬀects. This
heterogeneity could arise due to perishability, value-to-weight ratios, and unobserved diﬀer-
ences in oﬃcial barriers to trade such as tariﬀ and non-tariﬀ barriers. We turn, next, to
commodity-by-commodity results.
   Of the 14 commodities available, we present results for those with at least 100 observations
( pairs) and for which the 2 is at least 10%. The first criterion leads to our omitting
copper, pig iron, salt, saltpetre, and wool. The second one leads to our omitting beef. Table
3 shows regression results for the remaining 8 commodities individually. Together these
commodities span 3220 of the 3607 observations that were pooled in table 2. Again standard
errors based on clustering by locations were very similar to heteroskedasticity-consistent
ones, and so are not shown separately.
                                          b , is positive and significant at the 1% level for
   The commodity-specific distance eﬀect, 
                                                                                    b  ,
6 of the 8 commodities and (marginally) negative in only one case. The ocean eﬀect, 
is negative and significant at the 1% level for 6 of the 8 commodities too. And it is of a
similar magnitude for all of these, with point estimates from 3375 to 5619 km. Taking the
upper range of these point estimates would put the eﬀective distance between Stockholm
and Philadelphia at 826 km, and within the standard error of estimation of Webster’s 80
km. So, it could be that his estimate was reasonable when inferred from a particular piece
   9
     As Coleman (2007) notes, price diﬀerences may not identify transport costs with multiple locations in
any case, so we do not try to interpret the ocean eﬀect directly as a measure of relative transport costs.


                                                   17
of anecdotal evidence he had at hand or he was selective in his choice of example to make
his point. The evidence on whether internal Swedish dispersion is greater or less than what
one would expect from that at similar distances within the United States is mixed at the
commodity level.
   It is intriguing to note that the two extreme slopes, those of wheat and butter, are also
the extremes noted by Atack and Passell (1994, p 149, table 6.2) for transportation costs
(circa 1815). They report transportation costs relative to price increase by a factor of 10 as
we move from wheat to butter. Our coeﬃcients on distance increase by a factor of about 7.
   In summary, we have found evidence of a positive role of distance in accounting for price
dispersion, both in the pooled estimation and commodity-level results. The ocean eﬀect
is robustly negative, though not to the level implied by Webster’s oratory. What remains
unclear is how barriers to trade changed over time.

5.2. Time-Varying Trade Barriers

In a historical study spanning 130 years, it seems reasonable to expect improvements in
transportation technology and infrastructure as well as disruptions of international trade
(due to tariﬀ wars or international conflict) to alter price dispersion over time. In this part
of our analysis we include fixed time eﬀects to allow flexibility in the rate of change of market
integration.
   To begin, the only new variable introduced is time itself. This can be thought of as ex-
ploratory data analysis, but an obvious advantage is that this covariate, time, is exogenous.
In contrast, some economic variables that vary over time, such as tariﬀs, may not be exoge-
nous to commodity-price dispersion. That is, if governments introduce tariﬀs when prices
of foreign producers start to become competitive with those of domestic producers, overall
price convergence may not arise due to these countervailing eﬀects. Wars, in contrast, are not
typically driven by international commodity price diﬀerentials and thus might be considered
another source of exogenous variation in trade costs. But it can be diﬃcult to know where
to draw the line among 18th-century wars that could have aﬀected price diﬀerentials and

                                               18
distance eﬀects. Our initial analysis uses decades and no doubt captures some of the eﬀects
of the Seven Years War and the Napoleonic Wars. The disadvantage of simply using time
as a regressor is a loss of test power in assessing the eﬀect of a specific event, such as a war
or a particular technological change such as the expansion of railroads. But we have a lot of
data, so this agnostic approach should detect both a trend to globalization and interruptions
to that trend, whatever their causes.
   Given our earlier findings we begin by controlling for distance and ocean eﬀects in the
same way, but now we use the absolute deviations directly (rather than their medians over
time):
                                                                 
                        =  +   ln( +    +   ) +                (5.6)

Standard errors are clustered across locations and time to allow for residual correlation in
these dimensions. This multiway clustering is recommended by Cameron, Gelbach, and
Miller (2011) and Thompson (2011). And in this case these standard errors are larger than
the traditional heteroskedasticity-consistent ones. The top line of table 4 contains results,
now with 231,483 annual observations. We continue to find an overall eﬀect of distance,
            b , that is highly significant statistically and economically. And we continue
measured by 
to find a negative ocean eﬀect and a positive eﬀect within Sweden, as in sub-section 5.1.
   Turning to the case in which fixed eﬀects are included by adding 12 dummy variables,
one for each decade from the 1740s to the 1850s, linearly (the 1730s serve as the omitted or
reference decade), the specification becomes:

                                                                   
                     =  +  +   ln( +   +    ) +              (5.7)

where  = 1 in a specific decade and 0 otherwise.10 Measuring the time-varying eﬀects in
this way allows for dispersion to increase or decrease with a wide range of patterns over time.
   What is striking about the results using these time-varying measures of dispersion is that
distance and commodity-specific fixed eﬀects still dominate in terms of overall explanatory
  10
     We also interacted time dummies with the slope coeﬃcient on distance and found no evidence of an
interaction.



                                                  19
power, the 2 is 0.59, even with no time-varying covariates (the first row of table 4) compared
to 0.61 with time-varying eﬀects. Note that the change is highly statistically significant (with
an  -test statistic whose -value is eﬀectively 0.00), despite its small magnitude, given the
very large number of observations.
   Figure 6 graphs the estimated decade-eﬀects, ̂ , along with their 95% confidence inter-
vals. Since the dependent variable is the absolute value of a relative price any reduction in
the intercept from one decade to another represents a move towards zero, or price conver-
gence. The value for the time dummy variable in the 1740s is insignificantly diﬀerent from
the starting value of zero in the 1730s, while all subsequent values are significantly below
zero at the 1% level of significance. We see a history best described as convergence with an
interruption. The decline in the intercept proceeds steadily from the 1740s to the 1790s then
stalls and is reversed in the 1810s. Its value in the 1830s is only just below its value in the
1790s, suggesting a 30—40-year interruption, before convergence resumed steadily to the end
of this sample in 1860.
   Table 5 shows the increases in explanatory power from adding decade eﬀects to commodity-
specific regressions. Omitted are commodities with fewer than 1,000 observations: copper,
salt, and saltpetre. The explanatory power varies a great deal across commodities (as was
true in table 3 for medians over time). For example, the third column shows that distance
explains a lot of price dispersion for bar iron and pig iron, but very little for wax candles or
wool. But in all cases the fourth column shows that adding decade eﬀects leads to a large
improvement in the statistical fit. In several cases–beef, pork, tallow, tallow candles, and
wool–the 2 more than doubles. Moreover, all of these improvements lead to  -statistics
with very low -values, given the large numbers of observations (not shown).
   Jacks (2011) also reports an increase in price dispersion during the Napoleonic Wars with
an overall declining trend, using grain prices within England from 1771 to 1815. Our finding
uses a longer time span, two countries, and multiple commodities and presents a similar
finding in a diﬀerent context. The driving forces of the integration, however, are likely to be


                                              20
diﬀerent if rail, canal and river shipping costs evolved diﬀerently from ocean shipping over
time.
   We also consider decade fixed eﬀects that are specific to the three geographic categoriza-
tions (within the US, within Sweden, and cross-country pairs). The last set of results on
time focuses on this geographic categorization, pooling all goods. That is, we consider the
possibility that price dispersion was changing over time in some subsets of locations, but
not others. A number of the additional coeﬃcients were significant at conventional levels of
statistical significance, but jointly they were not. In other words, figure 6 continues to be a
good summary of the overall time trend in dispersion.

6. Conclusion

We have explored price dispersion using more than 230,000 relative prices covering more
than a century of data (and back well into the 18th century), from cities and towns in
the United States and Sweden, and for 14 commodities. Deviations from the LOP diﬀer
substantially across commodities but there is a clear increase in price deviations as the
distance separating city pairs rises. The ocean eﬀect is large and negative, consistent with
far greater trade frictions overland compared to by ocean, and also consistent with Daniel
Webster’s rhetoric in direction, if not magnitude. International price dispersion thus was
much less than would be predicted based on national distances alone.
   Evidence on the role of time is mixed. We stress two interesting things we did not find and
one that we did. First, distance and ocean-crossing provide most of the statistical explanation
for price dispersion even when time eﬀects are included (as table 4 shows). Second, these
eﬀects are, surprisingly, quite stable over time. We did not find evidence for interaction
between time and distance, for example, as one might expect. Third, however, the time
eﬀects show that, averaged over goods and locations, there was a statistically significant
process of price convergence that began early and was broad-based. It was interrupted for
2—3 decades during the Napoleonic Wars, but otherwise unfolded from the 1730s to the


                                              21
1850s. In contrast, the Stockholm-Philadelphia real exchange rate (shown in figure 2) shows
no trend, a feature which thus illustrates the importance of studying individual prices.

7. Appendix: Price Index Construction

Detailed description of the method of price index construction as well as comparisons to
other US and Swedish price index series may be found in Crucini and Sastry (2013). Follow-
ing Edvinsson and Soderberg (for Sweden) and Oﬃcer (for the United States), we use the
Laspeyres formula to construct price indices from common currency commodity prices:
                                         P
                                             0 X        
                                0   = P           =   0
                                           0 0   
                                                               0

where  (0 ) is the price (quantity) of commodity  in year  and the zero denotes a choice
of base year. The second expression expresses the price index as the expenditure-weighted
average of price ratios (current prices relative to base prices). The expenditure weights are
expressed as time-invariant in the formula and measured at a base year.
   The real exchange rate is constructed as the ratio of the Stockholm price index to the
Philadelphia price index. Importantly, the same basket of goods is used in the construction
of both indices. In particular, three diﬀerent sets of weights are used, one for each of these
time periods: 1733—1784, 1784—1803, 1803—1860. The choice of time periods was out of
convenience to maximize the breadth of goods we could include in the basket given the
available price observations in these two cities. The calculation of weights is somewhat
arbitrary, but the general approach was to reallocate budget shares for goods not in our
sample to very similar goods (e.g. barley to wheat) and, if necessary, rescale all weights to
one. Table A1 gives the weights.




                                                 22
           TABLE A1: CONSUMPTION EXPENDITURE WEIGHTS
         Commodities                  1733-1784           1784-1803           1803-1860
              Beef                      0.100               0.060               0.059
             Butter                                         0.269               0.265
              Cod                                           0.060               0.059
              Hops                                          0.040               0.039
              Pork                      0.150               0.090               0.088
             Tallow                                         0.015               0.015
         Tallow Candles                                                         0.008
          Wax Candles                                                           0.008
             Wheat                      0.750               0.468               0.460
              Sum                       1.000               1.000               1.000

Notes: Commodities excluded: Bar Iron, Copper, Hides, Lumber boards, Nails, Pig Iron,
Salt, Saltpetre, Wool. At the points the weights change, the indices are linked by rescaling
the “new" series to match the price level of the “old" calculation at the same point (e.g. the
price level at 1784 using the 1733-1784 weights.

References

 [1] Atack, Jeremy and Peter Passell (1994) A New Economic View of American History:
    From Colonial Times to 1940 (Second Edition). W.W. Norton & Co.

 [2] Cameron, A. Colin, Jonah B. Gelbach, and Douglas L. Miller (2011) Robust inference
    with multiway clustering. Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 29, 238—49.

 [3] Cole, Arthur Harrison (1938) Wholesale Commodity Prices in the United States, 1700—
    1861. Harvard University Press: Cambridge, MA.

 [4] Cole, Arthur and Ruth Crandall (1964) The international scientific committee on price
    history. Journal of Economic History 24, 381—388.

 [5] Coleman, Andrew (2007) The pitfalls of estimating transactions costs from price data:
    Evidence from trans-Atlantic gold-point arbitrage, 1886—1905. Explorations in Economic
    History 44, 387—410.

                                             23
 [6] Crucini and Sastry (2013) Estimating U.S. Inflation from 1700 to 1861, Vanderbilt
    University mimeo.

 [7] Dobado, Rafael and Gustavo A. Marrero (2005) Corn market integration in Porfirian
    Mexico. Journal of Economic History, 65, 103—128.

 [8] Edvinsson, Rodney and Johan Söderberg (2010) The evolution of Swedish consumer
    prices, 1290—2008. chapter 8 in Rodney Edvinsson, Tor Jacobson, and Daniel Walden-
    ström (eds.) Historical Monetary and Financial Statistics for Sweden: Exchange Rates,
    Prices, and Wages, 1277-2008. Stockholm: Sveriges Riksbank.

 [9] Elsas, Moritz J. (1936, 1949) Umriss einer Geschichte der Preise und Löhne in Deutsch-
    land vom ausgehenden Mittelalter bis zum Beginn des neunzehnten Jahrhunderts. 2 vols.
    Leiden: A. W. Sijthoﬀ.

[10] Friis, Astrid and Kristof Glamann (1958) A History of Prices and Wages in Denmark,
    1660-1800. Vol. I. Longman, Green and Co., London.

[11] Gorodnichenko, Yuriy and Linda Tesar (2009) Border eﬀect or country eﬀect? Seattle
    may not be so far from Vancouver after all. American Economic Journal: Macroeco-
    nomics, 1, 219—41.

[12] Hamilton, Earl J. (1947) War and Prices in Spain, 1651-1800. Cambridge: Harvard
    University Press.

[13] Hauser, Henri (1936) Recherches et documents sur l’histoire des prix en France de 1500
    à 1800. Paris: Les Presses Modernes.

[14] Head, Keith and Thierry Mayer (2013) What separates us? Sources of resistance to
    globalization. Canadian Journal of Economics 46, 1196—1231.

[15] Hung, Christian (2014) A Transportation Infrastructure Approach to Economic Dis-
    tance, mimeo Vanderbilt University.

                                            24
[16] Jacks, David S. (2004) Market integration in the North and Baltic Seas, 1500—1800.
    Journal of European Economic History 33, 285—329.

[17] Jacks, David S. (2005) Intra- and international commodity market integration in the
    Atlantic economy, 1800-1913. Explorations in Economic History 42, 381—413.

[18] Jacks, David S. (2006) What drove 19th century commodity market integration? Ex-
    plorations in Economic History 43, 383—412.

[19] Jacks (2009) On the death of distance and borders: Evidence from the nineteenth
    century. Economics Letters 105, 230—233.

[20] Jacks, David S. (2011) Foreign wars, domestic markets: England, 1793—1815. European
    Review of Economic History, 15, 277—311.

[21] Jacks, David S., Kevin H. O’Rourke, and Jeﬀrey G. Williamson (2011) Commodity price
    volatility and world market integration since 1700. Review of Economics and Statistics
    93, 800—813.

[22] Jörberg, Lennart (1972) A History of Prices in Sweden 1732-1914. Volume I: Sources,
    Methods, Tables. Lund: CWK Gleerup.

[23] Keller, Wolfgang and Carol H. Shiue (2008) Tariﬀs, trains, and trade: The role of
    institutions versus technology in the expansion of markets. NBER Working Paper 13913.

[24] Klovland, Jan Tore (2005) Commodity market integration 1850-1913: Evidence from
    Britain and Germany. European Review of Economic History 9, 163—197.

[25] McCusker, John J. (1978). Money and Exchange in Europe and America, 1600-1775: A
    Handbook. (reissued with corrections, 1992). University of North Carolina Press: Chapel
    Hill.

[26] Oﬃcer, Lawrence H. (2006) Dollar—sterling parity: 1789—1978. Table Ee612-614 in His-
    torical Statistics of the United States, Earliest Times to the Present: Millennial Edition,

                                             25
    edited by Susan B. Carter, Scott Sigmund Gartner, Michael R. Haines, Alan L. Olm-
    stead, Richard Sutch, and Gavin Wright. New York: Cambridge University Press.

[27] O’Rourke, Kevin and Jeﬀrey G. Williamson (1994) Late nineteenth-century Anglo-
    American factor-price convergence: Were Heckscher and Ohlin right? Journal of Eco-
    nomic History 54, 892—916.

[28] Parsley, D. C., and S.-J. Wei (2001) Explaining the border eﬀect: The role of exchange
    rate variability, shipping costs, and geography. Journal of International Economics 55,
    87—105.

[29] Pippenger, John and Llad Phillips (2008) Some pitfalls in testing the law of one price
    in commodity markets. Journal of International Money and Finance 27, 915—925.

[30] Posthumus, Nicolas W. (1946) Inquiry into the History of Prices in Holland. Vol. I:
    Wholesale Prices at the Exchange of Amsterdam, 1585—1914. Rates of Exchange at
    Amsterdam, 1609—1914. Leiden: E. J. Brill.

[31] Pribram, Alfred F. (1938) Materialen zur Geschichte der Preise und Löhne in Osterre-
    ich. Vienna: C. Veberreuters Verlag.

[32] Rogoﬀ, Kenneth A., Kenneth Froot, and Michael Kim (2001) The law of one price over
    700 years. IMF WP/01/174.

[33] Shiue, Carol H. (2005) From political fragmentation towards a custom union: Border
    eﬀects of the German Zollverein, 1815 to 1855. European Review of Economic History
    9, 129—162.

[34] Slaughter, Matthew J. (1995) The antebellum transportation revolution and factor price
    convergence. NBER working paper 5303.




                                            26
[35] Taussig, Frank William (1892) State Papers and Speeches on the Tariﬀ. Speech of Daniel
    Webster Upon the Tariﬀ, in the House of Representatives, April 1-2, 1824. Cambridge
    MA: Harvard University Press.

[36] Thompson, Samuel B. (2011) Simple formulas for standard errors that cluster by both
    firm and time. Journal of Financial Economics 99, 1—10.

[37] Trenkler, Carsten and Nikolaus Wolf (2005) Economic integration across borders: the
    Polish interwar economy. European Review of Economic History 9, 199—231.




                                            27
                    TABLE 1: CITY PAIRS BY COMMODITY
       Commodity                   units              UU             SS              SU
         bar iron                  ton                13              54              62
           beef                   barrel               6             205              84
          butter                    lb                10             480             150
          copper                    lb                 5               0               4
           hops                     lb                 3             243              60
         pig iron                  ton                 6              6               16
           pork                   barrel              13             190             116
           salt                   bushel               7              0                4
        saltpetre                   lb                 6              0                4
          tallow                    lb                10             291             113
     tallow candles                 lb                 2             406              62
      wax candles                   lb                 6             405             116
          wheat                   bushel               8             291             115
           wool                     lb                 3              10              15
   Maximum city pairs                                 15             496             192

Notes: A ton is 2000 lbs; a barrel is 217 lbs. The volumes are dry level bushels. To convert
to metric units, a lb is 0.45359 kg; a bushel is 0.35239 hectolitres.The notation UU refers to
city pairs within the US, SS refers to city pairs within Sweden and SU refers to city pairs
that lie across the ocean.




                                             28
                 TABLE 2: BORDER REGRESSIONS 1732—1860
                             POOLED DATA
                                                              
                     =  +   ln( +    +   ) + 

  Intercepts        b
                                        b
                                                               b
                                                                              2     

                9.91***           -3761.0***              183.8***          0.75   3607
                   (1.25)             (355.3)                (67.0)

                 9.28***           -3287.5***              135.7**           0.21   3607
                   (1.34)             (613.3)                (58.5)

                                                      
Notes: Distance is in kilometres. The dummy variable  is 1 when  and  are on opposite
                                                        
sides of the ocean and 0 otherwise. The dummy variable  is 1 when  and  are both
in Sweden and 0 otherwise. Standard errors are robust to heteroskedasticity (found using
method HC2). The asterisks ***, **, and * denote -values less than 001, 005, or 010
respectively.




                                              29
                  TABLE 3: BORDER REGRESSIONS 1732—1860
                       COMMODITY-BY-COMMODITY
                                                                
                    =  +   ln( +    +   ) + 

 Intercepts             b
                                         b 
                                                           b 
                                                                           2     
 Bar Iron            15.33***           17257.1           333.4**          0.78   129
                      (5.59)           (30184.4)          (159.9)

 Butter              29.38***         -5254.9***           366.7           0.51   640
                      (9.64)            (276.4)           (279.6)

 Hops                16.50***         -5315.6***            49.0           0.40   306
                      (3.01)            (164.7)            (38.3)

 Pork                 5.73***         -5619.3***            -8.4           0.25   319
                       (0.73)           (75.7)             (20.8)

 Tallow               4.35***         -4177.9***          -18.4**          0.27   414
                       (0.63)           (817.9)            (8.6)

 Tallow Candles        9.22           -3374.7***           748.8           0.36   470
                      (7.05)            (473.4)           (887.3)

 Wax Candles          -19.95*         -4689.3***          8500.0*          0.18   528
                      (11.67)          (1374.1)           (4733.7)

 Wheat                4.05***            -2455.7           -0.231          0.39   414
                       (1.05)           (2503.4)           (32.0)

                                                      
Notes: Distance is in kilometres. The dummy variable  is 1 when  and  are on opposite
                                                        
sides of the ocean and 0 otherwise. The dummy variable  is 1 when  and  are both
in Sweden and 0 otherwise. Standard errors are robust to heteroskedasticity (found using
method HC2). The asterisks ***, **, and * denote -values less than 001, 005, or 010
respectively.




                                              30
                  TABLE 4: BORDER REGRESSIONS 1732—1860
                    POOLED DATA (WITH TIME EFFCTS)
                                                                  
                    =  +  +   ln( +   +    ) + 

   Intercepts          b
                                         b
                                                            b
                                                                            2       

                  11.2***          -4250.4***          178.6***           0.59    231,483
                     (1.2)             (296.3)            (56.1)

    and         12.4***          -4346.2***          186.4***           0.61    231,483
                     (1.4)             (247.3)            (58.2)

                                                      
Notes: Distance is in kilometres. The dummy variable  is 1 when  and  are on opposite
                                                        
sides of the ocean and 0 otherwise. The dummy variable  is 1 when  and  are both in
Sweden and 0 otherwise. Standard errors are clustered by time and location. The asterisks
***, **, and * denote -values less than 001, 005, or 010 respectively.




                                                31
            TABLE 5: EXPLANATORY POWER OF DECADE EFFECTS
 Commodity                      Restricted 2          Unrestricted 2            
                                  Distance             Distance and Time
 Bar Iron                           0.526                    0.577                 8022

 Beef                               0.036                     0.078                19345

 Butter                             0.297                     0.347                48051

 Hops                               0.123                     0.223                23464

 Pig Iron                           0.780                     0.831                1680

 Pork                               0.064                     0.136                25947

 Tallow                             0.070                     0.208                31278

 Tallow Candles                     0.064                     0.152                24724

 Wax Candles                        0.009                     0.018                26996

 Wheat                              0.193                     0.233                19209

 Wool                               0.003                     0.213                1319

Notes: Each entry in the table reports the explanatory power of the regressions of the
form reported in table 4, but allowing for commodity-specific coeﬃcients. The first column
excludes decade fixed-eﬀects while the second column includes them.




                                            32
                            Figure 1: Price Indexes in Philadelphia and Stockholm



                                                                                       Stockholm

               300



                                                                                                 Philadelphia
               250
price levels




               200




               150




               100




                50
                     1740           1760               1780               1800               1820                1840         1860

                                                                      Year

                            Notes: The price level is an index of prices in pounds sterling, normalized to 100 in Stockholm
                            in 1733. The indexes are Laspeyres formulas with a common basket given in the Appendix.
                                                                Figure 2: Real Exchange Rate Between Philadelphia and Stockholm



                                                          1.6
real exchange rate (ratio of Stockholm to Philadelphia)




                                                          1.4




                                                          1.2




                                                          1.0




                                                          0.8




                                                          0.6




                                                          0.4
                                                                1740               1760                1780               1800                1820                1840           1860

                                                                                                                      Year

                                                                Notes: The real exchange rate is the ratio of the price index in Stockholm to the price index in Philadelphia.
                                                                Price indexes, shown in figure 1, are of the Laspeyres form with common weights given in the Appendix.
                                                              Figure 3: Beef Prices
                                                                      Sweden
                          6


                          5
pounds sterling per bbl




                          4


                          3


                          2


                          1


                          0
                              1740           1760             1780            1800            1820             1840   1860

                                                                          Year




                                                                     United States
                          6


                          5
pounds sterling per bbl




                          4


                          3


                          2


                          1


                          0
                              1740           1760             1780            1800            1820             1840   1860

                                                                          Year

                                     Notes: Prices are for 32 Swedish market towns, from Jorberg (1972), and for
                                     6 US cities, from Cole (1938). All prices are in pounds sterling per barrel.
                                                             Figure 4: Wheat Prices
                                                                      Sweden
                             0.6


                             0.5
pounds sterling per bushel




                             0.4


                             0.3


                             0.2


                             0.1


                             0.0
                                   1740        1760            1780            1800            1820           1840   1860

                                                                           Year




                                                                      United States
                             0.6


                             0.5
pounds sterling per bushel




                             0.4


                             0.3


                             0.2


                             0.1


                             0.0
                                   1740        1760            1780            1800            1820           1840   1860

                                                                           Year

                                          Notes: Prices are for 32 Swedish towns, from Jorberg (1972), and 6 US
                                          cities, from Cole (1938). Prices are in pounds sterling per bushel.
                                                                           Figure 5: Median Absolute Deviations




                              United States                                                    Sweden                                                         International

          160                                                             160                                                            160

          140                                                             140                                                            140

          120                                                             120                                                            120

          100                                                             100                                                            100
mdaqijk




                                                                mdaqijk




                                                                                                                               mdaqijk
          80                                                               80                                                             80

          60                                                               60                                                             60

          40                                                               40                                                             40

          20                                                               20                                                             20

           0                                                                0                                                              0
                0   200 400 600 800 100012001400160018002000                     0    200   400     600   800 1000 1200 1400                   5500   6000   6500     7000     7500   8000   8500

                                  distance                                                        distance                                                          distance




                                     Notes: Observations are medians over time of percentage absolute values of log price differences for 14 commodities.
                                     Locations are 6 US cities and 32 Swedish towns. Distance is measured in kilometres on a great circle.
                                                              Figure 6: Declining Dispersion



                              0.00
distance equation intercept




                              -0.05




                              -0.10




                              -0.15




                                      1740   1760                  1780                    1800                   1820                     1840

                                                                                   Decade


                                               Note: The solid line connects the dedade-specific intercepts αt from equation (5.7). The
                                               dashed lines show the 95% confidence intervals based on double-clustered standard errors.
