                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                  BANKS AS SECRET KEEPERS

                                            Tri Vi Dang
                                            Gary Gorton
                                         Bengt Holmström
                                         Guillermo Ordonez

                                        Working Paper 20255
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20255


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2014

We thank Tobias Adrian, Fernando Alvarez, Bruno Biais, Paul Beaudry, Ricardo Caballero, Douglas
Diamond, John Geanakoplos, Mike Golosov, Jonathan Heathcote, Christian Hellwig, Alessandro Pavan,
Enrico Perotti, Andrei Shleifer, Alp Simsek, Jean Tirole, Michael Woodford and seminar participants
at Banque de France, Chicago, Chinese University of Hong Kong, Columbia, Commodity Futures
Trading Commission, EIEF, Federal Reserve Board, Harvard/MIT Applied Theory Workshop, Hong
Kong Monetary Authority, IMF, LBS, MIT, Northwestern, NY Fed, NYU, Rutgers, Toulouse, UBC,
Universite de Montreal, Wharton, Yale Cowles Foundation, the SED Meetings at Cyprus, the LUISS
Workshop on “Financial Frictions in Macro-Models”, the Barcelona GSE Summer Forum on “Financial
Intermediation, Risk and Liquidity Management”, the ESSET Meetings at Gerzensee, the Sciences
Po Paris Workshop on “Macro and International Finance” and the 2013 Summer Workshop at the
Chicago Fed for useful comments. The usual waiver of liability applies. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w20255.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Tri Vi Dang, Gary Gorton, Bengt Holmström, and Guillermo Ordonez. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Banks as Secret Keepers
Tri Vi Dang, Gary Gorton, Bengt Holmström, and Guillermo Ordonez
NBER Working Paper No. 20255
June 2014
JEL No. D82,E44,G11,G14,G21

                                             ABSTRACT

Banks are optimally opaque institutions. They produce debt for use as a transaction medium (bank
money), which requires that information about the backing assets – loans – not be revealed, so that bank
money does not fluctuate in value, reducing the efficiency of trade. This need for opacity conflicts with
the production of information about investment projects, needed for allocative efficiency. Intermediaries
exist to hide such information, so banks select portfolios of information-insensitive assets. For the
economy as a whole, firms endogenously separate into bank finance and capital market/stock market
finance depending on the cost of producing information about their projects.


Tri Vi Dang                                         Bengt Holmström
Columbia University                                 Department of Economics, E18-220
420 W 118 St MC 3308                                MIT
New York, NY 10027                                  77 Massachusetts Avenue
td2332@columbia.edu                                 Cambridge, MA 02139
                                                    and NBER
Gary Gorton                                         bengt@mit.edu
Yale School of Management
135 Prospect Street                                 Guillermo Ordonez
P.O. Box 208200                                     University of Pennsylvania
New Haven, CT 06520-8200                            Department of Economics
and NBER                                            428 McNeil Building
Gary.Gorton@yale.edu                                3718 Locust Walk
                                                    Philadelphia, PA 19104
                                                    and NBER
                                                    ordonez@econ.upenn.edu
1       Introduction

The output of banks is short-term debt used for transactions and storing value.1 In
this paper we show that for this debt to be efficient banks need to be opaque. They
are opaque because the assets they select, such as loans to consumers and small busi-
nesses, are hard to value; and the information banks produce about borrowers is not
revealed. Because of this opacity banks are regulated and examined. Secrecy sur-
rounds banking. Bank regulators’ examinations are kept confidential and discount
window borrowing from the central bank is (supposed to be) secret. Bank opacity
can lead to bank runs, which occur when depositors question the value of the banks
assets. Deposit insurance is intended to mitigate this. We argue that opacity is inher-
ent in banking. Opacity can also explain the type of loans that banks hold and how
borrowers self-select between banks and capital markets.

A defining characteristic of privately-produced, money-like securities is that agents
accept them at par when transacting, because the agents expect to be able to redeem
them at par. The value of the money is not in doubt when transacting and the value
does not vary over time. In other words, bank money is not sensitive to information,
either public or privately-produced. But, how can banks produce such money when it
must be backed by risky assets, while investment efficiency requires that information
be produced to select and monitor these investments?

Our answer to this conundrum is that financial intermediaries produce private money
because they can keep the information that they produce about the backing assets se-
cret, thereby preventing their money-like securities from the fluctuations due to the
value of their real assets. In our model the raison d’etre of banking is secret-keeping
for the production of private money. Without banks, information about investments
would come out and reduce the efficiency of private money. So, banks are optimally
opaque. Furthermore, to create information-insensitive debt for trading, the bank will
also invest in information-insensitive assets. There is an information complementar-
ity between the production of private money and assets that minimize information
leakage.

We study a model where a firm has two sequential investment opportunities but no
    1
   Our concept of bank is more general than commercial banks; we include all financial institutions
which provide securities that are used as money, such as money market mutual funds and other
shadow banking participants.


                                                1
funds. Two overlapping generations of consumers (“early” and “late” consumers)
live for a total of three periods and have deterministic “liquidity” needs at an interim
date. The early consumer has a storable endowment that can either cover the invest-
ment needs of the firm or its own liquidity needs in the intermediate period, but not
both. If the early consumer finances the firm’s needs, he must cover his liquidity
needs by selling the claims on the firm to the late consumer in the intermediate pe-
riod. The liquidity needs make consumers (effectively) risk averse to changes in the
value of the claims they hold. Furthermore, an early consumer does not want the late
consumer to produce private information about the assets backing the claim, as in
Dang, Gorton, and Holmström (2013).
We assume that information about a project is of value in deciding whether to invest.
The problem is that there is a tradeoff between socially valuable information produc-
tion and its negative externality on liquidity provision. The model thus captures the
basic dilemma that information is needed for investment efficiency, but is unwanted
for trading efficiency.
We begin by analyzing two polar institutional arrangements for information produc-
tion and funding: an informationally efficient financial market and a secret keeping
bank. In the financial market, the two sequential projects are financed by issuing pub-
licly priced securities (equity) that all agents can observe. A bank finances the project
by issuing deposits to the consumers. The bank can find out the same information
about the projects as the market, but can hide this information from the consumers.
We show that capital markets are inefficient liquidity providers, because market prices
reveal information about the projects. By contrast, banks can implement the first best
allocation, because they can prevent information leakage. This comparison may not
be surprising, but provides a benchmark for our main model in which the late con-
sumer can produce private information about the bank’s portfolio at some cost and
the bank may have to adjust its financing and investment decisions to prevent this
from happening.
In the main model, the bank can avoid private information production by the late
consumer in one of two ways (when necessary). It can force the early consumer to
bear some risk (distorting money provision), or it can invest sub-optimally in the
initial project (distorting investment). These distortions make private information
acquisition less attractive. But if the (second) project is sufficiently risky or the cost
of information production sufficiently low, it will not be worthwhile for the bank

                                            2
(nor socially preferred) to fund the projects. Such projects will be funded by capital
markets instead.
The logic above implies that banks will choose to create private money by investing
in projects that are less risky and more opaque; opacity makes the cost of information
acquisition higher. Note that the implied allocation of projects between banks and
financial markets does not rely on any comparative advantage that banks have in
evaluating and overseeing its assets.

Empirical Evidence: Our prediction regarding the type of assets that banks should
invest in match rather well those we observe in reality. Banks have on the asset
side of their balance sheet relatively safe debt instruments, such as high-grade cor-
porate bonds and government issued securities, as well as hard-to-evaluate debt in-
struments, such as mortgages and loans to small businesses.
The recent financial crisis illustrates bank opacity. The money produced by shadow
banks, sale and repurchase agreements (repo) and asset-backed commercial paper
(ABCP), are short-term stores of value. This money, when not backed by U.S. Trea-
suries, is backed by asset-backed securities (ABS). ABS’s are opaque and have no
traded equity making them useful for backing repo and ABCP.
Prior to deposit insurance in the U.S., demand deposits were the dominant form of
bank money. There was no information leakage because checks were cleared in clear-
inghouses and bank stock was very illiquid. Again, banks were opaque (see Gorton
(2013)). In the period before the U.S. Civil War the dominant form of money was
private bank notes. These circulated at discounts that varied over time and space.
These discounts were information revealing and the bank money was inefficient as a
medium of exchange (see Gorton (1999)).
Bank opacity has been empirically studied in several different ways. Since the advent
of deposit insurance banks are examined by government regulators. These examina-
tions are kept secret, but are still informative. DeYoung et al. (2001) find that govern-
ment examinations did produce new, value-relevant, information which is eventually
revealed in bank subordinated debt prices. Berger and Davies (1998) find that infor-
mation from unfavorable examinations is eventually revealed in banks’ stock prices.
Apparently, the examiners uncover secrets.
Other evidence includes Bessler and Nohel (1996), who study dividend cuts and find
significantly stronger negative reactions for banks than for nonbanks. Hirtle (2006)

                                           3
examines the abnormal stock returns to 44 bank holding companies in response to
the SEC mandate that CEOs certify the accuracy of their financial statements. This
mandate resulted in no abnormal response in the case of nonfinancial firms, but bank
holding companies did experience positive and significant abnormal returns. Hirtle
also finds that the abnormal returns are related to measures of opacity.

Haggard and Howe (2007) find that banks have less firm-specific information in their
equity returns than matching industrial firms. They also show that banks with higher
proportions of agricultural and consumer loans are more opaque. Morgan (2002) and
Iannota (2006) look at the bond ratings of banks and find that bond rating agencies
are more likely to disagree on the ratings of banks compared to other firms, suggest-
ing that banks are harder to understand. Also, see Jones, Lee, and Yeager (2012).
Flannery, Kwan, and Nimalendran (2004) examine microstructure evidence (bid-ask
spreads and trading volumes) for banks and a matched non-bank control sample.
They conclude that banks are not so opaque, compared to non-banks. However, Flan-
nery, Kwan, and Nimalendran (2013) find evidence of a significant increase in bank
opaqueness during the financial crisis 2007-2009. One interpretation of this shift in
bid-ask spreads is that opaque bank assets were not causing significant information
asymmetries in stock markets before the crisis, but became information sensitive in
the financial crisis, leading to adverse selection fears.2

Related Literature: The idea that it may be optimal to keep information secret is not
new. It was perhaps first articulated by Hirshleifer (1971), who showed that early
release of information can destroy future insurance opportunities. This general idea
also underlies Kaplan’s (2006) study of a Diamond and Dybvig (1983) type model in
which the bank acquires information before depositors do. Kaplan studies when the
optimal deposit contract will be non-contingent. Breton (2011) view banks as a solu-
tion to information appropriability problems. With diversification banks can garble
the information. Our focus is on the issue of preventing information production by
outside potential depositors and the possible distortions that this may involve. We
also discuss the endogenous separation of firms into those that go to capital markets
and those that go to banks.

Dang, Gorton, and Holmström (2013) study the optimal design of securities for trad-
   2
    There is a related literature on the potential for market discipline to complement supervision. The
market discipline might occur via improved disclosure or mandatory subordinated debt requirements.
See Flannery (1999).

                                                  4
ing when public shocks and privately produced information can cause adverse selec-
tion problems. Their main result shows that debt is optimal both for bilateral trade
and as collateral backing up such trade, because debt is the least information-sensitive
contract. Our focus here is not on optimal contracts as such, but rather on optimal in-
stitutions. We show that the notion of information-insensitivity has important insti-
tutional implications, especially for banking and their unique role in creating private
money. Banks are purposefully opaque by being sparse in publishing information
and by investing in assets that are information-insensitive. Market funding is more
transparent and provides an alternative to banking for projects that are riskier and
easier to evaluate; banking and markets co-exist, serving different investment needs.

There is a large accounting literature on disclosure, almost all of it on disclosure in
stock markets. One of the most influential papers is by Diamond and Verrecchia
(1991) who examine the optimal disclosure policy of a firm. They show that more
information revelation reduces the firm’s cost of capital, but it can have the opposite
effect by reducing liquidity in the stock market.3 Another context in which limited
disclosure may be optimal is discussed in Andolfatto (2010) who shows that trans-
parency can be socially costly in a monetary economy with search frictions.

Finally, our paper offers a new explanation for the existence of financial intermedi-
aries that relies on complementarities between the two sides of a bank’s balance sheet.
Most explanations look at just one side of the balance sheet. One line focuses on the
role of banks in making loans. Banks are viewed as producing information about
potential borrowers and/or monitoring borrowers after the loan has been made; see,
e.g., Boyd and Prescott (1986).

Another line looks at the liability side of banks. In Diamond and Dybvig (1983) the
bank issues demand deposits to insure consumers against liquidity shocks, but the
asset side is deterministic. In their paper the possibility of trading among consumers
destroys insurance opportunities, because the insured consumers can cash out after
they learn their liquidity shock (privately). (See e.g. Jacklin (1987) and Haubrich
and King (1990)). We also have insurance in our model, but in our case liquidity
needs are deterministic while the asset side is stochastic. Bank secrecy is exactly what
prevents direct trading between agents under symmetric information, implementing
such trading through the bank. In our model secrecy prevents direct trading, allow-
ing for insurance opportunities. Gorton and Pennacchi (1990) focus on a different
  3
      See also the more recent contribution of Monnet and Quintin (2013).


                                                   5
mechanism of liquidity production. In their model banks produce riskless debt to
shield depositors from having to trade with privately-informed agents.
There are a few papers that, like ours, rely on the complementarity of the two sides of
the balance sheet. Diamond (1984) argues that bank liabilities should be debt claims
because this can ensure that the bank monitors its borrowers. In Diamond and Ra-
jan (2001) banks monitor borrowers and can do so better than others because the
design of their liability side gives them credibility in enforcing repayments more ef-
fectively. Demand deposits, which can be withdrawn at any moment, create the right
incentives for investing in and collecting from loans. In Kashyap, Rajan, and Stein
(2002) banks structure their balance sheet to take advantage of the imperfect correla-
tion between deposit withdrawals and loan commitment draw-downs, tying the two
banking activities together. In Breton (2007) investors invest in long-term projects
which they monitor and therefore have private information about. The private infor-
mation makes the projects illiquid; if they were sold on the market, they would be
subject to adverse selection. Kept on the bank’s balance sheet, the information about
the projects will not leak out so depositors, now without private information, can be
issued claims that are liquid in the market.
Our paper also provides a simultaneous explanation of the structure of a bank’s bal-
ance sheet, but one that is rather different from those above. It combines Gorton and
Pennacchi’s (1990) view of banks as issuers of private money with the insight from
Dang, Gorton, and Holmström (2013) that debt is optimal collateral, because it is least
sensitive to public and private information. To this, it adds the important ingredient
that banks are purposefully opaque, because keeping information secret will temper
the fluctuation in the value of collateral and the desire to leak secrets to the market.
Our argument says that banks exist to produce money and this dictates the nature of
bank assets, not the other way around. In our model there is nothing per se special
about the banks’ activities on the asset side (though they may be screening and mon-
itoring). However, there is still an important complementarity between bank assets
and bank liabilities. In order to produce money, the banks select assets to minimize
information leakage, publicly or privately. But, there are also other implications for
banks’ asset portfolios. For example, we show that banks “diversify,” hold safe trea-
sury bonds or maintain bank capital in order to reduce the incentives for information
production about their portfolios, and hence maintain their opacity.
In the next Section we introduce the model, calculate the first best allocation, and then

                                           6
show the first best can be implemented by intermediation and not capital markets. In
Section 3 we study what happens if agents can privately produce information, reduc-
ing the possibility of intermediaries to keep secrets. In Section 4 we determine the
optimal portfolio choice of banks that allows them to hide information most effec-
tively and discuss the coexistence of banks and capital markets. Section 5 shows an
overlapping generations extension that can be applied to a macroeconomic environ-
ment. Finally, Section 6 concludes.



2     Model

In this section we present the model. Then, we derive the first best allocations and
study the allocation achievable with capital markets and with a banking technology
(or contract environment) that enables banks to keep secrets.



2.1   Setting

Consider an economy with a single good, three dates, t 2 {0, 1, 2}, and four agents: a
firm (F ), an early consumer (E), a late consumer (L), and a bank (B). Preferences and
endowments are as follows:
                       2
                       X
               UF =          CF t                         !F = (0, 0, 0)
                       t=0
                       X2
               UE =          CEt + ↵ min{CE1 , k}        !E = (e, 0, 0)
                       t=0
                       2
                       X
               UL =          CLt + ↵ min{CL2 , k}        !E = (0, e, 0)
                       t=0
                       2
                       X
              UB =           CBt                          !B = (0, 0, 0)
                       t=0


where Cht denotes the consumption of agent h 2 {F, E, L, B} at date t 2 {0, 1, 2} and
↵ and k are positive constants. The firm has no endowment of goods but, as we will
discuss next, it has access to a productive technology; the consumers only differ as
to the period they are born – the early consumer is born in period t = 0 and the late


                                            7
consumer in t = 1. Both consumers have e units of goods as endowment when they
are born and nothing at other dates, and they both prefer to consume up to k the
period after they are born – in period t = 1 for the early consumer and in period t = 2
for the late consumer.
The consumers’ preferences show that they have some urgency (↵ > 1) to consume
as least k at dates 1 and 2, respectively. This can be thought of as a demand for “liq-
uidity” or as a productive investment possibility that costs k and produces k(1 + ↵).
It is clear from the pattern of endowments and preferences that there is a motive for
the early and late consumers to trade. Implicit in the model is the idea that con-
sumers’ spending occurs at different times, and that in the mean time they are busy
doing other things. Consequently, they do not all meet at t = 0 and write contracts,
meeting only in the interim date t = 1 (e.g., see Wallace (1988).) Another way to
think about this is that consumers do meet in period t = 0 but late consumers cannot
write contracts that enforce them to trade its future endowment, because of collateral
constraints or moral hazard, for example.
Even though the firm does not have any endowment, it has two investment opportu-
nities. At t = 0 the firm can invest, at a cost w, in a first project that generates x > w at
t = 2 with probability , and zero otherwise, all in terms of the single good. At t = 1,
the firm has another investment opportunity, a second project, at a cost w.b Projects
are perfectly correlated, an assumption made for simplicity, and discussed later. The
second project introduces the possibility of information production at t = 1, and it
is this information production which creates the potential problem for the early con-
sumer’s transaction with the late consumer. Hence it is our focus. Commitment not
to reveal information cannot happen in markets, but can happen in banks. That is the
definition of a bank.
We assume that the original project has a positive net present value and its operation
is ex-ante efficient (i.e., x > w). We also assume that at t = 1 the firm observes
whether the second project will be a success or a failure at t = 2 and can communicate
this information to other agents, in particular the bank, at no cost.
We also assume that the endowment of early consumers is not enough to cover both
their liquidity needs and firms’ investment needs, while total endowment in the econ-
omy (the endowments of both early and late consumers) is enough to cover both liq-
uidity and investment needs. In other words, if the early consumer covers the whole
cost of the project w, it does not have enough funds to also cover his liquidity needs k.

                                             8
However, if each consumer were to contribute half of the project cost, then each con-
sumer would have extra funds to cover his own liquidity needs. The problem is that
the late consumer is not able to contribute his endowment in period t = 0 to cover
half the project cost. This implies that early consumers face the risk of not consuming
k in t = 1 if financing the original project at w. But late consumers could provide
enough resources to eliminate such a risk. In summary, these restrictions are:


Assumption 1 Projects and endowments

  1. The first project is ex-ante efficient.
      x > w.

  2. Early consumers can cover their liquidity and investment needs, but not both.
     e > k, and e > w but e < k + w.

  3. Total endowment is enough to cover both liquidity and investment needs.
                   b
     2e > 2k + w + w.


Some further assumptions are worth noting. First, endowments are fixed and storable,
which implies that banks will not be necessary to move endowments intertemporally
so, the early consumer can store k of his endowment to guarantee its consumption at
t = 1. However, in this case, the early consumer would not have enough resources to
invest in the project, since e k < w. In contrast, if the early consumer finances the
project at t = 0, since claims on the project pay at t = 2, the only way to consume k
at t = 1 is by trading a fraction of those claims with late consumers that are born at
t = 1. Late consumers have enough resources to potentially finance a second project
and to buy the claims from early consumers to cover their liquidity needs.

The trade between early and late consumers that would implement the first best,
however, is potentially hindered by information revelation about the second project
at t = 1. Information about the type of the second project is important, since it allows
the second project to be financed only when it is optimal. The information, however,
would have a negative impact on the early consumers’ ability to trade its claims on
the first project, if the first project was unsuccessful. In that case the claims held by
early consumers are worthless and then late consumers would not be willing to buy
them. Early consumers would not be able to cover their liquidity needs.


                                               9
Remarks The assumption that ↵ and k are known parameters just simplifies the ex-
position but is not critical for the results. If these parameters that determine liquidity
needs were random, the kinks in the utility function would be random as well. Then
pricing would be based on expectations of the risk that early consumers face would
not be able to trade with late consumers. If banks reduce this risk of no trading with
late consumers, then random liquidity needs do not matter as long as there are some
states where trading matters.

We also assume early and late consumers are symmetric in their endowments and liq-
uidity needs (same e, k and ↵ for early and late consumers) and only differ on when
they are born. We introduce this extreme assumption for two reasons. First, it high-
lights that our results do not depend on heterogeneous preferences across depositors.
Second it allows us to extend the model to an overlapping generation structure and
explore the dynamic implications of potential shocks to the quality of projects in the
economy.

Again assuming individuals are heterogeneous in their liquidity needs or endow-
ments do not change the main insights as long as the forces in the model remain, i.e.,
as long as the combinations of endowments and liquidity needs are such that trade
across different generations is necessary to cover investments and liquidity needs in
the economy. In other words, heterogeneous preferences and endowments do not
change the results as long as the main trade-off remains – if there is no trade across
generations, a single generation bears all the liquidity risk in the economy.



2.2   Autarky and First Best

In autarky, if early and late consumers just store their endowments and do not interact
with the firm, then E(UFA ) = E(UBA ) = 0 and E(UEA ) = E(ULA ) = e + ↵k.

Clearly it is possible for the economy to do better than autarky. Consider the problem
of an unconstrained social planner (who can make transfers across consumers, so he
does not have to satisfy participation constraints). At t = 0, it is socially efficient for
the firm to invest in the project. The planner would then transfer an amount w from
the early consumer, who has the required endowment at t = 0, to the firm. It is also
optimal for the early consumer to consume k in period t = 1, but the early consumer
has only z ⌘ e w < k remaining to consume at t = 1. Then it is optimal for the


                                            10
planner to transfer k   z resources from the late consumer to the early consumer. It is
also optimal to use wb from the late consumer to finance the second project if there is
information that it will be successful.

These allocations are feasible because e > 2k            b from Assumption 1. Note
                                                     z + w,
that relaxing this assumption is not critical; it just restricts the first best outcome,
introducing a trade-off between reducing investment (allocating less than w to the
first project or less than w
                           b to the second project) or distorting consumption (making
consumers consume less than k).

The next question is how to split the surplus. We choose to assign the whole surplus
from these efficient transfers to firms. This assumption just allows for a clear welfare
comparison across scenarios with and without intermediaries, but it is irrelevant for
the results. As we discuss later, banks create value regardless of who keeps the sur-
plus. Define µ ⌘ x + xb w  b to be the total gains of the firm conditional on the projects
succeeding. Then, under this first best allocation the ex-ante expected utilities of the
agents are E(UBF B ) = 0, E(UEF B ) = E(ULF B ) = e + ↵k and E(UFF B ) = µ w.

The gains from trading are clear in this comparison. First, the first project always
gets funds and the second project gets funds only if there is information that it will
succeed, in which case it generates a positive net gain (b   b Then total expected
                                                         x w).
gains are µ w. Once the project is financed, there are gains that arise from late
consumers transferring resources to early consumers to cover their liquidity needs k
of consumption with certainty at t = 1, which is also feasible.

By the assumptions, if both consumers were born in period t = 0, then it would be
optimal and feasible for both to store k to consume in period t = 1 and to lend w2 each
to the firm. The problem is that they are born in different periods so that only the
early consumer can invest w. He then faces the risk of not being able to consume k in
period t = 1. In summary, it is optimal to finance the project at t = 0, and to finance
the second project if it is good at t = 1. However, if the information about the second
project leaks out, it may hinder trade between early and late consumers. This leakage
happens in capital markets, but not with ”secret keeping” intermediaries.



2.3   Capital markets

We now show that capital markets cannot implement the efficient allocation.

                                           11
At t = 0 the firm finances the project by issuing a security to the early consumer in
exchange for w. Define s(y) to be the contingent claim on the project at t = 2, where
y 2 {b, g} respectively for the “bad” and “good” project realization, respectively, of
the project. Assuming the firm faces limited liability, s(b)         0.

At t = 1 two transactions may occur. First, the firm may seek financing for a second
project if information that the project is successful arrives, by issuing a new security,
which we denote as sb(y), which can be bought by the late consumer. We assume
that financing is specific, i.e. each security issued is backed by the specific project.
This assumption simplifies the analysis but it is not crucial. Second, since the early
consumer prefers to consume k at t = 1, but only has z ⌘ e w < k available, he will
sell part of his security to the late consumer. Figure 1 shows the sequence of events
                                       Figure 1: Timeline of Basic Model
in the case !of a capital market.      !


                    Figure 1: Timing Model with Capital Markets
                         The firm raises w for the first project by issuing a security that
       Date t=0
                         pays s(b) in case of failure and s(g) in case of success.



                         The firm learns whether the second project will pay       (success)
                         or 0 (failure) in t=2.

      Date t=1           If the second project will succeed, the firm raises   by issuing a
                         new security,      !to the late consumer.             !

                         The early consumer trades a fraction of his security with the late
                         consumer to consume k.

       Date t=2          Project payoffs realized and securities are paid.


An important element of capital markets that we want to capture is that they commu-
nicate information about the health of financed projects. Markets are informationally
efficient. If firms could commit to raise funds in an uninformative way about the
health of its projects, then capital markets would play the role we assign to banks.

Since information is “hard” (can be credibly transmitted), the firm cannot lie about
the project’s results. In the capital markets, all agents observe whether a firm is rais-
ing funds for a second project or not, so all of them infer whether the first project
was successful or not. This leakage of information from the financing of the second

                                              12
project to the information about the first project’s expected payoffs has an impact (an
externality) on trade between the two consumers. The next proposition shows that
capital markets do not internalize this negative effect of information about projects
on trade, and so the first best allocation cannot be implemented.


Proposition 1 Capital markets do not implement the first best allocation.


Proof We proceed by backward induction. If the second project is doomed to fail, the
firm does not look for financing (since it cannot prove it has a worthy project), which
would reveal that the first project is also doomed to fail. If there is information that
the second project will succeed, the firm will seek financing by issuing a security that
pays sb(g) = w
             b in t = 2. Since the firm has hard information about the project’s results,
and also has the bargaining power, the firm keeps the surplus (b  b from the project
                                                               x w)
extension. So, raising money in capital markets is informative about the first project.

The previous stage is critical to define the optimal choices of the late consumer. If the
late consumer learns the first project is bad (because the firm never shows up asking
for a loan to finance a second project), then he is better off just consuming (or storing
to consume later) his full endowment e.

If the late consumer learns the first project is successful, then he chooses to finance
the second project, buying a fraction ✓ of the claims on the first project from the early
consumer, at a price s(g). Since the early consumer only needs to sell up to k z
to consume in period t = 1, the budget constraint for the late consumer in case the
original project is successful is
                                   b + ✓s(g)  e.
                                   w

This implies that
                           ✓s(g) = min {k    z, e   b =k
                                                    w}        z                         (1)

from Assumption 1. This means that late consumers have enough funds to cover the
investment needs of firms and also the remaining liquidity needs of early consumers.

Now we can study the choices of the early consumer. If the early consumer does
not finance the first project, he stores his endowment and obtains a certain utility of
UE|Store = e + ↵k. In contrast, if the early consumer decides to finance the first project,
then he faces a lottery because the project is risky. The expected utility for the early


                                            13
consumer when financing the project is:

                 UE|F inance = (1 + ↵)z + [(1 + ↵)✓s(g) + (1             ✓)s(g)].

Substituting in equation (1) and assuming the firm has the bargaining power, the
early consumer should be indifferent between financing the project or storing the
endowment (i.e., UE|F inance = UE|Store ), which implies

                        (1 + ↵)z + s(g) + ↵(k                 z) = e + ↵k,

and then, the price s(g) of the security that makes early consumers indifferent be-
tween financing the project or not (considering also the restriction of limited liability
such that s(g)  x) is
                                      ⇢
                                          w       ↵(1     )
                         s(g) = min           +               (k   z), x .            (2)


The first component of the first argument corresponds to the certainty equivalent cost
of the loan while the second component corresponds to the compensation to the early
consumer for taking the risk of not consuming k (but only k z) in period t = 1 (losing
the additional utility ↵ with probability 1      , when the project fails). The minimum
just captures limited liability since the claim cannot payout more than the underlying
payoff of the project in case of success, x.

Naturally, when s(g) = x, and limited commitment binds, then UE|F inance < UE|Store
and the first project would not be financed. In this case, early consumers would
rather store the endowment since the expected surplus from the project is not enough
to compensate for the risk from financing the project. In this case the first project is
not financed at all. Still the allocation is better than under autarky since the second
project would still be financed if the firm has information that that project will be a
success.

By construction (bargaining power to the firm) the expected utility of the two con-
sumers and the bank do not change with respect to the unconstrained first best (FB).
However, the expected utility for the firm raising funds in capital markets (CM) is:

                E(UFCM ) = x       s(g) + (b
                                           x            b < E(UFF B ) = µ
                                                        w)                      w


                                                  14
since, as is clear from equation (2) that s(g) > w, because the firm has to compensate
the early consumer for taking the risk of not consuming as much as desired at t = 1.
In the extreme, when s(g) = x and there is no financing of the first project, then
UFCM = (b     b
           x w).

The cost of capital markets vis-a-vis the first best (FB) outcome is the reduction in the
firm’s consumption in order to compensate early consumers for facing the possibility
of not covering their liquidity needs. Specifically, the gap between the welfare of first
best and capital markets is

          E(UFF B )   E(UFCM ) = s(g)    w = min {↵(1      )(k   z), x    w} .

                                                                                 Q.E.D.

Intuitively, the “money” of the early consumer is subject to information revelation
about the project’s result, creating the risk of bad news such that he cannot sell those
securities, leaving insufficient resources to meet his liquidity needs. Figure 2 illus-
trates the source of risk aversion given by the limited liquidity needs of the early
consumer.

Since early consumers’ liquidity needs effectively make them risk averse, the firm
has to compensate for that risk by promising in expectation more than the loan size,
w, inducing the same ex-ante utility as when early consumers choose to store their
endowments. The implication is that liquidity needs induce an inefficient transfer
of resources. Even though it is feasible for the late consumer to cover the liquidity
needs of the early consumer, the late consumer is not willing to do that in the case of
learning the project is bad. Hence the firm needs to compensate the early consumer
to take the risk from financing the project.

In essence, capital markets reveal too much information to people who know how
to interpret that information, reducing the expected utility of early consumers since
their money cannot buy as much when the bad state is revealed. On the one hand,
information about the project is valuable because in its absence some second projects
would be financed even though they have a negative net present value or some sec-
ond projects would not be financed even though they have a positive net present
value. However, such information generates an externality by revealing bad news
about the original project, hence inefficiently reducing trade at t = 1 between early
and late consumers. To compensate the early consumer for the risk of not covering

                                           15
        !



        !
                              Figure 2: Costs of Capital Markets


        !           Utility
                                                !"#$%! = !1

        !

        !
                   ! + !"

        !
                    !"#$%! = !1 + !

        !

        !
                                 !        ! !   ! + !"(!)      ! + !(!)
                                      !                       Consumption
                                      (1 − !)!(! − !)


his liquidity needs, the firm has to sell a larger share of total cash flow. In summary,
when firms raise funds in capital markets there is inefficient risk-sharing in the econ-
omy – all the risk is faced by a single individual rather than being distributed across
all individuals.



2.4   Financial intermediation

The previous analysis shows that capital markets may not implement the efficient
level of investment if the early consumer cares about liquidity and, even in situations
where there is efficient investment, there is inefficient risk-sharing in the economy.
Now we show that intermediation by a bank dominates capital markets.

Since intermediaries create value by providing liquidity and reallocating risk, they
can offer a rate for loans to firms such that they prefer to finance through interme-
diaries. However, there are limits to this since some projects cannot be exploited
by intermediaries to provide liquidity, given that they introduce incentives for infor-
mation acquisition by lenders even though banks try to hide such information. In


                                                 16


        !
this subsection we assume consumers cannot privately acquire information about the
quality of the project, so there are no limits to the possibilities of financial intermedi-
aries improving welfare. In the next section we relax this restriction.

Figure 3 shows the sequence of events, which we now describe. The setting now has
four active agents. At t = 0 the early consumer deposits e in the bank, which then
lends w to the firm to invest in the first project. The loan to the firm is a contingent
security that pays s(b) in case of failure and s(g) in case of success at t = 2. At the
time the bank receives the deposit from the early consumer, it promises to pay r1E = k
at t = 1 and a contingent claim that pays r2E (b) at t = 2 if the project fails and r2E (g)
at t = 2 if the project succeeds. The state is common information (and contractible) to
                                      Figure 1: Timeline of Basic Model
all agents at! t = 2.

                  Figure 3: Timing Model with Financial Intermediaries
                          The early consumer deposits e with the bank. The bank promises
                          an unconditional payment     at t=1 and a conditional payment
       Date t=0                 if the project succeeds and          if the project fails at t=2

                          The bank lends w to the firm with a loan contract, where the firm
                          pays s(b) if the project fails and s(g) if is succeeds.


                          The firm learns whether the second project will pay         (success)
                          or 0 (failure) in t=2.

                          If the second project will succeed the firm raises by issuing a
                          new security,      !to the bank. This transaction is kept
                                                                                ! in secret.

       Date t=1           The late consumer deposits    and the bank promises a
                          conditional payment     if the first project succeeds and
                                if the first project fails at t=2.

                          The early consumer withdraws          !and consumes.



       Date t=2           Project payoffs realized and loans are repaid.


At t = 1, the late consumer deposits e in the bank, which issues a security that
promises to pay r2L (b) if the state is bad (the first project ends up failing and the bank
is liquidated) and r2L (g) if the state is good (the first project is successful). If the bank

                                                17
determines that the firm has a good second project, then it lends w
                                                                  b to the firm, which
issues a security that pays sb(g). If the bank determines that the firm has a bad second
project, then the bank does not extend any new loan to the firm and w    b is stored until
t = 2. Finally, the early consumer withdraws k from the bank.

Note that the early consumer does not need to trade directly with the late consumer,
but just withdraws k from the bank. Alternatively, and equivalently, the early con-
sumer could trade with the late consumer directly by writing a check or using a bank
note issued by the bank. The key is that none of the consumers observe whether or
not the bank has given the loan to the firm to finance a second project. The intermedi-
ary, by hiding this information, allows for efficient trade between consumers at t = 1
which then covers early consumers’ liquidity needs.

Financial intermediaries achieve a first best allocation by channeling funds to firms
efficiently and permitting trade across consumers, exploiting information to make
efficient loans, and hiding that same information to allow for efficient trade. The next
proposition summarizes this result.


Proposition 2 Financial intermediaries implement the first best allocation.


Proof We work backwards. At t = 1, if there is information that the second project
will succeed the bank lends w
                            b to the firm, which pays sb(g) = w
                                                              b in t = 2. In contrast, if
there is information that the second project will fail, the best alternative for the bank
is to not lend to the firm and instead store the additional endowment w.  b

Since consumers are risk neutral, the bank’s promises to consumers are not deter-
mined, and there are many alternatives that make the consumers indifferent. Here
we assume r1E = k and r2E (b) = 0 and in the next section we justify this choice by
showing that it minimizes the incentives for late consumers to acquire information,
making promises more credible and banks feasible.

In the proposed first best contract, in which the bank promises r1E = k, the assets of
the bank at t = 2 depend on whether the first project fails or succeeds. When the first
project fails bank assets are,

                        Ab ⌘ e + z    k          where   z=e    w.



                                            18
When the first project succeeds, considering that sb(g) = w,
                                                          b bank assets are

                                             Ab + s(g).


Since r1E = k and r2E (b) = 0, we can compute r2E (g) from the indifference condition of
the early consumer. This is,

                               (1 + ↵)k + r2E (g) = e + ↵k.

Then
                                                     e        k
                                        r2E (g) =                 .                       (3)

Since r2E (b) = 0, from the resource constraint of banks when the project fails,

                                    k < r2L (b) = Ab < e,                                 (4)

and from the indifference condition of the late consumer,

                 (1 + ↵)k + (1       )(Ab       k) + (r2L (g)              k) = e + ↵k,

we can obtain the value of the last promise, which remains to be determined:

                                        (1      )
                        r2L (g) = e +               [w + k            e] > e > k.         (5)


Finally, we have to check that these payments are feasible when the project succeeds

                                r2E (g) + r2L (g)  Ab + s(g).

Then, the restriction on the claim for a successful projects has to be

                                                      w
                                             s(g)         .

Since the firm has all the bargaining power, s(g) =
                                                  , which is always feasible given
                                                                      w

our assumption that x > w. This implies that the surplus for the firm is E(UFF I ) =
 (x s(g)) + (bx sb(g)) = µ w, and then

                               E(UFF I ) = E(UFF B ) = µ                  w.

                                                19
Since by construction we guarantee E(UBF I ) = 0 and E(UEF I ) = E(ULF I ) = e + ↵k, then
financial intermediation (FI) implements the first best allocation.               Q.E.D.

Intuitively, a bank that credibly commits to hide information about the quality of the
second project can implement the first best because it allows information to be used
at t = 1 for investment purposes, but delays the revelation about the realization of the
first project until t = 2. This prevents the information from affecting efficient trade
across consumers at t = 1. In this way banks allow risk-sharing between the early
and late consumers. Banks eliminate the negative externality that information has on
liquidity.

This is a stark result because we have assumed it is impossible for late consumers to
learn about those secrets. We relax this assumption in the next two sections.

Remark: Notice that banks would like to reveal their assets in period 1 if they have
a “good” portfolio. In that situation they could induce the participation of late con-
sumers at a lower cost. However, if the bank can easily and credibly convey such
information to late consumers, not revealing a “god portfolio” is a signal that the
bank has a “bad portfolio,” in which case late consumers would not like to deposit in
the bank. Early consumers, foreseeing this possibility, would face the same risk as in
capital markets.

It is critical for a banking contract to be implementable that banks do not have incen-
tives to reveal their portfolio, or, if they do have incentives, that they can commit not
to reveal the information. Banks do not have incentives to reveal information if they
have reputation concerns (revealing information would give banks short term gains
at the cost of potentially losing future possibilities of operating). Or simply, if they do
not know how to interpret their information (there are information barriers that pre-
vent communication within the bank, such that different divisions have independent
bits of information and revealing that a particular part of the portfolio is good does
not imply that the market would interpret such information as good news about the
rest of the portfolio).

Similarly, even when having incentives to reveal information, banks can set up a
banking technology in period t = 0 that is complex, bureaucratic and opaque to delay
or avoid easy and timely information communication about the quality of the project
in period t = 1. As opposed to markets, which operate openly and allow for fast in-
formation transmission through observable prices, banks do not post prices but have

                                            20
to show hard evidence to convince agents that its portfolio is good. The opaque bank-
ing technology can be introduced to delay a credible flow of information about such
hard evidence.



3    Private information acquisition

In this section we assume that late consumers can privately learn about whether the
firm approached the bank for a second loan or not by exerting costly efforts in terms
of consumption. First we study the conditions that limit the use of a banking struc-
ture to improve welfare. Basically the potential late depositors have incentives to
acquire information about the quality of the second project before depositing in the
bank, since that provides information about the quality of the first project. Then, we
introduce a continuum of heterogeneous projects to study how the financing of firms
sorts into banking or capital markets. Finally, we show how banks can avoid private
information acquisition, not only by choosing the right projects to finance (small, safe
and low information cost projects), but also by financing many, asymmetric and un-
correlated projects.

When the bank makes one loan, producing information about the value of the bank
is the same as producing information about the value of the project. While the cost
of producing information is , the benefits are given by the possibility of avoiding
depositing in a bank with a failing firm in its portfolio. Specifically, if late consumers
do not acquire private information about the project and deposit in the bank, their
expected utility is

                        (1 + ↵)k + (r2L (g)      k) + (1      )(r2L (b)   k)

since, as we showed before, the late consumer does not suffer any liquidity concern
given r2L (g) > k and r2L (b) > k. 4
    4
      Note that when the late consumer does not produce information he may deposit in an insolvent
bank. In our setting, the bank would know that it is insolvent, but the bank does not reveal this
to the depositor. This, however, would not be the case, for example, if the project returns were not
perfectly correlated and the bank did not know the correlation between project returns. In that case
the bank could only determine whether a project is “good” or “bad,” but not the realized correlation.
For simplicity, we have not incorporated this. In a slightly richer setting with a bank manager who
is imperfectly controlled, the manager might want to “gamble for resurrection” and so not reveal the
bank’s insolvency.


                                                 21
In contrast, if late consumers acquire information at a cost              and find out that the
project is successful (with probability ) then they prefer to deposit in the bank, being
certain they will obtain r2L (g) > e at t = 2 (from equation 5). If they find out the project
is a failure (with probability 1     ), then they prefer to store their endowment e rather
than depositing and obtaining r2L (b) < e at t = 2 (from equation 4). This implies that
the expected gains from acquiring information are

                      (1 + ↵)k + (r2L (g)        k) + (1       )(e   k)   .

Comparing these two expected gains, late consumers prefer to deposit their endow-
ment without acquiring information if

                                  (1       )[e    r2L (b)]  .                              (6)

At this point, the optimality of our assumption that r1E = k and r2E (b) = 0 is clear.
Banks want to maximize the payments to late consumers when the project fails in
order to minimize their incentives to acquire information, still providing liquidity to
early consumers if possible. This leads to the following proposition.


Proposition 3 When consumers are able to learn privately about the quality of projects at a
cost , banks can implement the first best allocation only if

                                       k    z             .
                                                      1

The proof just requires replacing r2L (b) = Ab = e + z k from equation (4) into con-
dition (6). Naturally, if this condition is not fulfilled, banks cannot credibly promise
to pay k to the early consumer. The late consumer would have an incentive to learn
about the quality of projects, not depositing in the bank if the project is a failure. In
this case the bank would not always obtain the deposits at t = 1 to pay k to early
consumers. In other words, if the condition above is not fulfilled, the use of banks to
achieve the first best is unsustainable.

In essence, banks are more likely to sustain a contract proposed in the previous sec-
tion when: (i) projects have a low probability of default (high ), (ii) they are difficult
to monitor (high ), (iii) they are relatively small (low w), (iv) the liquidity needs
are relatively small (low k) or (v) the early consumer is relatively rich (high e). That

                                                 22
is, relatively safe, small and complex projects are more likely to be observed in the
portfolios of banks.

The natural question is, can the bank still improve welfare if this condition is not
fulfilled? We show that the bank can improve welfare, but it cannot achieve the first
best allocation. When condition (6) binds, banks need to either distort risk-sharing
or distort investment to avoid information production by late consumers. We next
show the conditions under which banks still dominate capital markets if they distort
the risk-sharing in the economy or if they distort investment. Then, we discuss the
condition under which banks prefer distorting risk-sharing to distorting investment.



3.1   Distorting risk-sharing

If late consumers have incentives to acquire information about the banks’ assets, in
particular the quality of the second project, when the bank offers the contract that
implements the first best, banks can distort risk-sharing (or the provision of private
money) in a way such that intermediation still dominates capital markets.


Proposition 4 If k     z>   1
                                , then banks still improve welfare relative to capital markets if

                                       (k    z)         ,
                                                    1

which is implemented by distorting risk-sharing in the economy, promising early consumers
a certain return r1E < k in t = 1.


Proof How can banks distort risk-sharing to avoid information acquisition? Since the
expected benefits for late consumers to acquiring information are given by (1     )[e
r2 (b)], and their costs are , a way for banks to discourage information acquisition is
 L

to promise late consumers no less than

                                     r2L (b) = e         ,                                    (7)
                                                    1

in case the project is a failure.

However, under our assumption that w z > 1 , total assets when the first project
fails are not enough to promise both k to early consumers and e 1 to late con-

                                              23
sumers because
                                Ab ⌘ e + z          k<e   .
                                                    1
The only possibility to satisfy the resource constraint and avoid information acquisi-
tion is to promise early consumers r1E < k. From the inequality above,

                                        r1E = z +              < k.                            (8)
                                                    1

The bank can distort risk-sharing by offering a non-contingent payment less than k
to early consumers. Since the bank promises a lower payment at t = 1 to early con-
sumers, it has to to offer them a larger payment at t = 2 in case the project succeeds,
which compensates them for not completely covering their liquidity needs, but mak-
ing them indifferent between storing or depositing. This condition is

                                (1 + ↵)r1E + r2E (g) = e + ↵k.

Replacing r1E (from equation 8) above, we get:
                                                           
                                    e    k       (1 + ↵)
                      r2E (g)   =            +                 k     z              .          (9)
                                                                           1

From the indifference condition of the late consumer,

                (1 + ↵)k + (r2L (g)           k) + (1          )(r2L (b)       k) = e + ↵k.

Recall, from equation (7), that the promise for the late consumer in the bad state
should be larger than without distortions, this is r2L (b) = e 1 > Ab > k. Then,

                                             r2L (g) = e + .                                  (10)

Now, we have to check that these payments are feasible when the project succeeds,
this is, the banks’ assets when the project succeeds are enough to cover the promises,

                           r2E (g) + r2L (g)  e + z               r1E + s(g).




                                                   24
Then, the restriction on the loan for a successful project, together with the firm having
the full bargaining power implies:
                                                  
                                      w       ↵
                             s(g) =       +           k   z                   .                        (11)
                                                                  1

Note that in the first best s(g) =. When risk-sharing is distorted, banks have to
                                      w

charge the firm the gap k z 1 adjusted by making the early consumer consume
more in period t = 2 rather than in t = 1 (adjusted by ↵ ). This is not feasible if
s(g) > x.

Again, by construction, the expected utilities of the bank and the two consumers are
the same as in all previous cases. However, the firm’s expected utility when risk-
sharing is distorted is
                                                                                  
         E(UFDist )   = (x   s(g)) + (b
                                      x           b =
                                                  w)          E(UFF B )       ↵ k       z       .
                                                                                            1

Assuming it is feasible for firms to raise funds in capital markets, comparing the
firm’s utility when risk-sharing is distorted with the firm’s utility when raising funds
in capital markets, banks can still implement higher welfare if:
                             
                          ↵ k    z                    < ↵(1           )(k         z),
                                      1

or
                                      (k      z) <                .
                                                          1
                                                                                                    Q.E.D.

In Figure 4 we show graphically that, if (k                  (a violation of the condi-
                                                                z) >      1
tion in Proposition 4), firms finance the project in capital markets and not through
distortionary intermediaries. When intermediaries distort risk-sharing the early con-
sumer’s expected utility effectively changes. The reason is that the bank pays r1E =
z + 1 < k with certainty in the first period (delivering marginal utility 1 + ↵) and
then provides a lottery that pays in the second period (delivering a marginal utility
of just 1). The utility function then becomes as depicted in dots, with a kink located
at r1E .



                                                  25
        !
              Figure 4: Case in which Capital Markets Dominate Banks


        !
                    Utility                     !"#$%! = !1

        !

        !
                  ! + !"

        !
                   !"#$%! = !1 + !

        !
                                     !!!                  !!!! (!) + !!!      !!! (!)
        !
                               !       ! !       ! + !"(!)                 ! + !(!)
                                                                       Consumption
                                     !
                                      (1 − !)! (! − !)

                                           ! (! − !!! )


In both cases the welfare loss is given by s(g) w. In capital markets, s(g) =
w
  + ↵(1 ) (k z) and the loss is given by ↵(1          )(k z). With distorting financial
                              ⇥             ⇤
intermediaries s(g) = + k z 1
                       w    ↵
                                              and the loss is given by ↵(k r1E ). When
the condition in Proposition 4 is not fulfilled, the loss from capital markets is smaller
than the loss from distortionary intermediaries, and then firms can raise funds at a
lower rate in capital markets.

Intuitively, when participating in banks that distort money provision, early consumers
always consume less than k in the intermediate period; participating in capital mar-
kets allow them to consume k with a positive probability. When information acquisi-
tion is very low, the first possibility becomes worse. This distortion shows up in the
model as an increase in the interest rates that banks charge to firms, so to compensate
early consumers for consuming always less than their liquidity needs.




                                                  26
3.2    Distorting investment

Assume now that the firm’s project is divisible and it is possible for the bank to invest
in just a fraction ⌘ of the project and to store the rest of the deposits (for example in
Treasury bonds or other safe assets).5 An alternative view is that a bank finances the
project only with probability ⌘, which can be interpreted as credit rationing. We show
that banks can distort investment in order to discourage information acquisition.


Proposition 5 If k      z>   1
                                 banks can still improve welfare relative to capital markets if

                                        (k    z)         ,
                                                     1
            ⇣               ⌘
where ⌘ 1 ↵w(1        x w
                          )
                              , which is implemented by providing funds for only a fraction ⌘ of
the original project.


Proof How can the bank distort investment in the project to avoid information acqui-
sition? Since the expected benefits for late consumers from acquiring information are
given by (1      )[e r2L (b)], and their costs are , banks can discourage information
acquisition by promising late consumers e 1 or more, as in equation (7).

Banks can publicly store a fraction (1 ⌘) of the endowment e of early consumers,
or invest in the whole first project just with probability ⌘, even when it is ex-ante
efficient to always invest in the project.

Since in this section we allow for efficient risk-sharing, the bank promises to pay k at
t = 1 to the early consumer, what remains for the late consumer in the case of a bad
shock is r2L (b) = ⌘(e + z k) + (1 ⌘)(e + z k + w) = e + z k + (1 ⌘)w (with
probability ⌘ we have the same situation as above, and with probability (1 ⌘) the
bank stores the endowment of early consumers without spending w on the project
and then it does not need as much money from late consumers to compensate early
consumers). In this case, the condition for late consumers not acquiring information
is
                          (1   )[e e z + k (1 ⌘)w] < ,
   5
    This analysis is isomorphic to imposing capital requirements under which banks are mandated by
regulation to invest a fraction of deposits in safe assets.




                                               27
and then the investment distortion that allows for optimal risk-sharing when k                        z>
1
   . Otherwise the incentives for late consumers to acquire information are:

                                         k          z
                                   ⌘=1                  +                    < 1.
                                             w               w(1         )

Since the rest of the original first-best contract remains unchanged, by construction,
the utilities of the bank and the two consumers are the same as in the previous cases,
while for the firm
                           E(UFDist ) = E(UFF B )                (1    ⌘)( x         w).

This implies that the loss from distorting investment is
                                            ✓                                    ◆
                                                k       z
                     (1    ⌘)( x     w) =                                            ( x     w).
                                                    w             w(1        )

Banks that distort investment dominate capital markets if
                          ✓                 ◆
                                                 x          w
                           k   z                                 < ↵(1           )(k       z).
                                    1                   w

Then                           ✓                        ◆
                                     ↵w(1  )
                                1                           (k        z) <             ,
                                       x w                                   1
                                                                                                   Q.E.D.

Notice that distorting investment manifests itself as a “credit crunch:” not all projects
get financed, but those that do, are financed at a low interest rate. Finally, we obtain
the conditions under which it is better to distort risk-sharing rather than to distort
investment. By comparing and from Propositions 4 and 5.

Proposition 6 Banks prefer to distort risk-bearing rather than investment if

                                            x > (1 + ↵)w.


Proof The costs of distorting risk-sharing are smaller than the costs of distorting in-
vestments if                                    
                                          x w
                   ↵ k z              <            k z           .
                               1            w             1
                                                                                                   Q.E.D.


                                                        28
Intuitively, banks distort risk-sharing rather than investment when the welfare costs
of risk-sharing (captured by (1+↵)w) are lower than the welfare costs of not financing
the first project (captured by the gains per unit of investment x times the probability
of success ). Then, it is clear that banks are more likely to distort risk-sharing when
liquidity needs are small (low ↵), when the relative cost of the projects is small (low
w), or when projects are very likely to succeed and pay a lot in case of success (high
and high x).



3.3    Coexistence of banks and capital markets

In this section we assume there are many, potentially heterogenous, projects that need
financing in the economy. We characterize which projects are financed by banks that
replicate first best, and which are financed by banks that have to distort risk-sharing
or investment (not implementing the first best because they need to avoid information
acquisition) and which are financed by capital markets.

We replicate the previous analysis performed for a single early consumer, a single late
consumer, a single bank and a single project in an economy with a continuum of early
consumers, a continuum of late consumers, a continuum of banks and a continuum of
projects i characterized by pairs ( i , i ), i.e., firms differ in their probability of success
and in their monitoring costs. 6

Assume a mass 1 of each agent’s type and assume that each bank forms a match with
a single early and a single late consumer and finances a single project. The cost of
financing each project is w; for simplicity each early consumer has endowment e at
t = 0, and each late consumer has endowment e at t = 1. Preferences, technologies,
information and the problem for each single individual are exactly the same as spec-
ified in the case for a single project. Since we assume the realization of projects are
i.i.d., then effectively financing each project has exactly the same characterization as
in the previous analysis.

The following proposition shows how projects are sorted by their financing type.

   6
    Since there is no agency problems in the banks, banks offer loan and deposit rates consistent with
the borrowers characteristics, i and i . Otherwise consumers would need to know which types of
borrowers match with which firms. In other words, banks would have to specialize in certain types of
loans, based on ( i , i ), and this would have to be common knowledge.


                                                 29
Proposition 7 Coexistence of Banks and Capital Markets

First projects are not financed if                 i   <   w
                                                           x
                                                               (and first projects are ex-ante inefficient).

First projects are financed by banks without distortions if

                                                                     i
                                                                                   > 1,
                                                       (1          i )(k      z)

they are financed by banks that distort risk-sharing if

                                             i
                      i                                       <1             and              ix        (1 + ↵)w
                               (1          i )(k        z)

and they are financed by banks that distort investment if

                                       i
                 i                                     <1                 and        w            ix   < (1 + ↵)w.
                          (1         i )(k         z)

Finally, first projects are financed in capital markets if

                                       i
                                                        <      i           and            ix        (1 + ↵)w
                          (1         i )(k        z)

or
                                 i
                                                   <       i         and            w         ix   < (1 + ↵)w.
                     (1        i )(k         z)

These regions arise trivially from combining Propositions 4-6 for a single project. The
Proposition is displayed in Figure 5.

The assumptions of i.i.d. projects and that all project types require the same invest-
ments, w and w, b are critical to sort projects as described above. As an illustration,
take the extreme opposite case of perfect correlation across projects (if one succeeds,
all succeed). In this case, it is easy to see that if a late consumer observes that a firm
financing the first project in capital markets does not try to finance a second project
also in capital markets, then no late consumer would be willing to deposit in the
bank because they can infer that all other first projects in the economy have failed.
In this extreme case, then, correlation destroys the possibility of using banks at all to
improve welfare.

The conditions of Proposition 7 show how firms separate across banks and markets
to raise funding. In this model this separation depends only on the banks’ desire to

                                                                         30
                                   Figure 5: Regions of Financing
       !
                           Banks
                           First Best



                                                                     Banks
                                                                     First Best


             No
             Finance
                           Banks            Banks
                           Distortion       Distortion
                           Investment       Money Provision




                                  Capital     Capital
                                  Markets     Markets

           0         !                            !                                       !     1
                            (1 + !)
                                    !   (1 + !)
                     !            !
                                    !             !
                            !1 + ! !
                                   !



have information-insensitive assets; banks charge a very high rate to finance high
firms for example, and then these firms prefer to raise funds in capital markets. The
interpretation of this is that corresponds to size, with larger firms having lower
  , hence making them unlikely candidates for bank financing.7 This result is stark
because the model does not include any attractive features of financing in the stock
market, such as the ability to trade control rights or rebalance portfolios.

Proposition 7 is broadly consistent with reality, namely, that banks tend to lend to
consumers and small businesses, entities which are particularly difficult for outsiders
to value. These types of loans are undertaken because of the informational synergy,
rather than screening or monitoring, which may also be present (but are not critical
elements according to the model).
   7
     This finding also seems consistent with the life cycle of firms. When firms are born they are usually
financed through banks. At this stage they are small, so it is relatively costly to produce information
about them. As the firm grows there is more publicly available information (relations with suppliers,
advertisements, etc.) that reduces ? to a point at which information is so widely available that the firm
is better-off going public.


                                                      31
4       Optimal portfolio and bank capital

In this section we explore other implications of bank secret keeping for the banks’
choice of assets and the effect of bank capital. We assume that a single bank finances
two projects using the funds from two identical early consumers and two identical
late consumers. This is enough to capture how the bank can exploit a combination
of projects to avoid information acquisition. We also assume that each late consumer
can choose to privately learn about the quality of one project, and only one, project
at a cost .8 As will become clear later, introducing more projects just complicates the
analysis without adding any new insight to the main conclusions derived with just
two projects.



4.1     Optimal portfolio

We state three propositions, the proofs of which are in the Appendix. First, if the
two projects are identical and independent of each other, financing both discourages
information acquisition more than financing just one, justifying economies of scale in
the banking sector.


Proposition 8 It is easier for banks to avoid information acquisition if financing two iden-
tical but independent projects rather than a single one. Banks can implement the first best
outcome if
                                                      w
                                    k z           + .
                                             1        2
Hence, banks can implement first best outcomes even if         = 0 since e > k + w2 .


Second, if there is correlation across two identical projects, it is more difficult for
banks to discourage information acquisition. We assume that, with a probability ⇢
there is a good aggregate shock where both projects always succeed and with a prob-
ability 1 ⇢ the results of the projects are independent of each other, with a prob-
ability of success . We redefine the ex-ante probability of success for each project
    8
    Restricting consumers to producing information about only one project can be thought of as re-
quiring specialization. This makes sense if “projects” are thought of as asset classes. The bank starts
by making loans to home buyers in Florida (the “first project) and then decides to make auto loans in
California (the “second project” which is an extension of the banks’ expertise.


                                                  32
as    = ⇢ + (1    ⇢) to facilitate the comparison with the previous proposition. This
suggests the optimal portfolio of banks should be composed of projects that are un-
correlated.


Proposition 9 It is more difficult for banks to avoid information acquisition if financing two
identical projects that are correlated. Banks can implement the first best outcome if

                                                        w
                                   k    z         +
                                             1          2
                                                                                   ⇥        ⇤
where     1. Banks can implement first best outcomes even if   = 0, when e > k+ w2 2           .

As ⇢ ! 0,    ! 1, converging to the condition in Proposition 8 for two i.i.d. projects.

As    ! 0,   ! 0, converging to the conditions in Proposition 3 for a single project.


Finally, assume the two projects differ in their probability of success and their costs
of monitoring ( 1 , 1 ) and ( 2 , 2 ), but their results are independent of each other. We
show that banks can cross-subsidize projects to discourage information acquisition
and implement the first best allocation. So, even when there may be incentives to
acquire information about a single project, banks can avoid distorting risk-bearing or
investment to prevent information acquisition by cross-subsidizing.


Proposition 10 In the presence of two different projects, banks can discourage information
acquisition and implement first best by cross subsidization rather than by distortions, charg-
ing relatively more for funds to projects for which there are relatively fewer incentives to
acquire information. Given the assumption that e > k + w2 it is not necessary to rely on cross
subsidization to avoid information acquisition, even for = 0.


These propositions characterize further the portfolio choices of banks. The motive is
not diversification per se, but the desire to make it difficult for outsiders to produce
information.


4.2     Bank capital

Assume now that agent B, who serves as a banker, receives a deterministic endow-
ment eB at t = 2 and it is able to issue a claim against those cash flows, committing

                                             33
to use it as “bank capital”. Access to this endowment is important in reducing incen-
tives for late consumers to acquire information during the intermediate period. The
following Proposition formalizes this result, proved in the Appendix.


Proposition 11 It is easier for banks to avoid information acquisition if they have an endow-
ment eB at t = 2 that can be used as ”bank capital”. Banks can implement the first best
outcome if
                                   k    z         + eB .
                                             1
Banks can implement first best outcomes even if   = 0 when e > k + w      eB .


Intuitively, if the banker can ex-ante commit some of his endowment in the last period
to compensate late consumers in case the first project fails, then he can avoid informa-
tion acquisition and still implement the first best by providing a buffer on the losses
of the late consumers that discourage their information acquisition. The bank com-
pensates for providing this buffer by promising lower payments to late consumers
in case the project succeeds. Even though we have assumed for simplicity that all
the surplus goes to the firm, it is natural to think that part of the surplus goes to the
bank, having positive incentives to participate in this arrangement and putting its
own endowment at stake as bank capital.

Remark The literature has identified diversification and bank capital as two impor-
tant forces for banks to provide money like services, in particular given their proper-
ties on making bank’s assets safer. In this paper we show that these two forces also
play an additional role in facilitating banks secret keeping, then playing a double role
in the provision of money by banks.



5    Overlapping generations

In this section we extend the previous model by developing an overlapping gener-
ations structure where the firm has the same investment opportunities as before in
periods t = 0 and t = 1, but the projects mature and pay out at an arbitrary date
T    2, which is unknown ex-ante. More specifically, conditional on the projects not
having paid out in a given period t, the probability the projects pay out during the
next period, t + 1, is a parameter ⌫.

                                             34
This extension just introduces a longer gap between the time projects are financed
and the time projects pays out, which is filled by the participation of generations that
only live for three periods and overlap over time. The main goal of this extension is
to show that the banking contract for all generations, except the two involved with
the bank at the time the projects mature, is unconditional on the projects’ results,
corresponding more closely to standard demand deposits whose payments are inde-
pendent of the performance of the bank portfolio. Only when projects mature are
payments conditional on project results.

The next proposition shows that the contract indeed looks identical to the one we
study in our benchmark above, and independent of the probability projects mature.
The proof is in the Appendix.


Proposition 12 When the time T at which projects mature is uncertain, all generations par-
ticipating during t < T obtain non-contingent payments, while generations participating at
t = T receive the same contingent payments as in the benchmark. None of these payments
depend on the probability of projects maturing ⌫.


Even though the promises that implement first best allocations do not depend on the
probability that projects mature during the next period, ⌫, depositors’ incentives to
acquire information about the bank’s portfolio do depend on that probability. Given
the promises obtained above, the expected gains for a consumer to deposit his en-
dowment in the bank at time t without producing information is
                    ⇥            L
                                                                ⇤
                  ⌫ (1 + ↵)k + (rt+1 (g) k) + (1       )(Ab   k) +
                         ⇥              E
                                                                ⇤
                  (1 ⌫) (1 + ↵)k + ⌫ rt+2 (g) + (1     ⌫)(e   k) = e + ↵k.


In contrast, the net expected gains from producing information about the portfolio of
the bank at a cost is
            ⇥            L
                                                   ⇤
          ⌫ (1 + ↵)k + (rt+1 (g) k) + (1    )(e k) +
                 ⇥               E
                                                                                ⇤
          (1 ⌫) (1 + ↵)k + ⌫ rt+2  (g) + (1    )(e k) + (1          ⌫)(e   k)       .


Hence, there are no incentives to acquire information (the first expression is larger
than the second) as long as

                                             35
                        ⌫(1       ) [(e   Ab ) + (1   ⌫)(e    k)] < .

This leads to the next Proposition.

Proposition 13 When consumers are able to learn privately about the quality of projects at
a cost , banks can implement the first best allocation only if

                          ⌫ [(k     z) + (1    ⌫)(e   k)]        .
                                                              1

This condition for information acquisition allows for the possibility of projects not
maturing in the future differs from the benchmark in Proposition 3. In the bench-
mark only late consumers had the potential to acquire information because the infor-
mation accrues in t = 1, while in this extension consumers act potentially both as late
consumers (if projects mature the period after depositing, with probability ⌫) and as
early consumers (if projects mature two periods after depositing, with probability ⌫ 2 ).
Both possibilities introduce incentives to learn about the bank’s portfolio, depositing
when projects are good and not depositing when projects are bad.

The incentives to acquire information increase with the probability the projects ma-
ture in the foreseeable future. Proposition 13 shows that if there is a low enough ⌫¯ > 0
such that for all ⌫ < ⌫¯ there is no information acquisition and the first best allocation
is implementable. Interestingly, since the payments that sustain the first best alloca-
tion do not depend on ⌫, the perceptions about the likelihood that projects mature
can vary over time, only affecting the incentives to acquire information over time and
then the need for distortions.

This result is consistent with Hanson et al. (2014). They show empirically that banks
focus on illiquid, longer-term assets with no terminal risk, but possibly substantial in-
termediate market risk. By contrast MMMFs and other shadow banking players deal
with market risk by assuring speedy exit options (selling). Both low terminal risk and
fast exit option map into low ⌫ in our model, then reducing the incentives to acquire
information and making both traditional and shadow banks feasible, implementing
the optimal allocation.




                                               36
6   Conclusions

Banks are opaque by design. An efficient transactions medium requires that bank
money be information-insensitive. But, the production of information is important
for investment efficiency. To prevent an information externality from the production
of information about investment opportunities, banks act as secret keepers. They are
opaque in that the information about the investments is not revealed.

Furthermore, banks choose portfolios of assets to minimize information leakage. The
synergies or complementarities between certain loan types and demand deposits (or
other forms of bank debt) are not due to the need for monitoring banks, ensuring that
the banks screen and monitor borrowers (although banks may also engage in these
activities). Bank portfolio choice is determined to minimize information leakage. The
optimal assets are precisely loans to small firms and households, but that is because
these minimize the information leakage.

Clearly, there are issues we did not address. We assumed that banks can commit not
to reveal information, a “bank technology.” We defined a “bank” to be a commitment
technology, but did not provide any details about how this works. One way to ad-
dress this would be in a repeated setting where the bank’s business would depend
on its history of keeping secrets. We also did not incorporate any agency problems
with hired bank managers, which has been the focus of much of the banking litera-
ture. See Gorton and Winton (2003). This may be one reason the results are so stark.
For example, there is no trade-off between keeping secrets and disclosure of infor-
mation. While bank examiners also keep the results of their examinations secret, still
sometimes limited information, from “stress tests,” for example is revealed.

Banks and markets coexist because of the desire on the part of banks to lend to en-
tities that help them minimize information leakage. While in reality there likely are
reasons for borrowers to want to fund in capital markets, our point is that there are
still reasons for banks to desire hard-to-value loans.

The argument explains why banks are regulated. The role of banks as secret keep-
ers means that they are hard for outsiders to discipline. Although the model did not
incorporate moral hazard on the part of the bank or governance issues , these fric-
tions are easy to imagine in the setting here, resulting in a need for the government
to examine and regulate banks. However, we also then explain why the results of


                                         37
bank examinations are kept confidential by the regulators. Deposit insurance avoids
bank runs that can be triggered by concerns about the portfolio, in the absence of
information. Finally, book-value accounting is also beneficial in maintaining secrecy.



References
 Andolfatto, David. 2010. “On the Social Cost of Transparency in Monetary Eco-
   nomics.” Working Paper 2010-001A, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis.
 Berger, Allen, and Sally Davies. 1998. “The Information Content of Bank Examina-
    tions.” Journal of Financial Services Research 14:117–144.
 Bessler, Wolfang, and Tom Nohel. 1996. “The Stock-Market Reaction to Divi-
    dend Cuts and Omissions by Commercial Banks.” Journal of Banking and Finance
    20:1485–1508.
 Boyd, John, and Edward Prescott. 1986. “Financial Intermediary-Coalitions.” Journal
    of Economic Theory 38:211–232.
 Breton, Régis. 2007. “Monitoring and the Acceptability of Bank Money.” Working
    Paper, Universite d’Orléans.
       . 2011. “A Smoke Screen Theory of Financial Intermediation.” Working Paper,
    Banque de France.
 Dang, Tri Vi, Gary Gorton, and Bengt Holmström. 2013. “Ignorance, Debt and
   Financial Crises.” Working Paper , Yale University.
 DeYoung, Rober, Mark Flannery, William Lang, and Sorin Sorescu. 2001. “The Infor-
   mation Content of Bank Exam Ratings and Subordinated Debt Prices.” Journal of
   Money, Credit and Banking 33:900–925.
 Diamond, Douglas. 1984. “Financial Intermediation and Delegated Monitoring.”
    Review of Economic Studies 51:393–414.
 Diamond, Douglas, and Robert Verrecchia. 1991. “Disclosure, Liquidity, and the
    Cost of Capital.” Journal of Finance 46:1325–1359.
 Diamond, Douglas W., and Philip H. Dybvig. 1983. “Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance,
    and Liquidity.” Journal of Political Economy 91 (3): 401–19.
 Diamond, Douglas W., and Raghuram G. Rajan. 2001. “Liquidity Risk, Liquidity
    Creation, and Financial Fragility: A Theory of Banking.” Journal of Political Econ-
    omy 109 (2): 287–327.
 Flannery, Mark. 1999. “Using Market Information in Prudential Bank Supervision:
    A Review of the U.S. Empirical Evidence.” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking
    33:273–305.



                                          38
Flannery, Mark, Simon Kwan, and Mahendrarajah Nimalendran. 2004. “Market
   Evidence on the Opaqueness of Banking Firms’ Assets.” Journal of Financial Eco-
   nomics 71:419–460.
      . 2013. “The 2007-2009 Financial Crisis and Bank Opaqueness.” Journal of
   Financial Intermediation 22:55–84.
Gorton, Gary. 1999. “Pricing Free Bank Notes.” Journal of Monetary Economics 44:33–
  64.
      . 2013. “The Development of Opacity in U.S. Banking.” Yale Journal on
   Regulation. Forthcoming.
Gorton, Gary, and George Pennacchi. 1990. “Financial Intermediaries and Liquidity
  Creation.” Journal of Finance 45 (1): 49–72.
Gorton, Gary, and Andrew Winton. 2003. Chapter 8 of Handbook of the Economics
  of Finance, edited by George Constantinides, Milton Harris, and Rene Stulz, 431–
  552. Elsevier.
Haggard, Stephen, and John Howe. 2007. “Are Banks Opaque?” Working Paper,
  University of Missouri.
Hanson, Samuel, Andrei Shleifer, Jeremy Stein, and Robert Vishny. 2014. “Banks as
  Patient Fixed Income Investors.” Working Paper, Harvard University.
Haubrich, Joseph, and Robert King. 1990. “Banking and Insurance.” Journal of
  Monetary Economics 25:361–386.
Hirshleifer, Jack. 1971. “The Private and Social Value of Information and the Reward
   to Inventive Activity.” American Economic Review 61 (4): 561–574.
Hirtle, Beverly. 2006. “Stock Market Reaction to Financial Statement Certification
   by Bank Holding Company CEOs.” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 38:1263–
   1291.
Iannota, Giulano. 2006. “Testing for Opaqueness in the European Banking Industry:
   Evidence from Bond Credit Ratings.” Journal of Financial Services Research 30:287–
   309.
Jacklin, Charles. 1987. “Demand Deposits, Trading Restrictions, and Risk Sharing.”
   In Contractual Arrangements for Intertemporal Trade, edited by Edward Prescott and
   Neil Wallace, 26–47. University of Minnesota Press.
Jones, Jeffrey, Wayne Lee, and Timothy Yeager. 2012. “Opaque Banks, Price Discov-
   ery, and Financial Stability.” Journal of Financial Intermediation 21:383–408.
Kaplan, Todd. 2006. “Why Banks Should Keep Secrets.” Economic Theory 27:341–357.
Kashyap, Anil, Raghuram Rajan, and Jeremy Stein. 2002. “Banks as Liquidity
   Providers: An Explanation for the Coexistence of Lending and Deposit-Taking.”
   Journal of Finance 57:33–73.



                                        39
Monnet, Cyril, and Erwan Quintin. 2013. “Rational Opacity.” Working Paper, Wis-
  consin School of Business.
Morgan, Donald. 2002. “Rating Banks: Risk and Uncertainty in an Opaque Indus-
  try.” American Economic Review 92:874–888.
Wallace, Neil. 1988. “Another Attempt to Explain an Illiquid Banking System: The
  Diamond and Dybvig Model with Sequential Service Taken Seriously.” Federal
  Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review (Fall):3–16.




                                      40
A     Appendix

A.1     Proof Proposition 8.

If the bank finances two original projects, with funds from two early consumers, there
are three possible states:

    • With probability 2 both original projects are successful (gg), and the bank’s
      assets at t = 2 are 2[Ab + s(g)].

    • With probability 2 (1      ) only one original project is successful (gb or bg), and
      the bank’s assets at t = 2 are 2Ab + s(g).

    • With probability (1 )2 neither original project is successful (bb), and the bank’s
      assets at t = 2 are 2Ab .

In this proof we study the conditions for the bank to implement the first best, hence
we require banks to pay each early consumer r1E = k at t = 1 and to charge firms
s(g) = w , which we know maximizes the utility of firms and both consumers. The
question is then, what is the condition for this contract to be feasible and imple-
mentable (no incentives for information acquisition).
Since late consumers can only produce information about one project (the condition
for information acquisition if the late consumer can produce information about both
projects is the same as in the previous analysis of financing a single project), the con-
dition for no information acquisition becomes

         max{E(rL |g), e}    E(rL |g) + (1        ) max{E(rL |b), e}   E(rL |b)  ,

where
                            E(rL |g) = r2L (gg) + (1     )r2L (gb)
are the expected payoffs of a late consumer who finds out that the project for which
information has been acquired is successful, and

                            E(rL |b) = r2L (bg) + (1     )r2L (bb)

are the expected payoffs of a late consumer who finds out that the project for which
information has been acquired is a failure.
As before, banks want to compensate late consumers as much as possible when all
projects fail. Then r2E (bb) = 0 and r2L (bb) = Ab . Assume this is also the case when one
project fails, that is r2E (gb) = r2E (bg) = 0. Then, from the resource constraint when one
project fails, r2L (gb) = r2L (bg) = Ab + s(g)/2, since the two late consumers are identical
and the proceeds of the single successful project are split in two.

                                             41
From the break even condition of the early consumer
                                                   2 E
                                    (1 + ↵)k +      r2 (gg)       = e + ↵k.

Then
                                                          e       k
                                             r2E (gg) =       2
                                                                      .                                          (12)

Using this result in the resource constraint when both projects succeed:

                                                                      e         k
                                     r2L (gg) = Ab + s(g)                   2
                                                                                    .                            (13)


Using these results in the break-even condition for the late consumer it is clear that
the expected utility from depositing in a bank should be exactly e + ↵k:
               2
 (1 + ↵)k +        (r2L (gg)   k) + 2 (1         )(r2L (gb)       k) + (1               )2 (r2L (bb)   k) = e + ↵k.

or alternatively, simply
                         2 L
                          r2 (gg)   + 2 (1       )r2L (gb) + (1                 )2 r2L (bb) = e.

Given the promises that implement first best are feasible, we need to check the incen-
tives for late consumers to acquire information based on those promises. Expected
gains for late consumers from depositing when observing a project failing are
                                                                          w
                                       E(rL |b) = 2e          k             ,
                                                                          2
while the expected gains for late consumers from depositing when observing a project
succeeding are
                                          (1   )h       wi
                          E(rL |g) = e            e k      .
                                                         2
If e < k + w2 , then E(rL |b) < e and E(rL |g) > e. This implies that late consumers
would deposit in banks when privately observing a project succeeding and store the
money if privately observing a project failing. The condition for late consumers not
acquiring information is,
                                (1     )[e E(rL |b)] 
or
                                                        w
                                         k     z         .   +
                                              1         2
If this condition is satisfied, then first best allocations are implementable.
In contrast, if e > k + w2 , E(rL |b) > e and E(rL |g) < e, then late consumers would
deposit in banks when privately observing a project failing and store the money if pri-
vately observing a project succeeding. However, there are enough resources for banks

                                                    42
to offer a contract to late consumers such that E(rL |g) = E(rL |b) = e, eliminating the
incentives to acquire information regardless of information costs. The intuitive way
for banks to achieve this result is to still pay r2E (bb) = 0 but r2E (bg) = r2E (gb) > 0,
which reduces expected payoffs to late consumers when a project fails and increases
their expected payoffs when a project succeeds.
Following this reasoning, we derive the promises that eliminate the incentives for
information acquisition when e < k + w2 . Since r2L (bb) = Ab and we want to achieve
E(rL |b) = e, then
                                               e (1     )Ab
                         r2L (bg) = r2L (gb) =              .                    (14)

From the resource constraint in the case where only one project succeeds

                                                             e      k           w
                          r2E (bg) = r2E (gb) =                                   > 0.               (15)
                                                                                2

From early consumers breaking even

                   (1 + ↵)k + 2 (1              )r2E (bg) +             2 E
                                                                         r2 (gg)      = e + ↵k,

we obtain
                                    e       k       2(1             )⇣                 w⌘
                       r2E (gg) =       2                       2
                                                                            e    k        .          (16)
                                                                                       2
Finally, from the resource constraint when both projects succeed

                                    w           e       k        2(1            )⇣            w⌘
                  r2L (gg) = Ab +                   2
                                                            +           2
                                                                                  e    k         .   (17)
                                                                                              2
Finally, substituting these results into the break even condition for each late con-
sumer, the expected gains from depositing in the banks are exactly e + ↵k.
These are the feasible payoffs that implement first best without introducing incentives
to acquire information when e > k + w2 , for any      0.


A.2    Proof Proposition 9.

If the bank finances two correlated original projects, there are three possible states:

   • With probability ⇢ + (1 ⇢) 2 both projects are successful (gg), and the bank’s
     assets at t = 2 are 2[Ab + s(g)].

   • With probability 2(1 ⇢) (1         ) only one project is successful (gb or bg), and
     the bank’s assets at t = 2 are 2Ab + s(g).


                                                        43
   • With probability (1 ⇢)(1                )2 no project is successful (bb), and the bank’s assets
     at t = 2 are 2Ab .

Again, in this proof we study the conditions for the bank to implement the first best.
The condition for no information acquisition becomes:

         max{E(rL |g), e}         E(rL |g) + (1            ) max{E(rL |b), e}         E(rL |b)  ,

where
                              E(rL |b) = r2L (bg) + (1             )r2L (bb),
and
                    E(rL |g) = P r(gg|g)r2L (gg) + (1            P r(gg|g))r2L (gb),
                    ⇢+(1 ⇢)   2
where P r(gg|g) =                 .
When both projects fail, r2E (bb) = 0 and r2L (bb) = Ab . Assume that, if only one project
fails, r2E (gb) = r2E (bg) = 0. From the resource constraint when only one project fails,

                                                                   s(g)
                                      r2L (gb) = r2L (bg) = Ab +        .                            (18)
                                                                    2

From the break even condition of the early consumer

                                                         e k
                                        r2E (gg) =                  2
                                                                        .                            (19)
                                                     ⇢ + (1 ⇢)

From the resource constraint when both projects succeed

                                                                e k
                            r2L (gg) = Ab + s(g)                              2
                                                                                  .                  (20)
                                                            ⇢ + (1 ⇢)

Substituting these results into the break-even condition for the late consumer, the
expected gains from depositing in the banks are exactly e + ↵k. This implies that
these promises are feasible and late consumers’ expected gains from depositing are
                                                                        w
                                      E(rL |b) = 2e    k     w            .
                                                                        2
             ⇥     ⇤
If e < k + w2 2      , then E(rL |b) < e and E(rL |g) > e. This implies that late con-
sumers would deposit in banks when privately observing the project succeed and
store the money if privately observing that the project failed. The condition for no
information acquisition is,

                                        (1     )[e    E(rL |b)] 


                                                      44
or
                                                        w
                                     k      z            .       +
                                             1          2
As ⇢ ! 0, ! 1, converging to the condition in Proposition 8 for two i.i.d. projects.
As ! 0, ! 0, converging to the conditions in Proposition 3 for a single project.
             ⇥      ⇤
If e > k + w2 2       , then E(rL |b) > e and E(rL |g) < e. In this case, there are enough
resources to make promises such that E(rL |g) = E(rL |b) = e, eliminating incentives
to acquire information for all        0. The intuitive way for banks to achieve this result
is to promise r2 (bb) = 0 but r2 (gb) = r2E (bg) > 0, which reduces expected payoffs for
                E               E

late consumers in case they observe a project fail.
Since r2L (bb) = Ab and banks want to achieve E(rL |b) = e,

                                                    e        (1       )Ab
                                   r2L (bg) =                                  .

From the resource constraint in the case only one project succeeds,

                                            e       k    w h                i
                             r2E (bg)   =                    2                     > 0.
                                                         2

From early consumers breaking-even

         (1 + ↵)k + 2(1      ⇢) (1          )r2E (gb) + [⇢ + (1                    ⇢)   2
                                                                                            ]r2E (gg) = e + ↵k

we obtain
                             e k                2(1 ⇢)(1                  )⇣                  wh        i⌘
            r2E (gg) =                  2                             2
                                                                            e           k        2           .
                         ⇢ + (1 ⇢)               ⇢ + (1 ⇢)                                    2

Finally, from the resource constraint when both projects succeed we obtain

                         w       e k                    2(1 ⇢)(1                       )⇣            wh          i⌘
      r2L (gg) = Ab +                           2
                                                    +                              2
                                                                                         e     k        2             .
                             ⇢ + (1 ⇢)                   ⇢ + (1 ⇢)                                   2

Finally, substituting these results into the break-even condition for the late consumer,
expected gains from depositing in the banks are exactly e + ↵k.
These are the feasible payoffs that implement
                                         ⇥    first
                                               ⇤ best without introducing incentives
to acquire information when e > k + 2 2w
                                                , for all 0.


A.3    Proof Proposition 10.

If the bank finances two different original projects, there are four possible states:


                                                        45
   • With probability 1 2 both projects are successful (gg), and the bank’s assets at
     t = 2 are 2Ab + s1 (g) + s2 (g).

   • With probability 1 (1     2 ) only the first project is successful (gb), and the bank’s
     assets at t = 2 are 2Ab + s1 (g).

   • With probability (1      1 ) 2 only the second project is successful (bg), and the
     bank’s assets at t = 2 are 2Ab + s2 (g).

   • With probability (1             1 )(1     2)   no project is successful (bb), and the bank’s
     assets at t = 2 are 2Ab .

Again, in this proof we study the conditions for the bank to implement the first best.
The condition for no information acquisition on firm 1 is:

      1   max{E(rL |g1 ), e}     E(rL |g1 ) + (1          1)   max{E(rL |b1 ), e}   E(rL |b1 )    1


where
                               E(rL |g1 ) =      L
                                              2 r2 (gg)   + (1          L
                                                                    2 )r2 (gb)

and
                               E(rL |b1 ) =      L
                                              2 r2 (bg)   + (1          L
                                                                    2 )r2 (bb),

where g1 refers to having produced information about firm 1 and discovered that firm
1’s project is successful, while b1 refers to having produced information about firm 1
and discovered firm 1’s project is a failure.
Similarly, the condition for no information acquisition of firm 2 is:

      2   max{E(rL |g2 ), e}     E(rL |g2 ) + (1          2)   max{E(rL |b2 ), e}   E(rL |b2 )    2,


where
                               E(rL |g2 ) =      L
                                              1 r2 (gg)   + (1          L
                                                                    1 )r2 (bg)

and
                               E(rL |b2 ) =      L
                                              1 r2 (gb)   + (1          L
                                                                    1 )r2 (bb).


Banks want to compensate late consumers as much as possible when all projects fail.
Then r2E (bb) = 0 and r2L (bb) = Ab . Assume this is also the case when only one project
fails, this is r2E (gb) = rE (bg) = 0. Then, from the resource constraint in those situa-
tions, r2L (gb) = Ab + s1 (g)/2 and r2L (bg) = Ab + s2 (g)/2, since the two late consumers
are identical and the proceeds of the single successful project are split in two.
From the break-even condition of early consumers
                                                     E
                                 (1 + ↵)k +     1 2 r2 (gg)      = e + ↵k.



                                                    46
Then
                                                                   e       k
                                                 r2E (gg) =                    .                                            (21)
                                                                       1 2

From the resource constraint when both projects succeed

                                                      s1 (g) s2 (g)                      e     k
                                 r2L (gg) = Ab +            +                                      .                        (22)
                                                        2      2                             1 2


The expected gains for a late consumer from depositing are:
             L                           L                                 L                                      L
        1 2 r2 (gg)   +   1 (1       2 )r2 (gb)    + (1             1 ) 2 r2 (bg)        + (1          1 )(1   2 r2 (bb),


and replacing the promises to the late consumer derived above

                                                               s1 (g)                  s2 (g)
                                  Ab     (e       k) +     1          +            2          .
                                                                 2                       2
These expected gains for a late consumer from depositing are equal to e + ↵k if

                                                s1 (g)             s2 (g)
                                            1          +       2          = w.                                              (23)
                                                  2                  2

In the first best, s1 (g) = w1 and s2 (g) = w2 , which implies that these promises are
feasible. The expected gains for a late consumer after privately observing the result
of a project i 2 {1, 2} are:
                                                          w
                                   E(rL |bi ) = 2e k
                                                           2
and                                                    h
                             L              (1      i)       wi
                          E(r |gi ) = e                  e k    .
                                                  i          2

If e < k + w2 , then E(rL |bi ) < e and E(rL |gi ) > e. This implies that late consumers,
regardless of which project they investigate, would deposit in banks when privately
observing the project succeeded and store the money if privately observing the project
failed. The condition for not acquiring information about any of the projects is,

                                       (1         i )[e    E(rL |bi )] 

or
                                                                   i           w
                                            k      z                      +     .
                                                           1           i       2
If this condition is fulfilled for both projects, then there are no restrictions to imple-
menting the first best, and no distortion is needed.
Without loss of generality, assume now that this condition is not fulfilled for firm 1,
i.e., k z > 1 1 + w2 . This implies that, in order to avoid information acquisition, it is

                                                           47
                                                  s2 (g)
necessary that E(rL |b1 ) = 2e     k          2     2
                                                         ,   or
                                                                  w
                                              s2 (g) >                ,
                                                                  2

which implies
                                                                  w
                                                  s1 (g) <
                                                                  1

from equation (23).
More precisely, s2 (g) should be set at a high enough level to avoid information acqui-
sition about firm 1. From the condition for no information acquisition, this implies
setting s2 (g) such that

                                                                              s2 (g)
                        (1       1 )[e       (e       k+z+                2          )] =           1
                                                                                2
or                                            
                                         2                                1             w
                             s2 (g) =             k          z                     >
                                          2                       1            1            2

and from equation (23),
                                              
                                         2                                1             w
                             s1 (g) =             e      k+                        <            .
                                         1                        1           1             1

This cross-subsidization to avoid information acquisition is feasible as long as

                                             w + ↵(1                  2 )(k        z)
                               s2 (g)                                                  ,
                                                                  2

otherwise firm 2 would rather raise funds in capital markets than paying a larger rate
for funds in banks. This condition can be rewritten as
                               
                                    ↵(1     2)        1    w
                       (k z) 1                           + .
                                        2         1     1  2

This implies cross-subsidization is preferred and feasible as long as
                                                   h          i
                                                2 1 1+ 2
                                                      1     w
                           1      w
                                +     <k z                      .
                         1    1   2             1 ↵(1         2)


Given our assumption that e > k + w2 , then E(rL |bi ) > e and E(rL |gi ) < e then cross
subsidization is not even needed to avoid information acquisitions as shown in the
previous proposition.



                                                         48
A.4    Proof Proposition 11.

Assume the bank has an observable endowment eB at t = 2, and it is able to commit
to use it as capital when issuing claims. We study the conditions for the bank to
implement the first best allocation, paying the early consumer r1E = k at t = 1 and
charging the firm s(g) = w for the original project, while still breaking-even and
generating in expectation E(UB ) = eB . Under what conditions is this contract feasible
and implementable (no incentives for information acquisition).
Assume a project that induces late consumers to acquire information, i.e.,

                                        k       z>          .
                                                      1

To avoid information acquisition, from equation (6), the bank has to promise late
consumers
                           r2L (b) = e     >e k+z
                                       1
in case the project fails.
To cover the difference between the maximum the bank can promise to the late con-
sumer only using firm’s funds and paying k to early consumers and the amount that
prevents information acquisition, the bank should contribute, as bank capital
                                    ⇢
                            k
                           eB = min k z            , eB .
                                              1

If
                                    k       z  < eB ,
                                        1
which is the condition in the proposition, the bank has enough resources to imple-
ment the first best allocation. Assume this is the case. Are the promises feasible to
make the bank willing to post its own endowment as capital?
When paying late consumers r2L (b) as above to avoid information acquisition, they
are indifferent between depositing in the bank or not if:
                                           
                            L
                           r2 (g) + (1    ) e           = e,
                                                1

which implies
                                        r2L (g) = e + .

In the first best allocation, r1E = k and r2E (g) =       e k
                                                                . Then, from resource constraints in




                                                 49
the case the project is successful,

                              w                 e    k
                      e+z+        + ekB = k +             +e+   + r2B (g),

which implies
                                                    ekB
                                        r2B (g) =         .

It is clear that there are enough resources to make the banker indifferent between not
setting up a bank or setting up a bank and committing capital ekB , obtaining r2B (b) = 0
if the project is a failure and r2B (g) if the project is a success.
Bank capital can implement the first best allocation if ekB  eB . If ekB > eB , the first
best cannot be implemented, but welfare can still be improved through the distortions
analyzed above.


A.5    Proof Proposition 12.

We start with consumers born at t = 0. This initial generation faces the possibility
(with probability ⌫) that the projects mature in T = 2, in which case the problem
is identical to the one in the benchmark. The first consumers receive k in t = 1 (to
implement the first best) and r2E (g) or r2E (b) = 0, depending on the result of the project,
in t = 2.
However, in this setting, with the complementary probability 1 ⌫, the projects do
not mature in period T = 2, in which case the payment to these consumers in t = 2 is
non-contingent on the realization of the project, which is information the bank does
not have. Since the consumer obtained k in period t = 1, then in this situation when
the projects do not mature the bank has to compensate the consumer with e k in
t = 2.
Is this feasible? When projects do not mature in period t = 2, conditional on con-
sumers born in t = 2 depositing e (we next check that this is the case), the bank can
always pay e k to consumers who deposited in t = 0 and k to consumers who
deposited in t = 1. In this sense, when projects do not mature, the bank that keeps
secrets allows for overlapping generations to just transfer funds optimally over time.
Now we show that the promise r2E (g) that banks have to make to induce consumers
born in period t = 0 to deposit is identical to the promise to late consumers in the
benchmark. Assuming r2E (b) = 0, which is the payment that minimizes the incentives
to acquire information about the bank’s secrets, consumers born in period t = 0 are
indifferent between depositing or not when
                ⇥                 ⇤
              ⌫ (1 + ↵)k + r2E (g) + (1 ⌫) [(1 + ↵)k + e k] = e + ↵k


                                             50
or similarly, when           ⇥                  ⇤
                            ⌫ (1 + ↵)k + r2E (g) = ⌫[e + ↵k]
which is exactly the equation that determines r2E (g) = e k in the benchmark model.
Recall this result is independent of the probability projects mature in T = 2.
Now we can focus on all other consumers, who born at t > 0. These consumers
face the probability the projects mature in t + 1 and, if not, that they mature in t + 2.
If projects mature in t + 1, consumers’ problem becomes that of late consumers in
the benchmark as they immediate receive either rt+1     L
                                                           (g) or rt+1
                                                                   L
                                                                       (b), depending on the
realization of the first project. If projects mature in t + 2, then the consumers’ problem
becomes that of early consumers as we described above; they receive k in t + 1 and
either rt+2
        E
            (g) or rt+2
                    E
                        (b) = 0, depending on the realization of the projects. Finally,
if projects do not mature in either t + 1 or t + 2 consumers receive non contingent
payments k in t + 1 and e k in t + 2, which is feasible as previously discussed.
At the moment T projects mature there are always two generations participating in
the banking contract. Generation T 1 takes the place of “late” consumers, and we
denote their payments as rtL (i), while generation T    2 takes the place of “early”
consumers, and we denote their payments as rtE (i), with i 2 {b, g}.
Now we show that the promises that banks have to make to induce consumers who
born in period t > 0 to deposit are identical to the promises to early and late con-
sumers in the benchmark. Assuming rt+1 E
                                          (b) = 0, by the resource constraint rt+1
                                                                               L
                                                                                   (b) =
Ab . Then, consumers that are born in period t > 0 are indifferent between depositing
or not when
                  ⇥             L
                                                              ⇤
                ⌫ (1 + ↵)k + (rt+1 (g) k) + (1       )(Ab k) +
                       ⇥                E
                                                                ⇤
                (1 ⌫) (1 + ↵)k + ⌫ rt+2    (g) + (1 ⌫)(e k) = e + ↵k

From the previous analysis rt+2
                            E
                                (g) = e k , and then this condition is simply
              ⇥               L
                                                             ⇤
            ⌫ (1 + ↵)k + (rt+1    (g) k) + (1      )(Ab k) = ⌫[e + ↵k]

which determines
                                           (1        )
                           L
                          rt+1 (g) = e +                 [w + k   e] > e,              (24)

exactly as r2L (g) in the benchmark model. Recall this result is also independent of the
probability ⌫ projects mature in future periods.




                                                51
