                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   SOCIAL NETWORKS AS CONTRACT ENFORCEMENT:
                   EVIDENCE FROM A LAB EXPERIMENT IN THE FIELD

                                       Arun G. Chandrasekhar
                                          Cynthia Kinnan
                                         Horacio Larreguy

                                        Working Paper 20259
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20259


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2014




We gratefully acknowledge financial support from NSF grant SES-0752735. We thank Abhijit Banerjee,
Esther Duflo, Matthew Jackson, Daron Acemoglu, Lori Beaman, Emily Breza, Dave Donaldson, Pascaline
Dupas, Simon Gaechter, Ben Golub, Avner Greif, S. Holger Herz, Seema Jayachandran, Markus Möbius,
Gowri Nagaraj, Ben Olken, Adam Sacarny, Laura Schechter, Tavneet Suri, Robert Townsend, Tom
Wilkening, Jan Zilinsky, as well as participants at various seminars. Chandrasekhar thanks the NSF
GRFP, Kinnan the US Dept. of Education, and Larreguy the Bank of Spain and Caja Madrid Foundation.
CMF at the IFMR provided valuable assistance. JPAL, CIS, MISTI-India, and MIT's Shultz Fund
provided financial support for this project. A previous version of this paper was titled “Can networks
substitute for contracts? Evidence from a lab experiment in the field.” The network data used in this
paper are archived at the J-PAL Dataverse at Harvard IQSS: http://hdl.handle.net/1902.1/16559. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Arun G. Chandrasekhar, Cynthia Kinnan, and Horacio Larreguy. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Social Networks as Contract Enforcement: Evidence from a Lab Experiment in the Field
Arun G. Chandrasekhar, Cynthia Kinnan, and Horacio Larreguy
NBER Working Paper No. 20259
June 2014
JEL No. D03,D14,O16,Z13

                                              ABSTRACT

Absence of well-functioning formal institutions leads to reliance on social networks to enforce informal
contracts. Social ties may aid cooperation, but agents vary in network centrality, and this hierarchy
may hinder cooperation. To assess the extent to which networks substitute for enforcement, we conducted
high-stakes games across 34 Indian villages. We randomized subjects' partners and whether contracts
were enforced to estimate how partners’ relative network position differentially matters across contracting
environments. Socially close pairs cooperate even without enforcement; distant pairs do not. Pairs
with unequal importance behave less cooperatively without enforcement. Thus capacity for cooperation
depends on the underlying network.


Arun G. Chandrasekhar                                Horacio Larreguy
Department of Economics                              Harvard University
Stanford University                                  Department of Government
579 Serra Mall                                       1737 Cambridge Street
Stanford, CA 94305                                   CGIS Knafel Building 408
and NBER                                             Cambridge, MA 02138
arungc@stanford.edu                                  hlarreguy@fas.harvard.edu

Cynthia Kinnan
Department of Economics
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
c-kinnan@northwestern.edu
                    SOCIAL NETWORKS AS CONTRACT ENFORCEMENT                                        2

                                      1. Introduction

   Societies depend for their success on the smooth exchange of goods, services
and information, which in turn requires cooperation among individuals. However,
cooperation is not always in individuals’ short-term interest: opportunistic devi-
ations may be profitable. States equipped with well-functioning legal structures
cope with this problem and maintain cooperation by enforcing contracts. However,
throughout much of history – and even in many settings across the world today –
effective external contract enforcement was lacking. Of course, even without legal
institutions, cooperative behavior can be maintained by repeated game dynam-
ics (Friedman, 1971; Abreu, 1988; Boyd and Richerson, 1988; Ellison, 1994; Fehr
et al., 1997; Bowles and Gintis, 2004; Nowak, 2006), and research suggests that
social networks – the web of interactions among members of a community – help
to sustain such cooperation (Greif, 1993). Despite the paramount importance of
cooperation to society, we know little about the empirical extent to which social
networks can substitute for formal contract enforcement and even less about how
the introduction of contract enforcement affects transactions traditionally medi-
ated informally through the social network. This is largely due to the difficulty of
combining detailed network from multiple networks together with random varia-
tion in the contracting environment, while also being able to observe individuals
contracting with multiple randomly assigned partners.
   Networks may interact with contract enforcement in two main ways. First,
socially closer agents (e.g., friends, friends of friends) may be able to maintain
high levels of cooperation even without enforceable contracts. Second, agents
in a network are often asymmetric in their position and hence importance, or
centrality. This asymmetry encodes a hierarchical structure that has been under-
studied by both theoretical and empirical literatures.1 A more central party may
have little to gain from cooperating with a less important individual, which in
turn also diminishes the incentive for the less important individual to cooperate.2
Introducing contract enforcement may allow for more cooperation in interactions
1
  A notable exception is Fainmesser (2012) who shows that in a model of network trade, there
should be better cooperation between nodes that are more equal in the sense of degree centrality.
2
  Consider a highly central individual contemplating doing a favor (e.g., making a transfer) for a
less central partner. The partner’s lesser importance reduces her ability to inflict punishment by
“ratting” or denying future favors. This heightens the central individual’s temptation to behave
opportunistically, i.e., not do the favor. This, in turn, means that the less central partner is also
less inclined to behave cooperatively when called upon, because she anticipates that her partner
will decline to cooperate in the future.
                 SOCIAL NETWORKS AS CONTRACT ENFORCEMENT                            3

between parties who differ in centrality – that is, where the relative centrality gap
is large.
   We explore these issues using a laboratory experiment conducted in 34 villages
in the Indian state of Karnataka. Subjects played three multi-round, two-person
games for high-stakes cash payouts. The average payment was over a day’s wage,
ensuring that participants were making decisions over large amounts. Every sub-
ject was randomly assigned a new partner for each game. The games were designed
to switch on and off two features of the environment: (1) external contract enforce-
ment and (2) access to a savings technology. Game payouts were risky: under risk
aversion, the first-best allocation was the cooperative one that fully shared risk
across members of a pair. However, in the absence of external enforcement, play-
ers receiving good income draws faced a temptation to renege on such a cooperative
agreement.
   The experiment had several important features necessary to understand whether
real-world network position affects the amount of cooperation that can be sustained
without external enforcement. One, subjects knew each other, so they could draw
on their real-world relationships when interacting; this is precisely the effect that
we are interested in measuring. In addition, we observe these real-world relation-
ships: we have extremely detailed social network data for each household in the
village. The data – collected in previous work (Banerjee et al., 2013) – is the
result of a household-level census providing network data across 12 dimensions of
interaction including financial, informational, and social links. To measure social
closeness, we use the shortest path length (social distance) between two individu-
als through the network (Figures 1A-1B). To measure importance in the network,
we use the eigenvector centrality of the agent (Figures 1C-1D). Eigenvector cen-
trality is defined recursively, such that individuals linked to central partners are
themselves rated as more central (Jackson, 2010; Banerjee et al., 2013).
   Another essential feature of the experiment is that the availability of external
contract enforcement was exogenously varied. The identity (hence relative network
position) of interaction partners was also exogenously assigned. Identification in
this setting is challenging because individuals may differ in unobserved propensi-
ties to behave more or less cooperatively (e.g., altruism or risk aversion) which may
correlate with network position. To deal with this, each subject participated in
multiple interactions across several partners and several contracting environments,
allowing us to account for individual-specific unobserved traits, such as altruism or
                 SOCIAL NETWORKS AS CONTRACT ENFORCEMENT                           4

gregariousness, through a fixed effects design. Thus, we can look within a person,
across randomly varied contracting environments, and across randomly assigned
partners, while conditioning on observable characteristics interacted with the con-
tracting environment. This allows us to precisely estimate how real-world social
networks differentially influence cooperative behavior as contracting environments
are varied.
   Our findings suggest an important role for social networks in the absence of
formal enforcement. Socially close pairs maintain high levels of cooperation even
when contract enforcement is removed, while more distant pairs do not. Pairs
with unequal centrality behave less cooperatively when enforcement is removed.
These results suggest that lack of enforcement is more damaging when individu-
als are socially distant and when there is greater inequality in centrality. Thus,
the benefits of enforcement are greatest in such settings. Notably, these roles of
network position are absent when external enforcement is available: networks’ role
is dependent on the economic environment. The roles of both social distance and
relative centrality support an interpretation of network ties as capturing the con-
tinuation value of a relationship, and the ability of this continuation value, when
sufficiently high, to discourage opportunistic behavior.
   Understanding if and how network relationships influence outcomes under dif-
ferent contracting environments is important for understanding where efficient in-
teractions will occur—and conversely, when gains from trade/cooperation will go
unexploited. The typical interactions that poor rural households engage in are
highly localized since the major drivers of rural network structure are caste (see,
e.g, Munshi and Rosenzweig, 2006), insurance (Ambrus et al., 2014; Jackson et al.,
2012) and geography (Rosenzweig and Stark, 1989). This means that despite the
endogeneity of the social networks of our subject pool, because of the nature of the
social network formation process, we are able to provide insight into this question.
While different dimensions of social networks (e.g., information exchange, informal
insurance, socializing) are not exogenously imposed, neither are they fully fluid.
There are complementarities in maintaining multiple types of relationships (e.g.,
Board (2011)) and fixed costs to building social ties (see, e.g., Chandrasekhar and
Jackson (2014)); unsurprisingly, there is a strong correlation in terms of whom an
individual socializes with, whom she goes to for advice, and whom she goes to for
a loan. Therefore, for many interactions – such as co-investment, job referrals,
public good investment – to a first approximation one can think of the network
                   SOCIAL NETWORKS AS CONTRACT ENFORCEMENT                                    5

as fixed. Our experimental setup replicates this type of interaction and asks, how
does the lack of contract enforcement influence the efficiency of various interactions
which take place between nodes in a network held fixed?
   Our findings suggest that in environments such as these, when considering other
economic exchanges that may arise – in our case at the scale of 1-2 days’ wage
(e.g., public good investment and labor exchange) – efficient behavior will arise
primarily between socially close and symmetric parties, with an attendant loss of
surplus from unrealized trades across more distant and unequal groups. For the
most distant and hierarchically asymmetric parties, when external commitment is
not present efficiency is all but precluded. This suggests, for instance, that, ceteris
paribus, places with greater fragmentation in terms of caste, religion, language, etc.
would benefit more from the introduction of commitment (e.g., well-functioning
courts) than more homogenous places.
   Although the role of networks has been studied extensively in the theoretical
literature (Axelrod, 1981; Eshel and Cavalli-Sforza, 1982; Ellison, 1994; Boyd and
Richerson, 1988; Ohtsuki et al., 2006; Bowles, 2006; Nowak, 2006; Jackson et al.,
2012), and to a lesser extent in the empirical literature (Goeree et al., 2010; Leider
et al., 2009; Ligon and Schechter, 2012), ours is, to our knowledge, the first paper
to exogenously vary both the contracting environment and the network position
of pairs in real-world networks. Simultaneous variation along both dimensions is
crucial to understand how the network matters in facilitating cooperation.
   Previous empirical work has focused on examining questions which, although
closely related, differ from ours. Work randomly grouping individuals in real-
world networks has not varied contracting structure, instead focusing on a single
interaction, such as a dictator or public goods game (Leider et al., 2009; Ligon
and Schechter, 2012; Goeree et al., 2010; Barr et al., 2012).3 Prior work examin-
ing the effect of contract incompleteness in real-world networks has typically used
observational data without random variation of groupings (Townsend, 1994; Udry,
1994; Kinnan and Townsend, 2012; Mobarak and Rosenzweig, 2012). In observa-
tional data, both whether individuals interact in a situation requiring cooperation,

3
 Goeree et al. (2010) document greater generosity toward closer individuals in a dictator game;
Leider et al. (2009) and Ligon and Schechter (2012) vary the information structure within public
goods games to disentangle altruism vs. reciprocity. Barr et al. (2012) study how individuals
select their partners when they have to engage in interpersonal insurance without commitment:
their focus is understanding assortative matching, taking as given contract incompleteness, a
different question than we examine here.
                   SOCIAL NETWORKS AS CONTRACT ENFORCEMENT                                     6

and the availability of enforcement, are endogenous. Further, the network itself
may be endogenous to the available opportunities to cooperate and contracting
environment (e.g., Jackson et al., 2012).
   Our design also has important differences with an experiment where the network
is constructed in the lab (e.g., Kearns et al. (2006)) or in which subjects interact
anonymously (e.g., Andreoni and Miller (2002)). In our setting subjects could
draw on relationships and consider the value of future social interactions to “col-
lateralize” contracts within the game (Karlan et al., 2009). The networks we study
are deep, persistent relationships reflecting financial, social and informational links
between villagers.
   To our knowledge, no previous papers have set out to identify whether social
ties play a differential role across contracting environments. As a result existing
research designs cannot–and do not intend to–control for individual-level unobserv-
ables correlated with network position. This is a key innovation in our approach.
   The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 details our experimental
design. Section 3 explains our data, network measures and randomization. Section
4 sets out the estimation framework and Section 5 presents the results. Section
6 concludes. The theoretical framework, proofs and additional details are in the
appendices.


                                      2. Experiment.

   Our experiment was conducted in the Summer of 2009 in 34 villages in Kar-
nataka, India. The villages span 5 districts and range from 1.5 to 3 hours’ drive
from the city of Bangalore. The median distance between two villages is 46 kilome-
ters. The average number of households per village is 164 households, comprised
of 753 individuals. These particular villages were chosen as the setting for our
experiment because village censuses and social network data were previously col-
lected on their inhabitants, as described below and in more detail in Banerjee et al.
(2013).
   In each village, 20 individuals aged 18 to 50 were recruited to take part in the
experiment.4 As an incentive to attend, participants were paid a show-up fee of
4
 The sample of villagers who took part in our games is not a random sample of the village as a
whole: we informed local leaders that we would be coming to the village on a certain day, looking
for individuals to participate in a series of games. All comers aged 18-50 who could be located
in the census data were considered for the experiment. Selection into the experiment poses no
                   SOCIAL NETWORKS AS CONTRACT ENFORCEMENT                                   7

INR 20 (~1 USD in PPP terms), and were told they would have the opportunity
to win additional money.
   Subjects were paired to play three games, differing in contract enforcement and
access to savings: (i) Enforcement, No savings (EN), (ii) No enforcement, No
savings (NN), and (iii) No enforcement, with Savings (NS). Each was a variation
on a standard interpersonal insurance game (Selten and Ockenfels, 1998). Each
game lasted multiple rounds, but the number of rounds was random. To mimic
a stationary, infinite-horizon setting, the game ended with one-sixth probability
after each round, and this feature was explained to participants.5 The order of the
games was randomized and individuals were re-paired after each game.
   The objective in designing the games was to construct an environment in which
individuals made high-stakes decisions over a short horizon that was amenable to
changing the institutional structure. The basic structure was such that individuals
received stochastic income every round and chose how much to consume, transfer
to their partner, and – in the NS game – save. Participants knew that, after all
sessions were completed, they would be paid their consumption in a randomly
chosen round of a randomly chosen game.6 Due to risk aversion, players had
incentives to smooth consumption across rounds to reduce the variability of the
one-shot payment lottery. To make this salient, income took the form of tokens
that represented INR 10 each, and each consumption realization was written on a
chip and placed in a bag that the player kept with him or her during the entire
experiment. At the end of the experiment, an experimenter drew one chip at
random from the bag, and the individual was paid the amount shown on the
selected chip.
   This payment structure has the implication that players could not use transfers
after/outside the experiment to insure the risk they faced during the experiment.
Outside transfers have the shortcoming that all players involved could be paid for
rounds in which their income was low. And while income was observable during
the experiment, it was no longer fully observable outside the experiment, since
selection of a round for payment and the actual payout were done in private.
Finally, since each player was paired with three different partners, there was no
guarantee of being paid for a round played with a particular partner. Thus, players
problems for internal validity, since all participants play all the games (with randomly chosen
partners), and individual-fixed effects control for individual heterogeneity.
5
  Therefore, on average individuals played six rounds per game, or 18 in total.
6
  This is standard in the literature, e.g., Charness and Genicot (2009) and Fischer (2013).
                    SOCIAL NETWORKS AS CONTRACT ENFORCEMENT                                      8

had strong incentives to engage in insurance within the experiment–and the data
show that they did so.
   The experiments were framed in the context of a farmer who could receive high
income because of good rains this season or low income because of drought.7 In
every round, one partner randomly received a large positive income (INR 250 or
~12.5 USD at PPP, representing three times the daily wage in Karnataka paid
by the National Rural Employment Guarantee Act in 2010). The other partner
received nothing.8 Before incomes were drawn, individuals made a conditional in-
surance plan for the round, stating how much they would transfer to their partner
if they received the high draw. Partners were free to discuss their strategies; their
intended transfers were publicly recorded. After incomes were drawn, in EN, exper-
imenters enforced the promised transfer contract. This determined consumption
for both parties. However, in NN and NS the contract was not externally enforced:
the players could change the transfers initially decided upon. Thus, in NN, the
high-draw partner determined both parties’ consumption. In NS, the high-draw
subject determined the transfer, but both could draw from or contribute to their
savings when choosing their consumption.9 Figures 2A-B present a timeline and a
schematic of a round of play when savings were available.
   Transfers and savings respectively serve as forms of interpersonal and intertem-
poral insurance. Insurance is a natural setting to study the role of networks.
Decisions in the game – transfers to others and saving – closely correspond to
7
  Discussions with participants indicate that they understood the risk they faced and the data
show that both transfers and savings are used to smooth this risk. One player told us “The
games were very interesting, especially for those who have some education... They help us think
about how much we really should save and give to our friends in times of hardship.” Furthermore,
in two villages, after the experiment village leaders inquired about the possibility of having an
microfinance institution come to their village, because they saw links between the games and the
possibility of having formal savings.
8
  Additionally, to simulate the (possibly unequal) wealth individuals have at the time when they
enter into an insurance relationship, before round 1 of each game one partner was randomly
chosen to receive an endowment of INR 60; the other received INR 30.
9
  Games were characterized by full information: incomes were common knowledge during the
experiment, due to perfect negative correlation in partners’ incomes and the fact that payments
were visible to both members of the pair. Savings, when available, were also fully observable
by the partner: saved tokens were stored in transparent plastic cups. Transfers, too, were fully
observable. The full information structure represents an abstraction from reality: players could
not hide income or savings, or claim to have made transfers when they did not. We deliberately
shut down information asymmetries to isolate the interaction of social networks and contract
enforcement. Moreover, many significant risks faced by poor households are quite observable,
such as harvest failure, illness, death of livestock, etc. Chandrasekhar et al. (2012) investigates
the impact of introducing hidden income and hidden savings into insurance relationships.
                 SOCIAL NETWORKS AS CONTRACT ENFORCEMENT                            9

decisions made regularly by our subjects, and theory provides several testable pre-
dictions. In Appendix A we detail a theoretical framework based on Ligon et al.
(2002) and its extension to incorporate the role of social networks in a reduced
form but parsimonious manner. Using this framework we derive the predictions
which frame the analysis in Section 5.




                                     3. Data

3.1. Network data. We make use of a unique dataset containing information
on all 34 villages in which our experiment was conducted. We have complete
censuses of each of the villages as well as detailed social network data. The network
data was collected by Banerjee et al. (2013), who surveyed 46% of households
about social linkages to all other households in the village. For a village, the
graph (or multi-graph), represents individuals as nodes with twelve dimensions
of possible links between pairs of vertices: “(1) those who visit the respondents’
home, (2) those whose homes the respondent visits, (3) kin in the village, (4) non-
relatives with whom the respondent socializes, (5) those from whom the respondent
receives medical advice, (6) those from whom the respondent would borrow money,
(7) those to whom the respondent would lend money, (8) those from whom the
respondent would borrow material goods (kerosene, rice, etc.), (9) those to whom
the respondent would lend material goods, (10) those from whom the respondent
gets advice, (11) those to whom the respondent gives advice, and (12) those whom
the respondent goes to pray with (at a temple, church, or mosque)” (Banerjee et al.,
2013). Following Banerjee et al. (2013), we work with an undirected, unweighted
graph which takes the union of these dimensions. In our villages, the multiple
dimensions are highly correlated so the union network ensures that we take into
account any possible relationship. Moreover, any weighting method would be
rather ad hoc in nature. Henceforth, we refer to this object as the social network
of the village. Using this social network, we compute the social distance and the
relative centrality for all possible pairs of individuals in each village.


3.2. Network statistics. The goal of this paper is to capture how network posi-
tion interacts with contract enforcement. To make this tractable, we focus on two
features. The first is social distance, a measure of proximity between individuals
                   SOCIAL NETWORKS AS CONTRACT ENFORCEMENT                                10

capturing the degree of closeness or frequency of interaction between them. For-
mally, we use the shortest path length between a pair i, j in the graph to compute
d(i, j). (See Figure 1 for a graphical illustration.)
   The second measure we use is the relative eigenvector centrality of parties i and
j. The eigenvector centrality of individual i, ei , is the ith entry of the eigenvector
corresponding to the maximal eigenvalue of the adjacency matrix A representing
the graph: eA = λ1 (A)e. Eigenvector centrality can be interpreted as a measure
of importance of node i which is defined, recursively, to be proportional to the sum
of its neighbors’ importances.10 A second, related, interpretation comes from an
information passing process. If information starts at i, ei gives (a normalization of)
the expected number of times others hear about a piece of information that starts
from that node i as T → ∞ (Banerjee et al., 2013).11 In both interpretations,
eigenvector centrality captures how important an agent is relative to others in the
graph. We are interested in how asymmetries in hierarchical position – ei − ej –
affects the ability to cooperate in the absence of contracts.
   In focusing on these dimensions, our aim is not to suggest that these two el-
ements capture all variation in networks relevant for cooperation. A complete
mapping of how network structure affects cooperation is beyond the scope of this
paper. Our aim is rather to find tractable measures that are theoretically and
empirically relevant in overcoming missing markets, and which capture conceptu-
ally different mechanisms through which networks may influence outcomes: social
distance captures the strength of a tie while the relative centrality between parties
is focused on hierarchy.

3.3. Randomization and networks. Our randomization was unique in that it
stratified against the social network in real time in each village. Even if a random
subset of villagers took part in our experiments, randomly chosen pairs would tend
to be fairly close in social distance. This tendency would be exaggerated if people
tend to come to the experiment with their friends or relatives, which was the case
for many people who took part in our experiment. Therefore, the distribution
of social distances would be left-skewed, and simply randomly assigning partners
would mean that more often than not, participants would be paired with near-
kin. This would limit the statistical power of our data to reveal how behavior
10Google’s  PageRank algorithm uses a closely related notion of importance to rank websites:
sites are important when they are linked to by other important sites.
11For further discussion of both interpretations, see Jackson (2010); Banerjee et al. (2013).
                    SOCIAL NETWORKS AS CONTRACT ENFORCEMENT                                     11

across different contracting environment changes with social distance, which is one
of the main goals of our experimental design. An analogous concern applies for
relative centrality since networks exhibit positive assortativity in centrality – that
is, friends tend to have similar centralities.
   To make the distribution of social distances between our pairs more uniform
in our sample, we used the network data to oversample the right tail of the dis-
tance distribution. This was done in real time in the field, once the experimental
participants had been located in the village census data. Figure 3 shows the distri-
butions of social distances for 3 villages: the full distribution and the distribution
of assigned pairings in the experiment. The comparison between the full distri-
bution and the distribution of assigned pairings reveals that we were successful in
oversampling the right tail of the social distance distribution: the distribution of
pairings used in the experiment has more mass at greater distances, particularly
distances of 5 and 6, than the full distribution.
   Finally, we note that we are working with sampled networks – approximately
half of households within each village were administered the social network ques-
tionnaire. Links including the other, unsampled half will be observed only when
one member of the dyad was sampled. This means that some ties between par-
ticipants will be unobserved (e.g., if i is connected to j who is connected to k,
the indirect tie between i and k will be missed if j is not surveyed). This has
the effect of upward-biasing our measure of social distance, and attenuating our
estimates of the effect of social distance, making our findings lower bounds on the
true significance of social networks. Monte Carlo evidence shows that the eigenvec-
tor centrality effects are likely to be attenuated as well Chandrasekhar and Lewis
(2013).

3.4. Sample Statistics. In total, 680 individuals participated in the experiment
but, for the sake of exposition, we restrict our sample to the 645 individuals who
played in pairs that could reach each other through the social network.12 The
average age among the subjects was 30, 53% of players were female, and the av-
erage education was 7th standard. The average and median social distance was 4,
meaning that the members of a median pair were “friends of a friend of a friend
of a friend.” The average difference in relative centrality is zero by construction,
12Due  to random assignment of partners, having a reachable partner is exogenous conditional on
an individual-fixed effect. Our results are unchanged if we incorporate the 35 excluded individuals
into our analysis by including a “reachable” indicator and distance conditional on reachability.
                   SOCIAL NETWORKS AS CONTRACT ENFORCEMENT                                12

and since centrality lacks natural units we normalize centrality difference to have a
standard deviation of one.13 Table 1 shows summary statistics for the individuals
and pairs that participated in the experiment.


                                       4. Analysis

4.1. Outcomes. To examine how cooperation varies with social distance and rela-
tive centrality under different contracting environments, we examine average trans-
fers made by individuals with high income realizations to their partners (who me-
chanically had low income realizations). Lemma A.1 in Appendix A shows that,
due to the exogenous income process, regardless of the relative bargaining power of
individuals or whether they are on the Pareto frontier, average transfers between
members of a pair capture the amount of interpersonal insurance sustained by that
pair. This implies that the level of transfers can be used as a measure of the level
of cooperation sustained by a given pair, with a higher level of transfers denoting
more insurance.
   Another outcome of interest is the level of welfare achieved under different con-
tracting environments, and how welfare varies with the relative network position.
In general, the effect of different contracting environments on welfare would be
comprised of an effect on the level of consumption and an effect on the variability
of consumption. However, because we fix the income process across contracting
environments, there is no difference in average consumption between environments,
and hence, the variability in consumption can be used to rank different regimes in
terms of welfare.14
   By focusing on transfers and variability of consumption, we can use Proposi-
tion A.2 in Appendix A to structure our thinking as to how the effect of different
contracting environments should differ across social distance and relative central-
ity. We are first interested in how the gap between behavior with and without
enforcement (that is, in EN versus NN) changes across partners with varying net-
work positions. If social proximity contributes to informal enforcement, socially
close partners will perform relatively better when formal enforcement is removed.
If more-central individuals gain less from relationships with the less-central and,
13The  most unequally-central pair has an absolute difference of 6.33 standard deviations and
15% of pairs have an absolute difference of more than one standard deviation.
14Average consumption is INR 131 in the EN and NN games. Because savings are lost when the
savings games end, consumption is slightly lower in the NS games (by INR 2).
                    SOCIAL NETWORKS AS CONTRACT ENFORCEMENT                                    13

consequently, are more tempted to behave opportunistically, partners whose net-
work centrality is similar (i.e., the difference in their centralities is small) will
achieve more cooperation without formal enforcement than those of more-unequal
centrality.
  NS differs from NN in that subjects could self-insure by saving in addition to
making transfers to their partners. Introducing this form of self-insurance allows
us to test extra predictions of the model: (i) partners who are more distant in the
network and/or more unequal in centrality use savings more, (ii) access to self-
insurance crowds out intra-personal insurance, measured by transfers, and (iii)
crowdout is greater when individuals are paired with more distant or less central
partners.


4.2. Estimating equations and identification. Our analysis uses regressions
of the following form. Consider comparing EN and NN.

(4.1)    yijtgv = α0 + α1 · N N + α2 · d(i, j) + α3 · (ei − ej ) + µi + νg + ηt
                     +β d · d(i, j) · N N + β e · (ei − ej ) · N N + ǫijtgv .

Here i indexes subject, j the partner, t round, g game order, and v village. y
denotes outcome: either the transfer from the high- to the low-income partner,
or the deviation of consumption in round t from i’s average level of consumption,
i.e., consumption variability. When the outcome is transfers, the sample includes
only individual-round observations on individuals who realized high income (i.e.,
who were in a position to make a transfer to their partner); when the outcome is
consumption variability all observations are included.
   N N is a binary variable indicating the NN treatment, i.e., lack of external
enforcement (so N N = 0 implies EN). The term d(i, j) is the social distance
between partners and ei denotes the eigenvector centrality of i.15 Terms µi , νg and
νt denote subject-, game order- and round-fixed effects, respectively. Parameters
of interest are β d and β e , which measure how social distance and relative centrality
affect the outcome of interest differentially as we randomly vary contract structure.
A similar regression is used for the comparison of NN versus NS, examining how

15A  more central individual will tend to have more links and therefore shorter paths to a given
partner (increasing proximity), and vice versa. Therefore the regressions simultaneously include
social proximity and relative centrality so that the effects are those of increasing the partner’s
distance (relative centrality) holding relative centrality (distance) fixed.
                 SOCIAL NETWORKS AS CONTRACT ENFORCEMENT                             14

outcomes change with the introduction of savings access, differentially as network
position is varied.
   Random assignment of players to different partners across games allows us to
estimate the effect of network position while accounting for a subject’s general
predisposition to make transfers or share risk (driven by e.g., altruism or risk
aversion) using a fixed-effects approach. Through fixed effects, the results are
interpreted as holding an individual fixed and randomly varying the distance and
centrality of their partner while orthogonally varying the contracting environment.
   To help illustrate confounds avoided by this design, consider the following two
examples. First, consider the case where individuals are more altruistic towards
socially closer people. This is not a confound in our design, since we are identified
off of the relative outcome in terms of transfers or consumption variation as we
vary contracting environment and network position. A confound would be present
only if individuals were differentially more altruistic to socially proximate people
as the ability to enforce contracts was removed. Second, consider the case where
individuals who are more central are more amicable and therefore give more in gen-
eral. Again, our design identifies whether an individual – as a function of network
position – differentially gives more (or less) as the contracting environment is var-
ied, so the confound would only be present if central individuals were differentially
more (or less) amicable when enforcement was removed. Therefore, the identifying
assumption is that there are no pair-level unobservable characteristics that vary
across contracting structures and are correlated with network structure. While
this is an assumption, natural confound stories do not predict effects which vary
across contracting structure. The ability to control for unobserved characteristics
that matter uniformly across contracting environments nonetheless represents a
significant reduction in the possible sources of omitted variable bias.
   Additionally, we perform further robustness exercises to examine whether our
measured effects are robust to the inclusion of treatment-by-demographic con-
trols. Specifically, in some specifications we add a vector of individual covariates
interacted with treatment (N N · Xi′ ) to control for how the characteristics of i dif-
ferentially
         1
            influence2
                       outcomes across contracting environment. Similarly, we also
                   ′
include N N · Xj for to control for effects of partner characteristics by treatment
(and analogously when we compare N N to N S). These estimates appear in Ap-
pendix Tables B.1 and B.2, columns 3 to 5 and 8 to 10. Thus, the most conservative
estimates of β d and β e can be interpreted as differential effects of network position
                    SOCIAL NETWORKS AS CONTRACT ENFORCEMENT                                       15

across contract environments, holding an individual fixed, randomly varying the
partner in the network, partialling out demographic characteristics-by-treatment
and partialling out partner demographic characteristics-by-treatment.16

4.3. The importance of within-individual variation. Figure 4 illustrates the
advantage of experimentally manipulating the economic environment and ran-
domly assigning interaction pairs. Figure 4A shows the network of a randomly-
chosen village in the data with nodes colored by caste, while Figure 4B depicts
the same network with nodes colored by µi : the individual-fixed propensity to
make transfers in game play. The µi capture the latent tendency to be cooperative
that would be unobserved without cross-environment variation within individuals.
In both figures, homophily is clear, suggesting that in real-world network data,
homophily is a potentially problematic confound. In order to establish how real-
world network structure influences interactions across contracting environments,
accounting for such homophily–both observed and unobserved–is essential. Our
design is unique in its ability to address these issues.



                                          5. Results.

5.1. The role of the contracting environment. Our first finding is that ex-
ternal enforcement, or lack thereof, matters considerably, and access to savings
partly compensates for lack of enforcement. Figure 5A shows that transfers are
lower when enforcement is removed (in NN and NS compared to EN). Figure 5B
shows consumption is most variable under NN, least variable under EN, and im-
proved under NS compared to NN, due to use of savings. That is, removing external
enforcement reduces consumption smoothing relative to full enforcement; access
to savings can partially but not fully compensate. Regression analysis shows the
differences between the regimes with and without external enforcement are signif-
icant (P < 0.01, Table 2) and large: removing enforcement increases consumption
variability by 20% and reduces transfers by 10% in the NN treatment, when sav-
ings are not available. When savings are available, in the NS treatment, removing

16In principle it would be possible to also include µj , partner fixed effects. However, the addition
of such fixed effects consumes an additional 645 degrees of freedom (in addition to the 645
consumed by the individual fixed effects, µi ), and the resulting estimates, shown in Appendix
Tables B.1 and B.2, columns 5 and 10, become very noisy.
                     SOCIAL NETWORKS AS CONTRACT ENFORCEMENT                                16

enforcement increases consumption variability by 12% and reduces transfers by
12%, relative to the EN treatment.

5.2. The role of social proximity. We now turn to examining how networks
differentially impact outcomes as the contracting environment is changed. We find
that social proximity substitutes for enforcement in the absence of enforcement.
We display these results in nonparametric plots of the levels of consumption vari-
ability (Figure 5C) and transfers (Figure 5D) against social distance. Under EN,
consumption variability does not change much as a function of the distance to one’s
partner and transfers only mildly fall as a function of distance. However, these
gradients are considerably different when we consider removing contract enforce-
ment and turning to NN: as distance increases, consumption variability sharply
rises, and transfers fall steeply.
   These outcomes are formally analyzed in Table 3. The insignificant main ef-
fects of distance and relative centrality indicate that consumption variability and
transfers do not significantly vary by network position in the EN treatment. This
supports the interpretation of network effects as entering the cooperation problem
via the continuation value of the relationship, an object which does not enter when
external enforcement is present. However, network position matters significantly
when contracts are not enforced externally. In NN, consumption becomes more
variable and transfers considerably decline, the greater the social distance between
the pair. Table 3 shows that each unit of social distance corresponds to an in-
crease in the variability of consumption equal to roughly 7% of the EN level when
enforcement is removed; this differential effect is significant at the 5 percent level.
For the most distant pairs (at distance 8), consumption variability increases by an
amount equal to 55% of the EN level when external enforcement is removed.
   In Appendix Table B.1, we investigate the extent to which our results on the
effects of social distance are robust to possible confounds. In columns 3 to 5
and 8 to 10 we include individual demographic covariates17 interacted with the
NN treatment: this allows observable characteristics of a subject to affect play
differentially across treatments. Columns 4, 5, 9 and 10 include demographic
covariates-by-treatment for both the subject and the partner. In both cases, the
parameter estimates remain highly stable and statistically significant: a unit of
social distance still corresponds to a fall in transfers equal to roughly 7% of the EN

17Gender,   marital status, age, education, and a binary indicator for high-caste groups.
                  SOCIAL NETWORKS AS CONTRACT ENFORCEMENT                             17

level when enforcement is removed. Columns 5 and 10 then introduce partner fixed
effects as well. It is here that we lose power (we are now including 1290 fixed effects)
though the parameter estimates again remain relatively stable. Taken together,
our social proximity result remains robust whether or not we include observable
experimental controls, demographic controls for subject by treatment, demographic
controls for subject’s partner by treatment and, though under-powered, for partner
fixed effects as well.
   Thus, we have shown that for the most distant pairs, removing contract enforce-
ment increases consumption variability by 55%. However, for the socially closest
pairs, there is no substantive effect of removing enforcement. Previous literature
has typically focused on how social distance influences behavior: Do people give
more to those who are closer in the network (Goeree et al., 2010)? Does the amount
given vary by whether the recipient (or the sender) knows the other party, disen-
tangling altruistic motives versus reciprocal motives (Leider et al., 2009; Ligon and
Schechter, 2012)? In contrast, what we isolate here is to what extent the contract-
ing institution may come to bear on this exchange: for the socially proximate,
there is essentially no return to enforcement–having contract enforcement is as
good as having no such enforcement. However, for the socially distant, contract
enforcement matters considerably.



5.3. The role of centrality. Turning to centrality, we find that inequality in
centrality reduces cooperation in the absence of enforcement. We present non-
parametric plots of the levels of consumption variability (Figure 5E) and transfers
(Figure 5F) against relative centrality. The raw data suggests that there is no
relationship between one’s relative centrality to her partner and her consumption
variability under EN and this is true (if anything only a mild relationship) for
transfers and relative centrality as well. However, when enforcement is removed,
consumption variability increases sharply and transfers fall sharply in relative cen-
trality.
   Turning to regression analysis in Table 3, the fixed-effects analysis exploits
within-individual variation and can be interpreted as holding an individual fixed
and varying her partner’s centrality, with larger relative centrality meaning a less-
central partner. Consumption variability and transfers do not vary significantly
by partner centrality in the EN treatment, again indicating that networks do not
                 SOCIAL NETWORKS AS CONTRACT ENFORCEMENT                            18

play an important role in mediating cooperation in the presence of external en-
forcement. In NN, however, transfers decrease, and consumption becomes more
variable, the greater the lucky player’s relative centrality, holding fixed the indi-
vidual’s centrality as well as the pair’s distance. Regressions results in Table 3
indicate that a one-standard-deviation increase in the lucky player’s relative cen-
trality (i.e., a decrease in their partner’s centrality) reduces transfers by INR 1.67
and increases consumption variability by INR 0.804. Both effects are significant
at the 1 percent level and represent roughly 2% of the EN levels.
   Appendix Table B.2 shows that the results on relative centrality are robust to the
inclusion of numerous controls. In columns 3 to 6 and 8 to 10 we add demographic-
by-treatment controls: the magnitude and significance of the effect are unchanged.
In column s 4,5, 9 and 10, we also add partner demographic-by-treatment controls.
The parameter estimates again remain stable and statistically significant. Finally,
we include partner fixed effects as well in columns 5 and 10; while the sign is
unchanged, significance is lost due to the noisiness of the estimate. The robustness
patterns hold true as well when we look at consumption variability.
   Finally, we turn to the economic significance of the parameter estimates. In the
case of centrality, the hierarchical effects measured here are modest (a 2% decline in
transfers relative to the EN levels associated with a one standard deviation increase
in relative centrality). This contrasts with the very strong social proximity effects.
Nonetheless, for the most distant pairs, whose relative centrality difference is more
than 6 standard deviations, the removal of commitment is associated with a roughly
15% drop in transfers, a meaningful decrease. The effects of centrality, while
relatively modest in mediating lack of enforcement, may be larger in other settings:
see e.g., Breza and Chandrasekhar (2014) for an example where centrality effects
are of the same magnitude as proximity effects in a savings account expansion
program.


5.4. Use of savings. Introducing savings into a setting without external enforce-
ment further contributes to understanding the role of networks by providing a set
of predicted comparative statics about how savings affects pairs with different net-
work characteristics. Ligon et al. (2000) show that access to savings has a twofold
impact on the constrained-efficient risk-sharing contract without enforcement. On
one hand, access to savings increases the utility that individuals enjoy after reneg-
ing, reducing the amount of interpersonal insurance which can be sustained in
                    SOCIAL NETWORKS AS CONTRACT ENFORCEMENT                                      19

equilibrium. On the other hand, if full insurance is not feasible without access to
a savings technology, savings can help to smooth over time the risk that cannot
be spread interpersonally. Overall, the effect of savings access on individuals’ risk
sharing and welfare is ambiguous and depends on the initial level of risk sharing.
This initial level, in turn, will depend on the distance and relative centrality of
the two individuals; thus the extent to which savings crowds out interpersonal
insurance will depend on these network characteristics. (See Appendix A.) The
introduction of savings into the no-enforcement environment thus provides addi-
tional predictions which shed light on networks’ role.
   While these predictions are tightly related to networks’ role in the setting with-
out external enforcement but no savings, these are not simply reparametrizations
of the basic predictions. Thus, introducing savings acts as a form of an over-
identification test: if a network measure, such as greater social proximity or less
hierarchical inequality, sustains cooperation in the absence of enforcement, when
savings are introduced, it should also predict less crowdout of transfers and less
use of savings.
   Table 4 shows that more unequally central pairs face increased difficulty in sus-
taining interpersonal cooperation when savings become available. A one-standard-
deviation increase in relative centrality corresponds to a fall of 1.8% in transfers
under NS relative to NN. We do not detect any effect for social proximity inter-
acted with savings access. Appendix Table B.2 examines the robustness of the
centrality effects. Including demographic-by-treatment covariates the coefficient
remains stable (though not significant at conventional levels, P < 0.102) and even
including demographic-by-treatment covariates as well as partner demographic-by-
treatment covariates as well as partner fixed effects, the coefficient remains similar
(P < 0.12).
   An implication of the fact that certain pairs, as a function of their network
position, are less able to maintain high levels of insurance in NN, is that such pairs
should use savings, when available, to compensate. Table 5 shows that this is the
case: socially distant pairs make greater use of savings in NS, with each additional
unit of distance increasing savings by approximately INR 0.8.18 A similar pattern is
seen for relative centrality, although the effect is imprecisely estimated. Greater use

18It is not possible to include individual- or partner-fixed effects in these regressions since each
individual is only observed under savings access with one partner. Therefore, these results are
less robust to possible confounds and should be regarded as suggestive.
                 SOCIAL NETWORKS AS CONTRACT ENFORCEMENT                            20

of savings by more unequal pairs can explain why, in Table 4, the differential impact
of lack of enforcement on consumption smoothing for unequal pairs is smaller than
the effect on transfers.



                                 6. Conclusion.

   This paper presents the results of a unique laboratory experiment designed to
identify how real-world social networks may substitute for formal contract enforce-
ment. Subjects engaged in high stakes interactions across regimes with and with-
out contract enforcement and with different, non-anonymous, partners selected at
random.
   Consumption smoothing, and hence welfare, are significantly lower when cooper-
ation is not externally enforced. However, this effect varies with individuals’ social
embedding: for the socially closest pairs, lack of external enforcement does not
bind. But, as social distance increases, external enforcement is increasingly impor-
tant. Furthermore, social hierarchies encoded in the social network exacerbate the
absence of external enforcement: when more important (higher centrality) individ-
uals are paired with less important partners, lack of enforcement is more damaging.
Social proximity mitigates contracting frictions and facilitates efficient behavior,
while unequal levels of importance lead to more opportunistic behavior. These
results provide a set of predictions for where the development of external contracts
should arise: the gains to external enforcement in superior-subordinate interac-
tions (e.g., expert-layperson; teacher-student; manager-managee) are greater than
in interactions those among relatively equal peers.
   Identification in this setting is challenging. Individuals may differ in unobserved
propensities to behave more or less cooperatively and this may correlate with net-
work position. By randomly varying the contracting environment and the partner,
the analysis can be purged of individual-fixed confounds. The resulting estimates
reveal how network effects mediate the changing contracting regime. Our results
are robust to the inclusion of subjects’ and partners’ demographic characteristics
whose effects can vary by treatment. While the results are subject to possible
confounds in the form of unobserved correlates of network position that enter dif-
ferentially across contracting environments (conditional on observables), the most
likely confounds (e.g., altruism or risk aversion) would not be expected to have
varying impacts across regimes.
                 SOCIAL NETWORKS AS CONTRACT ENFORCEMENT                             21

   Given the important role of social networks we establish in this paper, a natural
question is whether and how networks endogenously form to mitigate contract in-
completeness. For instance, do individuals choose to rely on socially close friends
and relatives for insurance and credit, despite the likelihood of covariate shocks,
in order to reduce the risk of opportunistic behavior? In this paper we sought to
understand the effects of network position. These effects can be combined with
estimates of the endogenous pairing process – which may be specific to a partic-
ular setting – to obtain overall comparative statics of how equilibrium outcomes
(e.g., insurance, public goods, etc.) would change if the contracting environment
changed and individuals were allowed to re-optimize their transaction partners.
Chandrasekhar et al. (2012) examines the role of endogenous pair formation.
   The finding that networks matter substantively in dynamic contracting environ-
ments contributes to the literature providing direct evidence against the standard
exchangeability of actors assumed in many economic models. Moreover, the way
the super-game – i.e., players’ relationships within the village social fabric – enters
into our experiment is analogous to how it affects many economically important
interactions: transactions balancing long-term gains to cooperation with short-
term temptations to renege are ubiquitous. Thus, the roles we measure for social
proximity and importance are likely to translate to other settings, while not in
exact magnitude, in sign and significance.
                SOCIAL NETWORKS AS CONTRACT ENFORCEMENT                         22

                                  References

Abreu, D. (1988): “On the Theory of Infinitely Repeated Games with Discount-
 ing,” Econometrica, 56, 383–396.
Ambrus, A., M. Mobius, and A. Szeidl (2014): “Consumption Risk-sharing
 in Social Networks,” American Economic Review, 104, 149–82.
Andreoni, J. and J. Miller (2002): “Giving according to GARP: An exper-
 imental test of the consistency of preferences for altruism,” Econometrica, 70,
 737–753.
Axelrod, R. (1981): “The emergence of cooperation among egoists,” The Amer-
 ican Political Science Review, 306–318.
Banerjee, A., A. G. Chandrasekhar, E. Duflo, and M. O. Jackson
 (2013): “The Diffusion of Microfinance,” Science, 341.
Barr, A., M. Dekker, and M. Fafchamps (2012): “Who shares risk with
 whom under different enforcement mechanisms?” Economic Development and
 Cultural Change, 60, 677–706.
Board, S. (2011): “Relational contracts and the value of loyalty,” American
 Economic Review, 101, 3349.
Bowles, S. (2006): “Group competition, reproductive leveling, and the evolution
 of human altruism,” Science, 314, 1569–1572.
Bowles, S. and H. Gintis (2004): “The evolution of strong reciprocity: coop-
 eration in heterogeneous populations,” Theoretical population biology, 65, 17–28.
Boyd, R. and P. J. Richerson (1988): “The evolution of reciprocity in sizable
 groups,” Journal of Theoretical Biology, 132, 337–356.
Breza, E. and A. Chandrasekhar (2014): “Savings Monitors,” Tech. rep.,
 Working Paper.
Chandrasekhar, A. and M. O. Jackson (2014): “Tractable and consistent
 random graph models,” Stanford working paper.
Chandrasekhar, A. G., C. Kinnan, and H. Larreguy (2012): “Informa-
 tion, networks and informal insurance: evidence from a lab experiment in the
 field,” Tech. rep.
Chandrasekhar, A. G. and R. Lewis (2013): “Econometrics of sampled net-
 works,” Manuscript.
Charness, G. and G. Genicot (2009): “Informal Risk Sharing in an Infinite-
 Horizon Experiment*,” The Economic Journal, 119, 796–825.
                SOCIAL NETWORKS AS CONTRACT ENFORCEMENT                        23

Ellison, G. (1994): “Cooperation in the prisoner’s dilemma with anonymous
  random matching,” The Review of Economic Studies, 61, 567–588.
Eshel, I. and L. L. Cavalli-Sforza (1982): “Assortment of encounters and
  evolution of cooperativeness,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
  79, 1331.
Fainmesser, I. P. (2012): “Community structure and market outcomes: A re-
  peated games-in-networks approach,” American Economic Journal: Microeco-
  nomics, 4, 32–69.
Fehr, E., S. Gächter, and G. Kirchsteiger (1997): “Reciprocity as a con-
  tract enforcement device: Experimental evidence,” Econometrica: journal of the
  Econometric Society, 833–860.
Fischer, G. (2013): “Contract Structure, Risk-Sharing, and Investment Choice,”
  Econometrica, 81, 883–939.
Friedman, J. W. (1971): “A non-cooperative equilibrium for supergames,” The
  Review of Economic Studies, 1–12.
Goeree, J. K., M. A. McConnell, T. Mitchell, T. Tromp, and L. Yariv
  (2010): “The 1/d law of giving,” American Economic Journal: Microeconomics,
  183–203.
Greif, A. (1993): “Contract enforceability and economic institutions in early
  trade: The Maghribi traders’ coalition,” The American economic review, 525–
  548.
Jackson, M. O. (2010): Social and economic networks, Princeton University
  Press.
Jackson, M. O., T. Rodriguez-Barraquer, and X. Tan (2012): “Social
  capital and social quilts: Network patterns of favor exchange,” The American
  Economic Review, 102, 1857–1897.
Karlan, D., M. Mobius, T. Rosenblat, and A. Szeidl (2009): “Trust and
  social collateral,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124, 1307–1361.
Kearns, M., S. Suri, and N. Montfort (2006): “An experimental study of
  the coloring problem on human subject networks,” Science, 313, 824–827.
Kinnan, C. and R. Townsend (2012): “Kinship and Financial Networks, For-
  mal Financial Access, and Risk Reduction,” The American Economic Review,
  102, 289–293.
Leider, S., M. M. Möbius, T. Rosenblat, and Q.-A. Do (2009): “Directed
  altruism and enforced reciprocity in social networks,” The Quarterly Journal of
                SOCIAL NETWORKS AS CONTRACT ENFORCEMENT                      24

  Economics, 124, 1815–1851.
Ligon, E. and L. Schechter (2012): “Motives for sharing in social networks,”
  Journal of Development Economics, 99, 13–26.
Ligon, E., J. P. Thomas, and T. Worrall (2000): “Mutual Insurance, Indi-
  vidual Savings, and Limited Commitment,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 3,
  216–246.
——— (2002): “Informal insurance arrangements with limited commitment: The-
  ory and evidence from village economies,” The Review of Economic Studies, 69,
  209–244.
Mobarak, A. and M. Rosenzweig (2012): “Selling formal insurance to the
  informally insured,” Yale University Economic Growth Center Discussion Paper.
Munshi, K. and M. Rosenzweig (2006): “Traditional institutions meet the
  modern world: Caste, gender, and schooling choice in a globalizing economy,”
  The American Economic Review, 1225–1252.
Nowak, M. A. (2006): “Five rules for the evolution of cooperation,” Science,
  314, 1560–1563.
Ohtsuki, H., C. Hauert, E. Lieberman, and M. A. Nowak (2006): “A
  simple rule for the evolution of cooperation on graphs and social networks,”
  Nature, 441, 502–505.
Rosenzweig, M. R. and O. Stark (1989): “Consumption smoothing, mi-
  gration, and marriage: Evidence from rural India,” The Journal of Political
  Economy, 97, 905.
Selten, R. and A. Ockenfels (1998): “An experimental solidarity game,”
  Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 34(4), 517–539.
Spear, S. E. and S. Srivastava (1987): “On Repeated Moral Hazard with
  Discounting,” Review of Economic Studies, 54, 599–617.
Townsend, R. M. (1994): “Risk and insurance in village India,” Econometrica:
  Journal of the Econometric Society, 539–591.
Udry, C. (1994): “Risk and insurance in a rural credit market: An empirical
  investigation in northern Nigeria,” The Review of Economic Studies, 61, 495–
  526.
                SOCIAL NETWORKS AS CONTRACT ENFORCEMENT                         25

                                    Figures




             (A)                                                (B)




             (C)                                                (D)
Figure 1. Schematic of network randomization. Each panel depicts an instance
of a random pairing of partners. In (A) and (B) the centralities of each node are
held fixed but the distance between the pair is 1 in (A) and 4 in (B). In (C) and
(D), the distance between the pair is held fixed at 2. However, in (C) one partner
is considerably more eigenvector central than in (D).
                        SOCIAL NETWORKS AS CONTRACT ENFORCEMENT                                                                                  26




              @"&+'6A'                                           @"&+';A'                                                    @"&+'0A'          6'
              !"#$%&'                                            !"#$%&'                                                     !"#$%&'
         ,+/&)#"2%#'3+"$('                                  ,+/&)#"2%#'3+"$('                                           ,+/&)#"2%#'3+"$('
            ,%':6'/%1#$('                                      ,%':;'/%1#$('                                               ,%':0'/%1#$('




   !"#$%&'                      !"#$%&'                                                                  !"#$%&'
                                                                                                                                            <"=&+#,'
"(()*#&+#,'%-'               "(()*#&+#,'%-'                                                           "(()*#&+#,'%-'
                                                                                                                                             .>"(+'
   ."/,#+/'                   #+?'."/,#+/'                                                             #+?'."/,#+/'




                                                           0%#(1&.2%#'/+"3)4"2%#('
                                                       5678797567: 75;787975;7: 7'5078797507: '
                                                                    6           ;             0




                                                            !"#$#%&'τ()*(+*,-'./0'
                                                            τ,)*(+*,-'1#"'23&'"#4/0'
                                                                                                               ;'

                                                                :.24"&'0".8%'*(+*,'


                                    5$.%2+('              *('                              *,'              5$.%2+,'




                                %$.%2+('6'*('7'τ()*(+*,-'6'τ,)*(+*,-'                %$.%2+,'6'*,'7'τ,)*(+*,-'6'τ()*(+*,-'




                                    5/&8+('               9('                              9,'              5/&8+,'



Figure 2. Design. (A) presents a timeline. Games A, B and C are randomly
assigned to EN, NN, NS and T A , T B , T C are random. Payment is based on one
randomly chosen consumption realization. (B) presents a single round of NS.
Subjects propose transfers that depend on the realization of incomes. Once incomes
are drawn, transfers are made but can differ from proposed amounts. Subjects then
decide how much to consume and how much to save for next period.
                                            SOCIAL NETWORKS AS CONTRACT ENFORCEMENT                                                                         27



                                Social Distance Histogram for Village 8                            Experiment Social Distance Histogram for Village 8

                  2




                                                                                       2
                                                                                       1.5
                  1.5




                                                                                   Density
        Density




                                                                                     1
          1




                                                                                       .5
                  .5




                                                                                       0
                  0




                        0               2             4           6        8                   1            2         3              4       5          6
                                               Social Distance                                                        Social Distance


                                                                              
                                Social Distance Histogram for Village 17                       Experiment Social Distance Histogram for Village 17
                  1.5




                                                                                       2
                                                                                       1.5
                  1
        Density




                                                                                   Density
                                                                                   1
                  .5




                                                                                       .5
                  0




                                                                                       0




                        0               2             4           6        8                   1            2         3              4       5          6
                                               Social Distance                                                        Social Distance


                                                                              
                                Social Distance Histogram for Village 49                       Experiment Social Distance Histogram for Village 49
                                                                                       2.5
                  2




                                                                                       2
                  1.5




                                                                                         1.5
                                                                                   Density
        Density
         1




                                                                                       1
                  .5




                                                                                       .5
                                                                                       0
                  0




                            1       2          3              4       5    6                   1                2             3          4              5
                                               Social Distance                                                        Social Distance


    


Figure 3. Sampling from the tail of the distribution.
                                                                                                                                                                   SOCIAL NETWORKS AS CONTRACT ENFORCEMENT                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   28
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0        26   87         93




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2                            4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   5                                                                                                                               28




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      6                                                                               7




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        3                                      8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         16                                                                                       9




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            13                                                              12                                     11




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           14

                                                          0    26   87         93




                                                          1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        15                                                                                                                      33




                    2                      4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       18             17                                                                                                                                                                  34



                    5                                                                                                                                         28                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        19                                                                                                       35                                 37                                             36




                                  6                                                                              7

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 20                                                                                                                                                                  38                                  39



                                                                                   3                                            8




     16                                                                                9                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                22                                                                                                                                                40




                                                                                                                                          10


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    24                                                                                                23                                                                                                                      41


                        13                                                             12                                  11




                                           14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           25                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      42




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          27              21                                                                                                                                                                                   43

                                                                    15                                                                                                                                               33
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           29                                                                                                                                                                                                                       45




                             18                 17                                                                                                                                                                             34


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              31                                                                                            30                                                         44                                                                 46

                                                                              19                                                                                                                 35                                           37                             36




                                      20                                                                                                                                                                        38                                      39



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         98                                                                                                32             97                                                          48                            47
                                                                         22                                                                                                                                               40




24                                                                                               23                                                                                                                                      41
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    49        75




                                                     25                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    42


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           52                                             62                                                      50


                                           27                 21                                                                                                                                                                                                   43




                                               29                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                45                                                                                                                                                                                                     53             60                                                                                                                                              51




               31                                                                                 30                                                                              44                                                                               46
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             54             61                                                                                                                    67




          98                                                                                     32                       97                                                                               48                       47




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  49             75                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             55                                  63                                                                       66




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               52                                                 62                            50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       56                                                                                                                                                                64




                                                                                                                                                                             53                  60                                                                                                                                      51

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             57                                                                                                                          72                                              65



                                                                                                                                                                                            54        61                                                                                                                       67



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  58                                                                                                                                         68                        70
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          55                            63                                                                          66

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             84                                  59                                                                                                                                                           71        69




                                                                                                                56                                                                                                                                                           64




                                                                                                                     57                                                                                                                       72                                            65                                                                                                                                                                   86                                                                                                                 73




                                                                                                                                                                        58                                                                                                                                           68                  70




                                                                                                      84                                       59                                                                                                                                                     71   69

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       85                                                                    88                                                                                                     74



                                                                                                                                                    86                                                                                                       73




                                                                                            85                                                                     88                                                                                                                  74                                                                                                                                                                  89                                                                                                                                                                                               76




                                                                                                                                     89                                                                                                                                                                                        76
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               90            91                                                                                                                                                        77




                                                                                                                                                         90        91                                                                                                                                                77


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               92                                                                                                                                                                                 78

                                                                                                                                                         92                                                                                                                                                               78
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      94                                                                         79




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             95                                                                                                                                                80
                                                                                                                                94                                                                                   79

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  96                                                                                                                                81



                                                                                                      95                                                                                                                                                                80


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               82

                                                                                                           96                                                                                                                                                 81




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   82




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (A)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  83

                                                                                                                                                                                       83




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              (B)
Figure 4. Observed and unobserved homophily. Both panels depict the same vil-
lage network. Panel (A) colors households by caste and demonstrates homophily
(households from the same caste are more likely to be linked). Panel (B) colors
nodes by µi ’s an individual’s propensity to make a transfer to her partner, which
is typically unobserved but is uncovered through our experimental design. Larger
nodes/darker shades indicate higher µi values. The graph exhibits both hetero-
geneity and homophily in µi . As only 20 subjects per village participated in the
experiment, most households are depicted neutrally (gray node, smallest size).
                                                       SOCIAL NETWORKS AS CONTRACT ENFORCEMENT                                                                                                                                 29

                                                                                                                  "                                                                                                    #




                                                                                                                          95
          50
          48




                                                                                                                          90
          46
          44




                                                                                                                          85
          42
          40




                                                                                                                          80
                                                  EN                           NN                            NS                                      EN                             NN                            NS
                                                                              Game                                                                                                 Game
                                                        Consumption deviation (Rs.)                 95% CI                                                Avg transfer, lucky to unlucky (Rs.)                95% CI




                                                                                                                  $                                                                                                    %
                                        55




                                                                                                                                          100
           Consumption deviation, Rs.




                                                                                                                                          95
                                                                                                                          Transfer, Rs.
                                        50




                                                                                                                                          90
                                                                                                                                          85
                                        45




                                                                                                                                          80
                                        40




                                                                                                                                          75
                                              1         2                 3                  4           5            6                          1           2                 3                  4           5            6
                                                                      Social distance                                                                                      Social distance
                                                                     EN                 NN          NS                                                                    EN                 NN          NS




                                                                                                                  &                                                                                                        '
                                                                                                                                          100
                                        50
           Consumption deviation, Rs.
                                        48




                                                                                                                                          95
                                                                                                                          Transfer, Rs.
                                        46




                                                                                                                                          90
                                        44




                                                                                                                                          85
                                        42
                                        40




                                                                                                                                          80




                                             -.075          -.0375                  0            .0375            .075                          -.075            -.0375                  0            .0375            .075
                                                                     Relative centrality                                                                                  Relative centrality
                                                                     EN                 NN          NS                                                                    EN                 NN          NS




Figure 5. Consumption variability and transfers. (A) variability in consumption
is significantly higher and (B) transfers are significantly lower without enforcement.
(C) consumption variability increases with social distance to partner only in the
absence of enforcement. (D) without enforcement, transfers decline more steeply
as a function of distance. (E) consumption variability increases with relative cen-
trality when there is no enforcement. (F) without enforcement, transfers fall more
steeply as relative centrality increases.
                 SOCIAL NETWORKS AS CONTRACT ENFORCEMENT                                     30

                                         Tables


                            Table 1. Summary statistics
                                                  Mean         N          St. Dev.

            Panel A: Household-level characteristics from survey            data
            Roof: Thatch                  0.0113 0.1057                      621
                   Title                  0.3108 0.4632                      621
                   Stone                  0.3639 0.4815                      621
                   Sheet                  0.1787 0.3834                      621
                   RCC                    0.0998 0.3000                      621
                   Other                  0.0386 0.1929                      621
            Number of Rooms               2.4686 1.2291                      621
            Number of Beds                0.9404 1.2344                      621
            Has Electricity               0.6355 0.4817                      620
            Owner of house                0.8970 0.3042                      602

            Panel B: Individual-level characteristics collected in experiment
                   Male                     0.4729 0.4997            645
                   Married                  0.7333 0.4426            645
                   Age                     29.9225 8.4332            645
                   Education                7.5140 4.5394            642
                   Degree                  10.1659 6.6761            645
                   Centrality               0.0225 0.0359            645

            Panel C: Pair-level characteristics collected in experiment
                   Distance                 3.6356 1.2043           1844
                   Centrality Difference 0.0000 1.0876              1840
Note: “Centrality Difference” is the player’s eigenvector centrality minus the partner’s eigenvector cen-
trality.
                 SOCIAL NETWORKS AS CONTRACT ENFORCEMENT                                    31


Table 2. Transfers and consumption smoothing, by treatment and distance
                                                   (1)             (2)
                                                Transfers     Consumption
                                                               Abs. Dev.
                     NN                    -8.694***            8.481***
                                             [1.554]             [1.335]
                     NS                    -10.88***            4.571***
                                             [1.749]             [1.389]
                     Distance               -1.244*             .9164**
                                             [.6696]             [.4431]
                     Centrality Difference -0.6447               -0.2059
                                             [.7413]             [.5395]
                     EN=NS
                     F-stat                  1.9343               9.4018
                     p-value                 0.1673               0.0028
                     EN Mean                  93.17                40.13
                     EN Std. Dev.             36.08                40.38
                     N                        6,270               12,556
                     R2                      0.3851               0.2918
Note: Regressions at the individual-game-round level. Regressions include individual-fixed effects, sur-
veyor and team effects, and controls for order and round of play. The transfer regression includes
individuals with high income only. Robust standard errors, clustered at the village by game level, in
brackets. * p<.1, ** p<.05, *** p<.01.
                 SOCIAL NETWORKS AS CONTRACT ENFORCEMENT                                   32


      Table 3. Effect of lack of contract enforcement by distance and
      relative eigenvector centrality
                                       (1)        (2)     (3)      (4)
                                         Transfers     Consumption Dev.
             NN × Distance         -3.508** -3.28** 2.747** 2.873***
                                    [1.668]     [1.61] [1.062]  [1.016]
             NN x Centr. Diff.     -2.051** -2.07** 1.003** .9844**
                                    [.9717]    [.9565] [.4482]  [.4769]
             NN                      4.504      3.665   -1.511  -1.934
                                    [6.759]    [6.452] [4.232]  [3.976]
             Distance                0.851     -0.0314 -0.3511 -0.1333
                                    [1.082]    [1.118] [.8391]  [.8814]
             Centrality Difference  -0.418     0.2408 -0.6967 -0.9238
                                    [1.204]    [1.231] [.6729]  [.7286]
             Experiment Controls                   ×                ×
             EN Mean                 93.17      93.17    40.13   40.13
             EN Std. Dev.            36.08      36.08   31.83    31.83
             N                        4231       4167    8478     8350
               2
             R                      0.4371     0.4492 0.3451    0.3534
Note: Sample is data for EN and NN only. “Centrality Difference” is the player’s eigenvector centrality
minus the partner’s eigenvector centrality. Regressions at the individual-game-round level. Regressions
include individual-fixed effects and, when indicated, surveyor and team effects, and controls for order
and round of play. Robust standard errors, clustered at the village by game level, in brackets. * p<.1,
** p<.05, *** p<.01.
                 SOCIAL NETWORKS AS CONTRACT ENFORCEMENT                                   33


      Table 4. Effect of savings access by distance and relative eigenvec-
      tor centrality
                                      (1)        (2)              (3)     (4)
                                        Transfers              Consumption Dev.
             NS × Distance          0.2725    0.5693           0.0303  -0.1865
                                    [1.34]    [1.294]          [.9544] [.8845]
             NS × Centr. Diff.     -1.584* -1.571**            0.4107   0.4144
                                   [.8177]    [.7734]          [.5487] [.5275]
             NS                     -2.583    -3.884           -4.282   -3.262
                                   [5.014]    [4.723]          [3.815] [3.534]
             Distance              -0.3386 -0.7324              1.103    1.307
                                    [1.38]    [1.178]          [.8871] [.8503]
             Centrality Difference 0.1373     -0.105           0.4422   0.5996
                                   [1.086]     [1.06]          [.7002] [.6738]
             Experiment Controls                  ×                        ×
             NN Mean                 84.3       84.3            48.43    48.43
             NN Std. Dev.           40.77      40.77             35.8    35.8
             N                       4218       4190            8436     8380
               2
             R                      0.4398    0.4605           0.3499   0.3585
Note: Sample is data for NN and NS only. “Centrality Difference” is the player’s eigenvector centrality
minus the partner’s eigenvector centrality. Regressions at the individual-game-round level. Regressions
include individual-fixed effects and, when indicated, surveyor and team effects, and controls for order
and round of play. Robust standard errors, clustered at the village by game level, in brackets. * p<.1,
** p<.05, *** p<.01.
                 SOCIAL NETWORKS AS CONTRACT ENFORCEMENT                                     34


       Table 5. Savings by distance and relative eigenvector centrality

                                                   (1)         (2)         (3)
                    Distance                    .8311***                .807**
                                                 [.3224]                [.3218]
                    Centrality Difference                    0.2032     0.2034
                                                             [.3523]    [.3526]
                    NS Mean                       22.74       22.74      22.74
                    NS St. Dev.                  28.81        28.81      28.81
                    N                             4211        4206        4206
                    R2                           0.2192      0.2235     0.2223
Note: Sample is data for NS only. “Centrality Difference” is the player’s eigenvector centrality minus
the partner’s eigenvector centrality. Regressions at the individual-game-round level. Regressions include
surveyor and team effects, and controls for order and round of play. Robust standard errors, clustered
at the village by game level, in brackets. * p<.1, ** p<.05, *** p<.01.
                 SOCIAL NETWORKS AS CONTRACT ENFORCEMENT                            35

                      Appendix A. Model and Proofs

Measuring the degree of cooperation. To examine how cooperation –measured by
interpersonal insurance– varies with social distance and relative centrality under
different contracting environments, we examine average transfers made by indi-
viduals with high income realizations to those with low income realizations. The
following lemma allows us to do so.

Lemma A.1. Because Pareto weights are orthogonal to the in-game income pro-
cess, under full insurance average transfers will equal half of average income. If
players insure, on average, fraction α of their idiosyncratic risk, average transfers
will equal a fraction α2 of average income.

Proof of Lemma A.1. If players 1 and 2 fully insure their idiosyncratic risk
(α = 1), and player 1 has a Pareto weight/bargaining power factor of λ, 1 transfers
an amount
                                τF1 I = (1 − λ) 250
to 2 when 1 is lucky, and 2 transfers an amount

                                     τF2 I = λ250

to 1 when 2 is lucky. Since each player is lucky 50% of the time on average, average
transfers will be
                      .5τFAI + .5τF2 I = .5 (λ + 1 − λ) 250 = 125
regardless of λ. Similarly, if players 1 and 2 insure, on average, fraction α of their
idiosyncratic risk, τα1 = α (1 − λ) 250 and τα2 = αλ250, and average transfers will
be
                                  .5τα1 + .5τα2 = α125
Even if transfers change over the course of the game in response to binding partic-
ipation constraints, as we expect to happen in a weak contracting setting, average
transfers will be α125, where α is the fraction of risk that is insured, averaging
across rounds. Note that the independence of average transfers and bargaining
weights relies on the fact that the income process is independent of bargaining
weights. This holds in our setting because each player has a 50% chance of being
lucky or unlucky in each round. However, in non-experimental data, bargaining
weights would typically be correlated with the individuals’ income processes, and it
would not be possible to map average transfers into the degree of insurance without
                 SOCIAL NETWORKS AS CONTRACT ENFORCEMENT                           36

knowledge of bargaining weights. This gives us a measure of the amount of inter-
personal insurance which does not rely on knowing the relative bargaining power
or Pareto weights. Moreover, this implication does not rely on the assumption
that individuals are on the Pareto frontier, merely that they are risk averse. 

   We can therefore interpret changes in transfers across different contracting en-
vironments as changes in interpersonal insurance due to changes in participation
constraints. Thus, we can test the predictions of the theory developed below
regarding the effect of social distance and relative centrality on the degree of in-
terpersonal insurance through their differential impact across different contracting
environments.

.

Theoretical Model and Empirical Predictions. Here describe a model of interper-
sonal insurance in the presence of networks to help interpret the results and pro-
vide a collection of predictions. The model is an adaption of the standard model
of interpersonal insurance in a dynamic mode without external enforcement that
provides the ability to formally commit to a contract Ligon et al. (2002), where
we allow for participants to be asymmetric in terms of their network position. We
first describe the main predictions in the following proposition, then set up the
model, after which we provide the proof the proposition.

Proposition A.2 (Empirical Predictions).
    (1) EN vs. NN:
        (a) Average transfers should be lower under NN the more socially distant
             the pair.
        (b) Consumption smoothing should be lower under NN, the more socially
             distant the pair.
         (c) Average transfers should be lower under NN the greater relative eigen-
             vector centrality of the high- vs. the low-income realization player.
        (d) Consumption smoothing under NN should be worse, the greater the rel-
             ative eigenvector centrality of the high- vs. the low-income realization
             player.
    (2) NN vs. NS:
        (a) More socially distant pairs should use savings more extensively.
                     SOCIAL NETWORKS AS CONTRACT ENFORCEMENT                                  37

           (b) Pairs with greater the relative eigenvector centrality should use savings
               more extensively.

    The proposition motivates the main regressions in Tables 3 and 4. Proposition
A.2.1(a) and A.2.1(c) are studied in columns 1 and 2 of Tables 3 and 4. Proposition
A.2.1(b) and A.2.1(d) are studied in columns 3 and 4 of Tables 3 and 4. Note that
all four predictions are confirmed by the data.
    Proposition A.2.2 describes the role of savings/self-insurance. Introducing this
technology provides a set of extra predictions. Access to savings should have
differential predictions as to which pairings within the network should make greater
use of the savings. These are studied in Table 5; both are qualitatively confirmed
in the data though only A.2.2(b) finds statistically significant support.
    We now set out the model used to derive the proposition.
Groups, income, and utility. We consider groups composed of two individuals,
i = 1, 2. In each period t = 1, 2, ..., individual i receives an income y i (s) ≥ 0 of
a single good, where s is an i.i.d. state of nature drawn from the set S = {1, 2}.
Income follows the process: yi (s) = y if i = s and 0 otherwise.
    The income process is i.i.d. across time, and perfectly negatively correlated
(ρ = −1) across individuals. In other words, in each period, one individual will
earn positive income y while the other individual will earn no income, with each
player equally likely to be lucky. There is no aggregate risk: total group income is
y each period.
    Individuals have a per-period von Neumann-Morgenstern utility of consumption
function u (ci ), where ci is the consumption of individual i. We assume that ci ≥ 0.
Individuals are assumed to be risk averse, with u′ (ci ) > 0, and u′′ (ci ) < 0 for all
ci > 0. Individuals are infinitely lived and discount the future with a common
discount factor β.19
    Individuals may enter into insurance agreements with their partners. A contract
τ̃ (·) will specify for every date t and for each history of states, ht = (s1 , s2 , ..., st ), a
transfer τ̃ 1 (ht ) to be made from individual 1 to individual 2, and correspondingly
a transfer τ̃ 2 (ht ) to be made from individual 2 to individual 1. For simplicity we
denote τ i (ht ) ≡ τ̃ i (ht ) − τ̃ j (ht ), that is, the (positive or negative) net transfer
that individual i makes to individual j after history ht .


19In   our experiment the β = 56 , the chance the game will continue after each period.
                    SOCIAL NETWORKS AS CONTRACT ENFORCEMENT                                        38

  Denote V i (ht ) to be the continuation value of remaining in the insurance agree-
ment, that is, the expected utility of individual i from a contract from period t
onwards, discounted to period t, if history ht = (ht−1 , st ) occurs up to period t
and st is already known. V i (·) obeys the recursive relation Spear and Srivastava
(1987):
                                  1                   2
(A.1)              V i (ht ) = u y i (ht ) − τ i (ht ) + βEht+1 |ht V i (ht+1 ) .

where τ i (ht ) follows optimally from equation (A.5), below.

The role of savings. In some of the cases we consider below, individuals have access
to a savings technology. The gross return on savings, when available, is assumed
to be R = 1. When saving is available, one unit of the consumption good saved
today delivers one unit in the next period. Savings amounts are restricted to be
positive: no borrowing is possible.
   In the case that individuals have access to a savings technology, an insurance
contract will not only determine net transfers τ 1 (st ) to be made from individual
1 to individual 2 but also an amount z i (st ) that an individual i, for i = 1, 2, saves
from period t to period t + 1. For simplicity we then denote as a sharing agreement
(τ (st ) , z (st )) = (τ i (st ) , z i (st )) for i = 1, 2.
   For the case that individuals have access to a savings technology V i (·) is denoted
as
(A.2)
    1                2      1                                           2               1                2
V i ht , z i (ht−1 ) = u z i (ht−1 ) + y i (ht ) − τ i (ht ) − z i (ht ) +βEht+1 |ht V i ht+1 , z i (ht )

where τ i (ht ) , z i (ht ) follow optimally from equation (A.14), below.

Autarky. Thus far we have assumed that individuals can make transfers with other
individuals. However, individuals may choose not to make such transfers. In
particular, they might initially promise to make certain transfers, but later change
their minds. To characterize the payoffs to an individual who reneges on promises
to his or her partner, we assume that if either party reneges upon the contract,
both individuals consume autarky levels thereafter. The grim trigger or “autarky
forever after defection” case is used for expositional clarity and because it supports
the most on-equilibrium insurance. In our experimental setup, players are free to
choose any post-defection response. The qualitative properties of the equilibrium
do not depend on the grim trigger assumption, as argued by Ligon et al. (2002).
                    SOCIAL NETWORKS AS CONTRACT ENFORCEMENT                                    39

   If individuals have access to a savings technology they can smooth consumption
only intertemporally. Without a savings technology, an individual in autarky will
simply live “hand to mouth," consuming his or her income in each period. By
choosing not to make transfers with others, an individual gives up the benefits of
interpersonal consumption smoothing: the option to receive transfers from others
when unlucky, in exchange for making transfers to others when lucky is lost forever.
When individuals are risk-averse, such interpersonal insurance will be welfare-
enhancing, and giving it up is a cost of choosing autarky instead. (We discuss
below why individuals might make this choice.) There may also be other costs of
choosing autarky, which we consider next.
The role of social networks. We now discuss introducing village network structure
into the standard interpersonal insurance model. Recall that we will focus on the
social distance and the relative eigenvector centrality between pairs.
   We assume that an individual who has reneged on the insurance agreement with
her partner pays a non-pecuniary cost f (·, ·) that can be represented as :

                                      f (d(i, j), ei − ej )

where d(i, j) is the social distance between i and j, and ei − ej is the difference in
eigenvector centrality. We predict the following comparative statics on f (·, ·) :
    (1) f (d, ei − ej ) > f (d′ , ei − ej ) , d < d′ , ∀d, d′ ∈ N+ and ∀ei − ej ∈ R
    (2) ∂f (d, ei − ej ) /∂(ei − ej ) < 0 ∀d∈ N+ and ∀ei − ej ∈ R.
(1) states that f is larger, the lower the social distance between the individual
and her partner: it is less costly to defect against a stranger than a friend. (2)
states that, conditional on social distance, f is larger, the larger the difference in
eigenvector centrality between the lucky partner and the unlucky partner: ceteris
paribus it is more costly to defect against an important than an unimportant
individual.20 We discuss below how the presence of the term f (·, ·) affects insurance
under different contracting environments.
Autarky without savings. If individuals do not have access to a savings technol-
ogy, then after the violation of a contract both individuals consume their income
                             i
in every period. Denote VA,N   S (st ) to be the expected utility of autarky for an



20This  cost is conceptually similar to the costs Pi (s) in Ligon et al. (2002); relative to their
setting, we specify these costs to depend on i’s social distance to his or her partner and their
relative centralities.
                       SOCIAL NETWORKS AS CONTRACT ENFORCEMENT                                        40

individual i, who has reneged against individual j in period t, after observing st :
                                                1         2
                         i                i                i
(A.3)                   VA,N S (ht ) = u y (st ) + βEht+1 VA,N S (ht+1 )

There is no maximization because, in autarky with no savings, i simply consumes
her income each period.
Autarky with savings. If individuals have access to a savings technology, and its
use cannot be barred from those who have defected, then after the violation of a
contract individuals are not constrained to consume their income period-by-period
as they can make use of the storage technology. After the violation of a contract,
both individuals keep
                   1
                       any 2savings they have.
                i       1
   We denote VA,S ht , zt−1    to be the expected utility of autarky for an individual
                             1
i in period t with savings zt−1 , after observing st :
               1          2                 1                              2                  1   2
                    1
(A.4)     i
         VA,S ht , zt−1 = max
                          i
                                 i
                              u zt−1 + y i (st ) − zti (ht ) + βEht+1 VA,S
                                                                       i
                                                                           ht+1 , zt1
                                  z (ht )

Unlike the no-savings case, i has a choice variable, namely z i (ht ), the amount of
savings that will be carried into the next period.
Insurance with no enforcement, no savings (NN). We now set up the problem
characterizing the set of constrained efficient insurance contracts for the case where
there is no access to savings. As a insurance contract can be seen as a non-
cooperative equilibrium of a repeated game, and reversion to autarky is the most
severe subgame-perfect punishment, this assumption allows us to characterize the
most efficient set of non-cooperative subgame-perfect equilibria Abreu (1988).
  The set of efficient risk-sharing contracts for the no contract enforcement, no
savings case solves the following dynamic programming problem21
                                                                                           
                   1          2                                u (y 1 (st ) 1− τ 1 (st )) +2 
(A.5)        V 1 Vt2 (st )        =             max            βEs V 1 V 2 (st+1 ) 
                                             τ 1 (st ),            t+1          t+1
                                        {Vt+1 (st+1 )}
                                           2
                                                      s∈S

                                        s.t.




21Thiswill also be the set of decentralizable equilibrium allocations since the conditions of the
2nd welfare theorem are satisfied.
                     SOCIAL NETWORKS AS CONTRACT ENFORCEMENT                                41
                 1                  2
(A.6) λ : u y 2 (st ) + τt1 (st ) + βEst+1 Vt+1
                                             2
                                                (st+1 ) ≥ Vt2 (st ) , ∀ st ∈ S
             2             2
(A.7)βφt : Vt+1 (st+1 ) ≥ VA,N S (st+1 ) − f (d(2, 1), e2 − e1 ) , ∀ st+1 ∈ S
                     1          2
(A.8)βµt : V 1 Vt+1
                 2             1
                    (st+1 ) ≥ VA,N S (st+1 ) − f (d(1, 2), e1 − e2 ) , ∀ st+1 ∈ S

(A.9) ψ1 : y 1 (st ) − τt1 (st ) ≥ 0, ∀ st ∈ S
(A.10)ψ2 : y 2 (st ) + τt1 (st ) ≥ 0, ∀ st ∈ S
           i                                                  1              2
where VA,N   S (st ) is as in equation (A.14). We can write τ (st ) and Vt (st ) instead of
τ 1 (ht ) and Vt2 (ht ) because, due to the recursive nature of the problem, all previous
history of the efficient risk-sharing contract is encoded in st . This recursivity also
allows us to write V 1 (Vt2 (st )) instead of Vt1 (Vt2 (st )), because player 1’s value
function will be the same whenever an amount Vt2 (st ) is promised to player 2
Ligon et al. (2002).
    Due to the strict concavity of u (ci ), it follows that Vti (·) is also strictly concave
for i = 1, 2. The set of constraints is convex (this follows from the concavity of
u (·) and the linearity in V i (·). Consequently, the problem is concave, and the
first-order conditions are both necessary and sufficient.
    The first-order conditions for this problem are the following:
                   u′ (y 1 (st ) − τt1 (st ))               ψ1 − ψ2
(A.11) τt1 (st ) :  ′    2           1
                                              =λ− ′ 2                         , ∀ st ∈ S,
                   u (y (st ) + τt (st ))             u (y (st ) − τ 1 (st ))
                           1        2       λ + φt
(A.12)     Vt2   : −V 1′ Vt2 (st ) =                 , ∀ st ∈ S.
                                           (1 + µt )
Further, the envelope condition is given by
                                    1       2
(A.13)                        V 1′ Vt2 (st ) = −λ, ∀ st ∈ S.

   The terms f (d(i, j), ei − ej ) do not enter directly into the first-order conditions
since they enter the problem additively, but their presence will affect the likelihood
of the continuation constraints equations (A.7) and (A.8) binding, as discussed
below.
No contract enforcement, with savings. As before, if either party reneges upon the
contract, both individuals consume autarky levels thereafter. However, now after
the violation of a contract, individuals are not constrained to consume their income
period-by-period as now they can make use of the storage technology. After the
violation of a contract, both individuals keep any savings they have.
                         SOCIAL NETWORKS AS CONTRACT ENFORCEMENT                                                    42

  Ligon et al. (2000) show that the set of efficient insurance contracts for the no
contract enforcement case with savings solves the following dynamic programming
problem:

                                                                                                             
                                                                             z 1 + y 1 (st )−                 
                                                                         u  t−1
                                                                                                               
                                                                                                       +
        1    1            2        2                              
                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                
    V 1 Vt2 st , zt-1
(A.14)            2      1
                      , zt-1           =           max                        τt1 (st ) − zt1 (st )
                                            τt1 (st ),zt (st )∈R+ ,                                            
                                                                        βEst+1 V 1 (Vt2 (st+1 , zt2 ) , zt1 )
                                                                    
                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                
                                                Vt2 (st+1 ,zt2 )
                                                                                                               



such that

                 1                                            2                   1           2
              2
(A.15) λ : u zt−1 +y 2 (st ) +τt1 (st ) -zt2 (st ) +βEst+1 Vt2 st+1 , zt2
                     1         2             1            2
(A.16)              2
    βφt : Vt2 st , zt−1    2
                        ≥ VA,S       2
                               st , zt−1 − f (d(2, 1), e2 − e1 ) , ∀ st ∈ S
                     1     1           22             1            2
    βµt : Vt1 Vt2 st , zt−1
(A.17)                  2                      1
                                            ≥ VA,S       2
                                                   st , zt−1 − f (d(1, 2), e1 − e2 ) , ∀ st ∈ S
           1
    ψ1t : zt−1
(A.18)         + y 1 (st ) − τt1 (st ) − zt1 (st ) ≥ 0, ∀ st ∈ S
           2
(A.19)
    ψ2t : zt−1 + y 2 (st ) + τt1 (st ) − zt2 (st ) ≥ 0, ∀ st ∈ S
                                                                      i
where as before the problem is characterized recursively, and VA,S       (st ) is as in
equation (A.4). Note that now the constraint set is non-convex due to equations
(A.18) and (A.19) and consequently the problem may not be concave. To avoid
such issues, lotteries can be used to convexify the problem, as in Ligon et al. (2002).
  Having set out the model framework, we now proceed to proving Proposition
A.2.

Proof of Proposition A.2. We begin with Proposition A.2.1(a) and (c). We
provide the proof for social distance; the same argument extends to relative cen-
trality. Fix relative centrality and consider a change in social distance. For simplic-
ity we write f (d(i, j)). Ceteris paribus, participation constraints are less likely to
bind when partners are socially close, and hence transfers fall more in the absence
of contract enforcement when social distance is greater. To see this, assume that
after some history, i is just indifferent between reneging and staying in the insur-
ance agreement with j when i is lucky (when income is y), for a given promised
transfer τti (y), promised utility Vti (y), and penalty, f (d(i, j)), meaning that i’s par-
ticipation constraint binds when i’s income is y. Now, decrease the social distance
between i and j, holding the promised transfer and promised utility fixed. Since i
                  SOCIAL NETWORKS AS CONTRACT ENFORCEMENT                             43

was just indifferent between reneging and staying at the lower penalty, when the
penalty increases, i will no longer be tempted to renege. Thus, denoting as φit the
Lagrange multiplier on i’s time t participation constraint, and taking expectations
over the possible states of nature at t:
                                     ∂Et−1 φit
                                                 < 0.
                                    ∂f (d(i, j))
and similarly for i’s partner, j. The expected magnitude of the multiplier on the
promise-keeping constraint is lower the greater the penalty for reneging, i.e., the
lower the pair’s social distance.
  Manipulating the first-order conditions on the no contract enforcement no-
savings problem, equations (A.7), (A.8) and (A.13), yields the following relation-
ship between i and j’s marginal utilities, as a function of i’s relative bargaining
power λit :
                                       u′ (yjt + τtj )
                                  λit = ′
                                       u (yit + τti )
and the following updating rule for the multiplier on i’s time t promise-keeping
constraint Ligon et al. (2002):
                                               C                D
                                                   1 + φi,t+1
                                λi,t+1 = λit
                                                   1 + φj,t+1
This yields the following expression for the ratio of i and j’s time t + 1 marginal
utility:
                     u′ (yj,t+1 − τt+1
                                    i
                                           u′ (yjt + τtj ) 1 + φi,t+1
                                                            C           D
                                       )
(A.20)                             i
                                         =
                     u′ (yi,t+1 + τt+1 )   u′ (yit + τti ) 1 + φj,t+1
Therefore, the more often i or j have binding participation constraints (i.e., a
positive φit or φjt ), and the more binding they are (larger positive values of φit or
                                                                i
φjt ), the more each player’s consumption cit = yi,t+1 − τt+1       is expected to vary.
Thus, when participation constraints are more binding, less interpersonal insurance
is possible. This implies that players will on average transfer less to each in the
absence of contract enforcement when they are more socially distant.
   Replacing f (d(i, j)) with f (ei − ej ) – holding distance fixed and varying relative
centrality – an identical argument holds for relative centrality, mutatis mutandis.
   Now we turn to Proposition A.2.1(b) and (d). Proposition A.2.1(a) implies that,
in the absence of contract enforcement, consumption is more strongly correlated
with contemporaneous income when social distance is greater. Hence, consumption
                              SOCIAL NETWORKS AS CONTRACT ENFORCEMENT                                                                             44

smoothing is worse in the absence of contract enforcement when social distance is
greater. An analogous statement is clearly true with relative centrality.
   Finally, we look at Proposition A.2.2(a) and (b). From Ligon et al. (2000)’s
equation (14), the motive to save arises from the expectation that, without sav-
ings, expected marginal rates of substitution would differ across dates. By our
Proposition A.2.1(c), with savings, consumption smoothing is worse, i.e. expected
marginal rates of substitution differ more, the more socially distant the pair. There-
fore distant pairs have the greatest incentive to save. The argument for relative
centrality proceeds similarly.                                                      




                                    Appendix B. Supplementary Tables




           Table B.1. Robustness of effects of lack of contract enforcement
           by distance and relative eigenvector centrality
                                   (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)         (5)          (6)      (7)       (8)      (9)      (10)
                                                        Transfers                                          Consumption Deviation
  NN × Distance                 -3.508**     -3.28**    -3.346**     -3.144*      -3.535      2.747** 2.873*** 2.872*** 2.463**      3.28
                                 [1.668]      [1.61]     [1.619]     [1.805]      [4.634]     [1.062]  [1.016]   [1.051]   [1.174]  [4.101]
  NN x Centr. Diff.             -2.051**     -2.07**    -2.346**    -2.887**      -8.981      1.003** .9844**    0.7933 1.369** 3.878***
                                 [.9717]     [.9565]     [.9419]     [1.145]      [7.122]     [.4482]  [.4769]   [.4794]   [.6187]  [1.342]
  NN                              4.504        3.665      -4.832      -12.42       23.9        -1.511  -1.934    0.3513     7.545   -39.63
                                 [6.759]     [6.452]     [9.771]     [15.85]      [74.34]     [4.232]  [3.976]   [7.028]   [11.49]  [74.99]
  Distance                        0.851      -0.0314     -0.3311      -1.089     45.94***     -0.3511 -0.1333    -0.0096   0.4684 -42.78***
                                 [1.082]     [1.118]     [1.157]     [1.262]      [12.56]     [.8391]  [.8814]   [.9572]   [1.091]  [7.616]
  Centrality Difference          -0.418       0.2408     0.2088        1.066      -1.279      -0.6967 -0.9238    -0.9742 -1.474* -39.15**
                                 [1.204]     [1.231]     [1.254]     [1.497]      [8.503]     [.6729]  [.7286]   [.6981]   [.8539]  [18.89]
  Individual Fixed Effects          ×            ×           ×           ×           ×           ×         ×         ×        ×        ×
  Partner Fixed Effects                                                              ×                                                 ×
  Experiment Controls                           ×           ×          ×             ×                     ×         ×        ×        ×
  Indiv. Cov. × NN                                          ×          ×             ×                               ×        ×        ×
  Partner Cov. × NN                                                    ×             ×                                        ×        ×
  EN Mean                        93.17       93.17        93.17      93.17         93.17       40.13    40.13     40.13     40.13    40.13
  EN Std. Dev.                    36.08      36.08        36.08       36.08        36.08       31.83    31.83     31.83     31.83    31.83
  N                               4231        4167        3915        3648         3648         8478     8350      7824     7312     7312
  R2                             0.4371      0.4492      0.4486      0.4503       0.5934       0.3451  0.3534    0.3514    0.3583   0.4658
    Note: Sample is data for EN and NN only. “Centrality Difference” is the player’s eigenvector centrality minus the partner’s eigenvector
    centrality. Regressions at the individual-game-round level. “Experiment Controls” include surveyor and team effects, and controls for order
    and round of play. “Indiv. Cov.” and “Partner Cov.” include gender, marriage status, age, education and high caste indicator. Robust
    standard errors, clustered at the village by game level, in brackets. * p<.1, ** p<.05, *** p<.01.
                       SOCIAL NETWORKS AS CONTRACT ENFORCEMENT                                                                                  45


     Table B.2. Robustness of effects of savings by distance and relative
     eigenvector centrality
                                 (1)        (2)       (3)           (4)      (5)           (6)         (7)     (8)     (9)     (10)
                                                  Transfers                                            Consumption Deviation
NS × Distance                  0.2725     0.5693   0.2289         -2.038 5.007** 0.0303             -0.1865 0.4372 1.589 -5.806***
                               [1.34]     [1.294]  [1.503]       [1.712] [2.462]  [.9544]           [.8845] [1.017] [1.159]  [1.106]
NS × Centr. Diff.             -1.584*    -1.571** -1.368         -0.9313 -2.342   0.4107             0.4144 0.5205 -0.5324 -0.8015
                              [.8177]     [.7734]  [.8358]       [.9203] [1.557]  [.5487]           [.5275] [.5899] [.562]   [.9329]
NS                             -2.583      -3.884   9.297        34.25** -69.36** -4.282             -3.262 -10.31 -21.01* 40.36**
                              [5.014]     [4.723]  [9.806]       [15.82] [30.26]  [3.815]           [3.534] [6.364] [11.55]  [20.07]
Distance                      -0.3386     -0.7324 -0.678          0.7851 -6.36     1.103              1.307 0.8857 0.9388 12.12***
                               [1.38]     [1.178]  [1.331]       [1.495] [5.585]  [.8871]           [.8503] [.9792] [1.083]  [3.301]
Centrality Difference          0.1373      -0.105 -0.4748        -0.2428 -48***   0.4422            0.5996 0.4901 0.4222 15.99***
                              [1.086]      [1.06]   [1.11]        [1.29] [8.029]  [.7002]           [.6738] [.7368] [.7761]  [4.228]
Individual Fixed Effects         ×           ×         ×            ×    ×           ×                  ×       ×       ×       ×
Partner Fixed Effects                                                    ×                                                      ×
Experiment Controls                          ×           ×          ×    ×                              ×       ×       ×       ×
Indiv. Cov. × NN                                         ×          ×    ×                                      ×       ×       ×
Partner Cov. × NN                                                   ×    ×                                              ×       ×
NN Mean                         84.3        84.3       84.3        84.3  84.3      48.43             48.43   48.43   48.43    48.43
NN Std. Dev.                   40.77       40.77      40.77        40.77 40.77      35.8              35.8    35.8    35.8     35.8
N                               4218       4190        3923        3628  3628       8436              8380    7805    7256    7256
R2                             0.4398     0.4605      0.4542      0.4686 0.6041   0.3499             0.3585 0.3513 0.3591    0.4619
  Note: Sample is data for NN and NS only. “Centrality Difference” is the player’s eigenvector centrality minus the partner’s eigenvector
  centrality. Regressions at the individual-game-round level. “Experiment Controls” include surveyor and team effects, and controls for order
  and round of play. “Indiv. Cov.” and “Partner Cov.” include gender, marriage status, age, education and high caste indicator. Robust
  standard errors, clustered at the village by game level, in brackets. * p<.1, ** p<.05, *** p<.01.
