                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                        GUNS AND VOTES

                                          Laurent Bouton
                                           Paola Conconi
                                           Francisco Pino
                                          Maurizio Zanardi

                                        Working Paper 20253
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20253


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2014




We are grateful to Micael Castanheira, Ernesto dal Bo, Mirko Draca, Allan Drazen, Matthew Gentzkow,
Steve Levitt, John List, Dilip Mookherjee, Jim Snyder, and Noam Yuchtman for their helpful comments,
as well as participants at the 2013 Political Economy NBER Summer Institute, the Faculty Discussion
Group on Political Economy at Harvard University, and seminar participants at the University of Chicago,
Berkeley University, Chicago GSB, University of Maryland, Georgetown University, ECARES, HEC
Montréal, CEU Budapest, and Max Planck Institute Bonn for their valuable suggestions. We are also
indebted to Jorge Sanchez Bravo and Yasemin Satir for excellent research assistance. Funding from
the FNRS is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Laurent Bouton, Paola Conconi, Francisco Pino, and Maurizio Zanardi. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Guns and Votes
Laurent Bouton, Paola Conconi, Francisco Pino, and Maurizio Zanardi
NBER Working Paper No. 20253
June 2014
JEL No. D72,I18

                                               ABSTRACT

Why are U.S. congressmen reluctant to support gun control regulations, despite the fact that most Americans
are in favor of them? We argue that re-election motives can lead politicians to take a pro-gun stance
against the interests of an apathetic majority of the electorate, but in line with the interests of an intense
minority. We develop a model of gun control choices in which incumbent politicians are both office
and policy motivated, and voters differ in the direction and intensity of their preferences. We derive
conditions under which politicians support gun control early in their terms, but oppose them when
they approach re-election. We test the predictions of the model by analyzing votes on gun-related legislation
in the U.S. Senate, in which one third of the members are up for re-election every two years. We find
that senators are more likely to vote pro gun when they are close to facing re-election, a result which
holds comparing both across and within legislators. Only Democratic senators "flip flop'' on gun control,
and only if the group of pro-gun voters in their constituency is of intermediate size.


Laurent Bouton                                        Francisco Pino
Georgetown University                                 ECARES, Université Libre de Bruxelles
Department of Economics                               fpino@ulb.ac.be
37th & O Streets, NW
Washington,DC 20057                                   Maurizio Zanardi
and NBER                                              Lancaster University
boutonllj@gmail.com                                   Management School
                                                      m.zanardi@lancaster.ac.uk
Paola Conconi
ECARES, Université Libre de Bruxelles
and CEPR
pconconi@ulb.ac.be
1       Introduction
For decades there has been a heated debate about gun control in the United States.
On the one hand, gun control supporters argue that stricter regulations are needed to
reduce violence. On the other hand, gun rights advocates argue that gun controls violate
Second Amendment rights and are unlikely to be effective at reducing violent crimes.1
    Opinion polls reveal that most Americans support stricter gun regulations. While
most citizens oppose an all-out ban on guns, they clearly favor a series of less extreme
gun-control measures. The extent of support varies across measures: in an ABC News-
Washington Post poll carried out in January 2013, 88% of respondents favored back-
ground checks on firearms purchased at gun shows, 76% supported checks on buyers of
ammunition, 71% backed a new federal database to track gun sales, and 58% favored
a ban on high-capacity magazines. Support for gun regulations also varies over time:
according to Gallup polls between 1999 and 2012, support for background checks at gun
shows increased from 83% to 92%. Admittedly, poll results depend crucially on the way
in which the question is framed. When they are asked about specific gun regulations,
most respondents—in the country as a whole as well as in individual states—are in favor
of them. When instead asked to choose between gun controls and gun rights, respon-
dents tend to be equally split.2 Overall, however, a vast majority of the electorate has
long been in favor of a range of stricter gun regulations.
    Why are then U.S. congressmen often reluctant to support even mild gun control
measures, against the interests of a majority of their electorate? For example, a poll
carried out between April 11 and 14, 2013 showed that 86% of respondents supported
a law requiring background checks on people buying guns at gun shows or online (ABC
News-Washington Post). Yet, less than a week later many senators voted against an
amendment to require background checks for commercial gun sales. This dichotomy was
    1
       During the past 30 years, there have been at least 70 mass shootings, in which four or more people
were killed by a gunman not involved in a conventional crime. More than 75% of the guns possessed
by the shooters were obtained legally and included dozens of assault weapons and semiautomatic hand-
guns (“Broken hearted,” The Economist, December 15, 2012). Gun rights advocates argue that gun
regulations may actually increase violence, if criminals are deterred when potential victims are more
likely to possess a firearm.
     2
       A survey carried out in January 2013 by the Pew Research Center shows that 85% of Americans
supported background checks for private and gun show sales; in all but two states (Delaware and North
Dakota), a majority of respondents were in favor of background checks; in 42 states, support was at
least 70%. The poll also shows that 80% of Americans supported laws to prevent people with mental
illness from purchasing guns; in all but one state (Delaware), a majority of respondents were in favor
of these laws; in 40 states, support was at least 70%. The same Pew Survey asked the question “What
do you think is more important – to protect the right of Americans to own guns, or to control gun
ownership?”; 51% of respondents said that it is more important to control gun ownership, 45% said it
is more important to protect gun rights, and 5% were unsure or did not reply.


                                                   1
pointed out by President Obama after the vote: “The American people are trying to
figure out: How can something have 90% support and yet not happen?”
    In this paper, we show that electoral incentives can help to explain this “gun control
paradox” (Schuman and Presser, 1978). We argue that understanding politicians’ stance
on gun control requires taking into account not only the direction of voters’ preferences,
but also their intensity. As stressed by Goss (2006, p. 6), “American gun owners are
intense, well organized, and willing to vote for or against candidates purely on the basis
of their position on gun control.” They represent a “highly motivated, intense minority,”
who prevails over a “larger, relatively apathetic majority.”3 This can lead politicians to
support the interests of a minority of pro-gun voters.4
    To formalize this idea and guide our empirical analysis, we describe a simple model
of gun control choices, in which incumbent politicians are both office and policy moti-
vated. There are two groups of voters in the electorate: anti-gun voters, who represent a
majority of the electorate and care less about gun control than about other policy issues;
and pro-gun voters, who are a minority of the electorate and care more intensely about
gun control policies.5 Minority voters may also be better informed about politicians’
choices on gun control.
    We consider first a one-period model and show that re-election incentives might
induce politicians to support the interests of the pro-gun minority, against both the
interests of the majority of the electorate and their own policy preferences. We then
extend the model to a setting in which politicians serve two-period terms, and their
choices in the second period—when they are closer to facing re-election—have a larger
impact on voters’ decisions. We examine the impact of election proximity on gun control
decisions. We show that politicians might support gun regulations in the first period, but
oppose them in the second period. Only anti-gun politicians, who face a tradeoff between

   3
      In a recent national survey conducted by the Pew Research Center in January 2013 among 1,502
adults, most respondents ranked gun control relatively low on their priority list (18th out of 21 policy
goals tested). Similarly, in the latest survey from Gallup, also conducted in January 2013, just 4% of
respondents listed guns when asked for the most important issue facing the country.
    4
      Similar arguments are often raised by the media: “Why aren’t the polling numbers on gun control
swaying more members of Congress? Many of the poll numbers don’t capture the nuances of public
opinion. For example, there is a significant difference in the level of passion of voters on the two sides
of the issue. While members of the National Rifle Association or conservative gun owners home in on
this issue, gun-control proponents may not register that sort of excitement” (“How Democrats got gun
control polling wrong,” National Journal, April 18, 2013).
    5
      Goss (2006) argues that gun control is a “missing movement” in America. Even though there are
some organized gun-control groups, such as the Brady Campaign to Prevent Gun Violence or the Coali-
tion to Stop Gun Violence, their membership pales in comparison to gun-rights groups. Membership
figures are difficult to obtain, but Goss estimates that total membership in gun control organizations
was 268,000 in 2005. By contrast, the NRA had approximately 4 million members in 2004.


                                                    2
their policy preferences and re-election motives, should “flip flop” on gun control—and
only if the group of pro-gun voters in their constituency is of intermediate size. Election
proximity should have no impact on politicians who are not concerned about re-election
and on pro-gun politicians, whose policy preferences are aligned with re-election motives.
    To assess the validity of these predictions, we exploit the staggered structure of the
U.S. Senate, in which senators serve six-year terms and one third of them is up for re-
election every two years. This provides a quasi-experimental setting to verify whether
election proximity affects the voting behavior of incumbent politicians on gun-related
legislation. For any given vote, it is possible to compare the behavior of senators who
belong to three different “generations,” i.e. who face elections at different times. We can
also study whether election proximity affects the stance of individual senators, exploiting
the fact that senators cast multiple votes on gun control during their terms in office.
    To select the votes in our sample, we rely on Gun Owners of America (GOA), a
non-profit lobbying organization formed in 1975 to preserve and defend the Second
Amendment rights of gun owners. Since 1994, GOA has been keeping track of key gun
votes in Congress, indicating whether or not they support them.6 We study the voting
behavior of U.S. senators on these votes for nine consecutive congresses. Our main
sample covers the period 1995-2010, but in robustness checks we include votes from
1993.
    First, we examine the impact of election proximity on the voting behavior of senators
at large. We find that the last generation is significantly more likely to vote pro gun
than the previous two. The effect is sizable: senators who are in the last two years of
their mandates are between 3.4 and 9.6 percentage points more likely to vote in favor
of pro-gun policies than senators in the first four years, depending on the specification.
These changes imply that the predicted probability of voting pro gun increases by be-
tween 5.5 and 17.6 percent when senators approach re-election. The pro-gun effect of
election proximity continues to hold when, rather than exploiting variation in the voting
behavior of different senators, we compare the behavior of the same senator over time:
flip flopping by individual senators is both common and recurrent.7 Inter-generational
differences in senators’ votes on gun control are also robust to using different economet-
ric methodologies and samples of votes, and including a wealth of controls to account for
   6
      The National Rifle Association (NRA), the most well-known pro-gun lobby, publishes information
on gun ratings of politicians, but does not keep track of key gun votes in Congress.
    7
      Senators often change their stance on gun control more than once. For example, Senator Tom
Daschle (Democrat from South Dakota) voted anti-gun in 1993 on 2 votes and in 1995 on 1 vote, when
he belonged to the first and second generation, respectively. He then voted pro-gun on 2 out of 4 votes
in 1998, when he belonged to the third generation. Following re-election, he voted again anti-gun in
1999 on 4 votes, when he belonged to the first generation.


                                                  3
characteristics of legislators (e.g. party affiliation, gender, age, contributions received
from gun-rights and gun-control lobbies), states (e.g. subscriptions to gun magazines,
violent crime rate), and votes (e.g. margin of passage or rejection) that might affect
senators’ voting behavior.
    To verify whether inter-generational differences in senators’ voting behavior on gun
control are driven by electoral incentives, we focus on legislators who have announced
their retirement. According to our model, election proximity should have no impact on
the voting behavior of legislators who are not concerned about losing office, and should
then always vote according to their policy preferences. In line with this prediction,
we find that inter-generational differences disappear for senators who are not seeking
re-election.
    We next explore party differences and show that election proximity has no effect on
the voting behavior of Republican senators. By contrast, the probability that Democratic
senators vote pro gun increases by between 16.6 and 18.9 percent in the last two years
of their mandate.8 Yet, the effect of election proximity for Democratic senators is non-
monotonic: it is only present when the group of pro-gun voters is of intermediate size.
These results are consistent with the predictions of our theoretical model. Republican
senators should take a pro-gun stance throughout their mandate, since their policy
preferences (or those of their party) are aligned with their re-election motives. By
contrast, Democratic senators might flip flop on gun control, since they face a tradeoff
between voting in line with their gun-control preferences and their re-election prospects.
When the pro-gun group in their constituency is neither too small nor too large, they
should vote in favor of gun regulations at the beginning of their terms, but oppose them
at the end.
    Our analysis suggests that electoral incentives can lead politicians to support the
interests of an intense minority of voters, on policy issues that the majority cares less
intensely about. The lack of congruence between the policies chosen by incumbent
legislators and the preferences of the median voter can in principle also be explained by
the financial pressure of deep-pocketed lobby groups. Our empirical results show that
senators who receive larger amounts of campaign contributions from gun-rights lobbies
are indeed more likely to take a pro-gun stance. However, contributions by lobby groups
do not account for the pro-gun effect of election proximity on senators’ voting behavior

   8
     This result confirms anecdotal evidence that Democratic senators are often afraid of supporting gun
control, particularly if they seek re-election in pro-gun states. For example, pointing to Heidi Heitkam—
a Democratic senator from North Dakota—Larry Sabato, director of the University of Virginia’s Center
for Politics, said: “You think she’s going to vote for gun control and have a prayer for re-election?”
(“Gun control efforts are expected to be revived in Congress,” Times Union, December 15, 2012).


                                                   4
on gun control.
    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 briefly reviews the
related literature. Section 3 presents the theoretical model. Section 4 describes the
dataset and variables used in our empirical analysis. Section 5 discusses our empirical
strategy, while Section 6 presents the results. Section 7 concludes.


2       Related literature
Our paper is related to several strands of the literature.
    The idea that electoral incentives may affect politicians’ choices on secondary policy
issues has already been emphasized by List and Sturm (2006). They develop a theoretical
model in which politicians use secondary policies to attract single-issue voters, and test
their predictions by exploiting gubernatorial term limits across U.S. states. They argue
that term-limited governors implement policies closer to their ideal points, while those
who can be re-elected manipulate their policies in order to retain office.
    Our paper differs from List and Sturm (2006) in three ways. First, in their infinite
horizon model voters are uncertain about the preferences of politicians on the secondary
policy issue, so incumbents engage in reputation building. In our finite horizon model,
there is no uncertainty about the preferences of politicians and thus no scope for repu-
tation building. In light of our empirical findings, this difference appears to be far from
innocuous. The theoretical model by List and Sturm (2006) can explain why politi-
cians may override their private preferences on gun control to retain office, i.e. why
Democratic senators seeking re-election in a state with a large pro-gun group may op-
pose gun regulations. However, it cannot provide an explanation for our main empirical
finding: the fact that politicians flip flop on gun control during their terms in office.9
Second, List and Sturm examine the impact of electoral incentives on environmental
policy choices, while we focus on gun-control policies. Finally, they verify the effect of
re-election incentives on secondary policy issues by exploiting gubernatorial term limits
across U.S. states. Our empirical strategy exploits instead the staggered structure of
the U.S. Senate.10

    9
      In a reputation building model, voting anti-gun early would reveal the anti-gun preferences of the
incumbent to the voters as much as a full anti-gun platform; incumbents should thus adopt a full anti-
gun or a full pro-gun platform during their terms. Using the model by List and Sturm (2006), it would
thus be hard to explain why individual senators change their voting behavior on gun control during
their terms in office. It would also be hard to rationalize why their flip flopping behavior is recurrent.
   10
      Our empirical strategy builds on a vast literature that examines the impact of election proximity
on legislative behavior (e.g. Amacher and Boyes, 1978; Thomas, 1985; Glazer and Robbins, 1985;
Levitt, 1996; Bernhard and Sala, 2006). Rather than focusing on senators’ choices on specific policy


                                                    5
     Our analysis is also related to a large body of work that studies political obstacles
to reforms. One of the seminal contributions in this area is the paper by Fernandez and
Rodrik (1991), which shows that ex-ante uncertainty about the gains and losses can lead
a rational electorate to oppose a reform ex ante, even if the reform would be supported by
a majority ex post. Several other papers have examined the political viability of reforms
in the presence of distributional effects and uncertainty (e.g. Alesina and Drazen, 1991;
Dewatripont and Roland, 1995). Our paper shows that, in the presence of an intense
minority, re-election motives can deter politicians from implementing reforms that are
supported by a majority of their electorate.
     Our empirical findings are reminiscent of the predictions of theoretical models of
political business cycles. These emphasize the importance of electoral calendars when
politicians are office motivated: close to elections, incumbent politicians manipulate
fiscal and monetary policies to signal their competence (Rogoff and Sibert, 1988; Rogoff,
1990). Our paper shows that proximity to election can lead office-motivated politicians
to support the interests of vocal minorities on secondary policy issues.
     Our paper also contributes to the literature examining the determinants of the voting
behavior of U.S. congressmen. The pioneering contribution by Peltzman (1985) studies
senators’ voting patterns on federal tax and spending. Recent contributions include
Washington (2008), who investigates the effect of parenting daughters on the likelihood
that House members will vote for reproductive rights, and Mian et al. (2010), who
examine legislators’ votes on two bills introduced in the aftermath of the recent financial
crisis. Closest to our analysis is the paper by Conconi et al. (2014a), which exploits
inter-cameral differences in term length and the staggered structure of the Senate to show
that electoral incentives deter legislators from supporting trade liberalization reforms.
     Finally, the paper contributes to the empirical literature on gun control. Various
papers focus on the effectiveness of gun control policies on crime, often reaching con-
flicting conclusions. In two influential studies, Lott and Mustard (1997) and Lott (1998)
conclude that Carrying Concealed Weapons (CCW) laws have reduced violent crime.
This finding has been disputed by Duggan (2001), among others.11 A recent paper by


issues, these papers analyze how election proximity affects senators’ ideological positions, captured
by summary indexes of their voting record on a broad set of issues (e.g. ADA scores, D-Nominate
and W-Nominate scores). Other studies compare senators’ voting scores to various measures of their
constituencies’ preferences and examine how election proximity affects the gap between the two.
   11
      The argument of Lott and Mustard (1997) and Lott (1998) is that CCW laws deterred crime by
increasing the likelihood that potential victims would be carrying a firearm. Using information on the
geographic circulation of firearms magazines as a proxy for gun ownership, Duggan (2001) finds no
evidence that CCW laws led to increases in the rate of gun ownership or in the frequency with which
gun owners carried their guns.


                                                  6
Duggan et al. (2011) examines the localized effect of gun shows, which allow vendors to
sell firearms without background checks in some U.S. states, showing that these events
do not increase homicides (within three weeks, in or near the zip code where shows
take place). Another strand of the literature examines gun trafficking within the United
States (e.g. Webster et al., 2009; Knight, 2013) or internationally (DellaVigna and La
Ferrara, 2010; Dube et al., 2013). Few studies have examined U.S. legislators’ voting
behavior on gun control, focusing on specific bills and on the role of lobbies’ contribu-
tions and constituencies’ characteristics (e.g. Langbein and Lotwis, 1990; Kahane, 1999;
Lipford, 2000). This is the first paper to consider a large set of gun-related votes and
study the role of electoral incentives.


3       Theory
In this section, we describe a simple theoretical model to guide our empirical analy-
sis. First, we introduce a one-period version of the model, to formalize the idea that
re-election motives can lead politicians to support the interests of an intense pro-gun mi-
nority, against the interest of an apathetic majority who favors gun regulations. Second,
we extend the model to two periods, to derive predictions about the impact of election
proximity on gun control choices.


3.1     One-period model
3.1.1    Setup

We describe a simple model of gun control choices, in which politicians are both office
and policy motivated and voters differ in the direction and intensity of their preferences.
Our analysis builds on standard probabilistic voting models (e.g. Enelow and Hinich,
1982; Lindbeck and Weibull, 1987; Dixit and Londregan, 1995; Grossman and Helpman,
1996). To keep the model as simple as possible, we adopt a formulation similar to
Persson and Tabellini (2001) and Stromberg (2004).
    As discussed in the introduction, opinion polls reveal that a majority of U.S. citizens
supports a range of gun regulations. However, to most voters, gun control is an issue
of secondary importance. Only an intense minority of pro-gun voters is willing to vote
for or against candidates purely on the basis of their position on gun control. Our
theoretical model captures these facts in a stylized way.
    We consider an incumbent who has to vote “yea” (1) or “nay” (0) on two policy
issues: a primary policy issue (p), which a majority of the electorate cares relatively

                                            7
more about; and a secondary policy issue (s), which a minority cares more intensely
about.12 The choice s ∈ {0, 1} can be interpreted as a vote in favor (s = 0) or against
(s = 1) stricter gun regulations (e.g. supporting or opposing background checks on sales
at gun shows).
    We assume a structure of preferences that allows us to focus our attention on politi-
cians’ voting behavior on the secondary issue, which captures gun control. In particular,
there are two groups of voters, j ∈ {M, m}, in a population of size 1. Group j consti-
tutes a fraction nj of the electorate. The two groups differ in size, with M representing
the majority group: nM > nm . We assume that the utility of a group-j voter is:

       Wj (p, s) = −|pj − p| − αj |sj − s|,                                                                     (1)

where (pj , sj ) is the bliss point of any j voter. We also assume that the two groups
differ in the relative intensity of their preferences: αM < 1 < αm . Thus the majority
cares relatively more about the primary issue, while the opposite is true for the minority.
Finally, voters in the two groups differ with respect to the direction of their preferences.
In particular, we assume that their bliss points coincide with respect to the primary
issue (pM = pm ), but diverge on the secondary issue: sM = 0, sm = 1. This assumption
allows us to drop the primary issue from the rest of the analysis, and focus our attention
on politicians’ voting behavior on the secondary issue.13 We refer to voters in group M
as the anti-gun voters and to voters in group m as the pro-gun voters.
    Besides policy, voters care about other characteristics of the incumbent politician.
The total utility of voter i in group j under the incumbent is

       Wj (s) − σij − µ,

with σij ∼ U [− 2φ1 j , 2φ1 j ] and µ ∼ U [− 2γ
                                              1    1
                                                , 2γ ]. The parameter −σij represents an individ-
ual’s ideological preference in favor of the incumbent, while −µ represents her general
popularity.14 As usual in probabilistic voting models, there is an implicit assumption
   12
      We do not analyze the behavior of a challenger competing against an incumbent when the latter is
up for re-election. However, in our framework, it is easy to formally introduce a challenger and analyze
her behavior. All our results continue to hold in this alternative specification.
   13
      Our results continue to hold if the two groups of voters have different preferences on the primary
policy issue, i.e. if their bliss points are (pM , sM ) = (0, 0) and (pm , sm ) = (1, 1), or alternatively
(pM , sM ) = (1, 0) and (pm , sm ) = (0, 1).
   14
      We could allow for a group-specific bias against or in favor of the incumbent by introducing a non-
stochastic shifter, say, ψj in the distribution of σij , i.e. σij ∼ U [− 2φ1 j −ψj , 2φ1 j −ψj ]. This could capture
differences in the average popularity of the incumbent with different groups of voters, e.g. Republican
candidates are more popular among pro-gun voters than anti-gun voters. Introducing such bias would
not affect our results, since the incentives of the incumbent would not change at the margin.


                                                         8
that, for any incumbent, there are always voters that can be swung at the margin, i.e.
the support of σij is large enough. However, one could imagine situations in which, due
to strong ideological divergences, some pro-gun voters may never vote for an incumbent,
even if she adopts a pro-gun stance. Our results continue to hold (at least qualitatively)
if we introduce such “partisan voters” in the model.
    At the end of the incumbent’s mandate, voters decide whether to re-elect her or
vote for a challenger. However, not all voters know what the incumbent did during her
mandate. Let the variable ξij = 1 if voter i in group j knows what the incumbent has
done, and ξij = 0 otherwise. Following Stromberg (2004), the decision of re-electing the
incumbent is based on a simple rule: each voter i in group j casts the ballot in favor of
the incumbent if her utility under the incumbent has met some minimum standard ūj :15



       ξij Wj (s) − σij − µ ≥ ūj .                                                                (2)

For each individual i in group j, the incumbent assigns a probability χj that the voter
knows what she has done during her mandate.16
    We focus on scenarios in which the “intense minority” of pro-gun voters prevails over
the “apathetic majority”of anti-gun voters. To this purpose, we impose the following
restriction: nm αm χm φm > nM αM χM φM . A sufficient condition for this assumption to
hold is that the minority more than compensates for its smaller size by caring relatively
more about gun control. Yet, minority voters may have other advantages that reduce the
required difference in preference intensities: they may be more informed about politi-
cians’ decisions on gun control (χm > χM ) or more homogeneous in their ideological
preferences (φm > φM ).
    For any given µ, we can compute πj , the fraction of each group voting for the in-
cumbent. Using these fractions, we can compute the probability of re-election of the
incumbent (re-election requires a majority of the votes):
                                    !
                      X           1     1 γX
      Π (s) = Pr         n j πj ≥     = +          nj φj (χj Wj (s) − ūj ) ,         (3)
                  µ
                       j
                                  2     2    φ   j

             P
where φ =      j   nj φj .
  15
      Our results do not rely on this specific retrospective voting rule. Indeed, as mentioned above,
we can easily rewrite our model as a forward-looking voting model in which two candidates credibly
commit to a policy platform. In such a specification, ūj would simply be replaced by voter i’s utility
when the challenger wins the election.
   16
      See Appendix A.3 for an extension of the model in which χm is a function of the information
provided by a lobby representing the interests of pro-gun voters.


                                                  9
    The politician cares about being re-elected, but also about the ballot she casts. Her
utility is

        U (s) = Π (s) + θω (s) ,                                                                     (4)

where ω (s) captures the incumbent’s policy preferences, and θ(≥ 0) is the relative
importance of those policy preferences for the incumbent.17 This assumes that the
incumbent cares about how she votes on any policy issue (e.g. Levitt, 1996; Ansolabehere
et al., 2001; Washington, 2008). Alternatively, ω (s) can be interpreted as the preferences
of the incumbent’s party. In this case, θ is the relative importance of the party line (e.g.
Levitt, 1996; Snyder and Groseclose, 2000; Ansolabehere et al., 2001).
    We consider two different types of incumbents. An anti-gun incumbent has policy
preferences similar to voters in the anti-gun group: ω (0) > ω (1). A pro-gun incumbent
has policy preferences similar to voters in the pro-gun group: ω (1) > ω (0). If we
interpret ω (s) as the importance of the party line, given the historical positions of U.S.
parties on gun control, anti-gun and pro-gun incumbents can be thought of Democratic
and Republican politicians, respectively.

3.1.2     Equilibrium analysis

In this subsection, we show that anti-gun incumbents might choose to oppose gun re-
strictions to increase their probability of re-election. These politicians face a tradeoff
between doing what they think is right (or what their party leaders want), and maxi-
mizing their chances of retaining office. As a result, they might support the interests of
the pro-gun minority, against the interests of most voters.

Proposition 1 For an anti-gun incumbent, the strategy s∗ = 1 is an equilibrium if and
only if
        γ
          (nm φm χm αm − nM φM χM αM ) ≥ θ (ω (0) − ω (1)) .
        φ

For θ = 0, this is always true.
Proof: see Appendix A.1.
   To understand the intuition of this result, it is easier to start with the case in which
the incumbent cares only about her probability of re-election, i.e. θ = 0. When choosing
  17
     By varying the size of θ we can capture different political situations. For instance, θ = 0 captures
the case of an incumbent who does not care about the ballot she casts, as long as she gets re-elected.
θ → ∞ captures the case of a retiring incumbent, who does not care about re-election, but only about
voting according to her policy preferences.


                                                   10
between “yea” and “nay”, the incumbent has to weigh the effect of her choice on her prob-
ability of being re-elected. Voting “yea” instead of “nay” would convince some pro-gun
voters to vote for her, and some anti-gun voters not to vote for her. In expectation, the
net gain in re-election prospects depends on the sign of nm φm χm αm − nM φM χM αM . No-
tice that the effect is always positive since, by assumption, nm φm χm αm > nM φM χM αM .
Therefore, the incumbent votes in line with the interests of the minority, opposing gun
regulations. When θ > 0, the difference nm φm χm αm − nM φM χM αM has to be large
enough to compensate the policy preference of the anti-gun incumbent in favor of voting
“nay”, i.e. θ (ω (0) − ω (1)) > 0.
    In Appendix A.2, we analyze the social optimality (from a utilitarian welfare stand-
point) of incumbents’ choices. The bottom line is that, depending on the values of the
parameters, supporting the interests of the pro-gun minority may or may not be socially
efficient. We also identify the two reasons underlying socially inefficient choices by the
incumbent in our model: i) differences in how the two groups are informed about the
incumbent’s actions, and ii) differences in the homogeneity of the two groups.


3.2      Two-period model
In this subsection, we extend the model to a setting with two-period terms, where politi-
cians’ choices in the second period have a greater impact on their re-election chances.
This allows us to derive predictions about the impact of election proximity on the voting
behavior of incumbent politicians.

3.2.1     Setup

The model is very similar to the one introduced in the previous section. Hence, we only
highlight the differences.
    There are now two periods. In each period, the incumbent has to cast a vote on gun
control. We denote with s1 and s2 her votes on gun regulations in the two periods. The
utility of a voter belonging to group-j is a weighted sum of her utility in both periods:

        Wj (s1 , s2 ) = −αj (δ|sj − s1 | + |sj − s2 |).                               (5)

We assume that δ ∈ (0, 1), implying that voters put more weight on the incumbent’s
policy choice that are made closer to the election. Several remarks are in order about
this assumption. First, it is in line with theoretical studies emphasizing that voters
suffer from a recency bias, following the so-called “what have you done for me lately?”


                                                   11
principle (e.g. Fiorina, 1981; Weingast et al., 1981; Ferejohn, 1986; Shepsle et al, 2009).
Second, empirical and experimental evidence provides strong support for the existence
of such bias (e.g. Lewis-Beck and Stegmaier, 2000; Huber et al., 2012; Healy and Lenz,
2014). Third, in this version of the model, the recency bias directly enters voters’ utility
function, i.e. voters care less about earlier decisions of politicians. This is for the sake
of simplicity. Indeed, we obtain similar results in a model in which voters care equally
about the two periods (δ = 1), but know more about the choices of the incumbent in
the second period. The fact that voters may be more informed about second-period
policy choices could be due to their limited memory or to increased media coverage of
policy choices close to elections. Fourth, we assume the same δ for all voters. This
is again for the sake of simplicity. Indeed, all we need for our results to arise is that
the discount factor of minority voters is less than 1. Finally, one may argue that a
lobby, representing the interests of its members, may compensate for any recency bias
by providing them with information about what the incumbent did during her mandate
before they go to the polls. In Appendix A.3, we extend the model to allow for such
informational lobbying. We show that the lobby’s optimal information effort is affected
by voters’ recency bias (or limited memory/information)—even though the lobby does
not suffer from such a bias—and that our results might be amplified by the existence of
such lobbying.18
    Finally, we need to adapt the assumption about the policy preferences of the two
types of incumbents ω (s1 , s2 ). As long as incumbents do not suffer from a recency bias,
there is no reason for them to differentiate between (1, 0) and (0, 1). Therefore, we have



        ω (0, 0) > ω (0, 1) = ω (1, 0) > ω (1, 1)                                                    (6)

for an anti-gun incumbent, and

        ω (1, 1) > ω (1, 0) = ω (0, 1) > ω (0, 0)                                                    (7)

for a pro-gun incumbent.

3.2.2     Equilibrium analysis

We analyze the voting behavior of both anti-gun and pro-gun incumbents when they
vote in the two periods.
  18
    See Sarafadis (2007) for a detailed analysis of the strategic release of information in settings with
agents having memory imperfections.


                                                   12
    First, we can show that an incumbent who cares mostly about her policy preferences
does not flip flop, i.e. she votes in the same way in the two periods. This is because
re-election incentives are swamped by policy preferences. The following result follows
directly from (4), (6), and (7):

Proposition 2 There is always a θ sufficiently large such that (s∗1 , s∗2 ) = (0, 0) is the
unique equilibrium for an anti-gun incumbent, and (s∗1 , s∗2 ) = (1, 1) is the unique equilib-
rium for a pro-gun incumbent.

   When re-election motives matter, they can lead politicians to flip flop on gun control.
In particular, there are situations in which an anti-gun incumbent will vote anti-gun in
the first period, but not in the second one:

Proposition 3 For an anti-gun incumbent, the strategy (s∗1 , s∗2 ) = (0, 1) is an equilib-
rium if and only if
                                               γ
                  θ (ω (0, 1) − ω (1, 1)) ≥      δ (nm φm χm αm − nM φM χM αM )
                                               φ
      γ
        (nm φm χm αm − nM φM χM αM ) ≥ θ (ω (0, 0) − ω (0, 1)) ,
      φ

which is never true if θ = 0. The strategy (s∗1 , s∗2 ) = (1, 0) is never an equilibrium.

Proof: see Appendix A.1.
    Three features of the model are crucial for this result to hold: i) the incumbent has
policy preferences (θ > 0); ii) voters put more weight on the incumbent’s choices close
to the election (δ < 1); and iii) the minority compensates for its smaller size by caring
relatively more about gun control, and possibly being better informed about politicians’
choices on gun control and more homogeneous ideological preferences (nm φm χm αm >
nM φM χM αM ). The intuition is as follows: the anti-gun incumbent would like to vote
“nay” in both periods to satisfy her policy preferences. However, this is costly in terms
of re-election prospects, since it would swing away many pro-gun voters and attract
fewer anti-gun voters. The anti-gun incumbent votes according to her policy preferences
in the first period, when her choice has a smaller impact on her re-election prospects. In
the second period, she votes according to the interests of the vocal minority, to maximize
her chances of retaining office.
    We can also show that a pro-gun incumbent will never vote differently on gun regu-
lations in the two periods:

Proposition 4 For a pro-gun incumbent, neither (s∗1 , s∗2 ) = (0, 1) nor (s∗1 , s∗2 ) = (1, 0)
are equilibrium strategies.

                                              13
Proof: see Appendix A.1.
    The intuition is straightforward. A pro-gun incumbent would like to vote “yea” in
both periods to satisfy her policy preferences. This is also the best strategy in terms
of her re-election prospects, since it would attract many pro-gun voters and swing away
fewer anti-gun voters (nm φm χm αm > nM φM χM αM ). The pro-gun incumbent can thus
afford to oppose gun regulations in both periods.
    As pointed out in Appendix A.2, an incumbent who is flip flopping cannot be adopt-
ing a socially optimal policy (from a utilitarian welfare standpoint). Importantly, this
neither means that an anti-gun incumbent always behaves inefficiently, nor that a pro-
gun incumbent always behaves efficiently. Indeed, voting in the same way in the two
periods may actually be a worse policy than flip flopping.
    Finally, we can also show that anti-gun incumbents will only flip flop if the group of
pro-gun voters is neither too small nor too large:19

Proposition 5 For δ (ω (0, 0) − ω (0, 1)) < ω (0, 1) − ω (1, 1), there exist nm and nm ,
with nm < nm , such that for an anti-gun incumbent
1. (s∗1 , s∗2 ) = (0, 0) is an equilibrium if and only if nm < nm ;
2. (s∗1 , s∗2 ) = (0, 1) is an equilibrium if and only if nm ∈ (nm , nm );
3. (s∗1 , s∗2 ) = (1, 1) is an equilibrium if and only if nm > nm .

Proof: see Appendix A.1.
The intuition for this result is as follows. When the vocal minority is small enough
(nm < nm ), voting pro-gun, even if only in the second period, does not lead to a large
enough increase in the probability of re-election to compensate the anti-gun incumbent
for the cost of voting against her policy preferences. When instead the group of pro-gun
voters is large enough (nm > nm ), an anti-gun incumbent find it worthwhile to support
its interests in both periods. Therefore, only in the intermediate range nm ∈ (nm , nm )
the incumbent finds it worthy to flip flop on her policy choices.


4        Data
To assess the validity of the model’s predictions, we have assembled a novel dataset
that allows us to link U.S. senators’ voting behavior on gun control to a wealth of
    19
     Proposition 5 shows that three types of equilibria may exist, but that the equilibrium is generically
unique. For δ (ω (0, 0) − ω (0, 1)) > ω (0, 1)−ω (1, 1) , it is easy to prove a similar result: the equilibrium
is generically unique, and it can be of two types (proof available upon request).


                                                      14
characteristics of the legislators and their constituencies. In this section we describe
our data, starting from our dependent variable. Tables B-1 and B-2 in Appendix B.1
provide definitions and descriptive statistics for all the variables used in our regressions.


4.1     Roll-call votes on gun-related legislation
We examine the voting behavior of U.S. Senators on gun-related legislation. To deter-
mine the votes in our sample, we rely on the list of gun votes assembled by Gun Owners
of America (GOA), a lobby whose main goal is to protect and defend the Second Amend-
ment rights of gun owners. Since 1994, GOA has been keeping track of key votes in the
U.S. Congress. Based on legislators’ decisions on these votes, GOA rates politicians on
their gun positions. For the years 1994-1996, we obtain key votes from GOA’s newslet-
ters, which report voting records for senators on key legislation. For subsequent years,
we obtain the list of votes from GOA’s website.
    One of the advantages of using this source is that we can directly identify votes
that are supported by gun-rights groups: GOA lists all the votes it supported, i.e. for
which it wanted congressmen to vote “yea.”20 These include two different types: votes
to strengthen the rights of gun owners, and votes to reject gun-control legislation that
threatens these rights. An example of the first type is the vote cast in the Senate
on July 22, 2009 to pass an amendment introduced by Senator John Thune (R-SD),
allowing individuals to carry concealed firearms across state lines. An example of the
second type is the vote on May 12, 1999 to table an amendment introduced by Senator
Frank Lautenberg (D-NJ) to ban the private sales of firearms at gun shows unless buyers
submitted to background registration checks.21
    In our empirical analysis, we will study the determinants of GOA-supported votes,
which fit the kind of decisions faced by politicians in our theoretical model. The ra-
tionale for this is twofold. First, these votes capture well politicians’ positions on gun
control: senators’ decisions on votes supported by GOA are a strong predictor of their
ratings by gun-rights organizations (see Appendix B.2). Second, these votes concern
gun regulations on which there is a clear party divide: based on the definition of bi-
partisan cosponsorship from Harbridge and Malhotra (2011), none of these votes was
bipartisan.22

  20
      As mentioned earlier, the NRA does not keep track of key gun votes in Congress. In robustness
checks, we include votes from Project Vote Smart, which includes only votes that receive considerable
media attention and are passed or defeated by a close margin (see discussion at the end of Section 6).
   21
      In the U.S. Congress, a request to “table” a pending motion is a procedure to suspend consideration
of the motion. A vote to table gun-control legislation is thus classified as a pro-gun vote by GOA.
   22
      A vote is coded as bipartisan if at least 20% of its cosponsors are from a different party than that


                                                   15
    Table B-4 in Appendix B.2 lists the 19 votes included in our main sample, as well as
the description of each vote provided by GOA. Notice that 4 of these votes do not involve
decisions on gun regulations, but are important for GOA as a lobby group. In some of
our regressions, we will exclude votes that are not directly related to gun control.
    GOA also lists votes that it did not support, i.e. for which it wanted congressmen to
vote “nay.” These votes are not included in our empirical analysis, since they are not
congruent with our theoretical model. Senators’ decisions on these votes have a much
smaller impact on their ratings by gun-rights organizations than votes supported by GOA
(see Appendix B.2). Moreover, many of these votes involve relatively uncontroversial
gun-control measures, often sponsored by legislators from both parties. An example is
the vote in 1999 on an amendment to force gun sellers to include trigger locks with every
handgun sold, which passed by a large margin (78-20) and was introduced by Senator
Herb Kohl (D-WI) and co-sponsored by Orrin Hatch (R-UT) and John Chafee (R-RI).23


4.2     Characteristics of legislators
Our primary interest is to examine the impact of election proximity on the voting records
of U.S. senators. As discussed above, senators serve six-year terms, and one third of them
are up for re-election every two years (together with the entire House of Representatives).
We define those senators facing election within two years as belonging to the third
generation; those who face elections next belong to the second generation, while the
first generation includes senators facing elections in no sooner than four years. The
main regressors of interest for our analysis are thus the indicator variables SenateGit ,
G ∈ {1, 2, 3}, capturing the generation to which senator i belongs in year t.
    We also include information on senators’ party affiliation, which is known to be a
strong predictor of a politician’s support for gun rights, with Republicans being system-
atically more pro gun than Democrats (e.g. Lipford, 2000). To assess the role played
by a senator’s ideological position, we employ the dummy variable Republicanit , which
is equal to one if senator i belongs to the Republican party.24 We also control for the
role of demographic characteristics, by including the variables Femalei and Ageit in our
analysis.

of the original sponsor. Notice that this definition can only be applied to votes on bills or amendments.
   23
      Based on the definition by Harbridge and Malhotra (2011), almost 30% of the votes on bills and
amendments that GOA did not support had bipartisan cosponsorship.
   24
      We allow this variable to be time varying, since three senators in our sample switched from or
to the Republican party: Ben Nighthorse Campbell, Jim Jeffords and Arlen Specter. Four senators
switched from one of the parties to being independent: senators Joe Lieberman and Bernard Sanders
(coded as Democrats), and senators Robert Smith and James Jeffords (coded as Republicans).


                                                   16
    Contributions from interest groups may also affect senators’ voting behavior. To
account for this, we gather data of campaign contributions from gun-rights and gun-
control lobbies from the Center for Responsive Politics. Gun-rights contributionsit and
Gun-control contributionsit record campaign contributions received by senator i in year
t from gun-rights and gun-control lobbies (in thousands US$), respectively.25
    To verify the role of electoral incentives, we construct the dummy variable Retiringit ,
which takes the value of 1 for the mandate in which a senator decides to retire. These
data come from Overby and Bell (2004), augmented using information from the website
rollcall.com.26
    In robustness checks, we include two additional controls for legislators. The variable
Margin of victoryit measures the difference in votes between the winner (senator i) and
the runner-up in the last election.27 Finally, the variable Tenureit measures the number
of congresses a senator has served.


4.3     Characteristics of constituencies
We include a set of variables to control for differences across senators’ constituencies.
    To proxy for the size of the pro-gun minority, we use state-level data of subscriptions
to gun magazines. These data come from audit reports of circulation from the Alliance
for Audited Media. American Rifleman is published by the NRA and is the gun mag-
azine with the largest circulation.28 The variable Gun magazine subscriptionsjt is the
number of subscriptions to American Rifleman per 1,000 inhabitants in state j and year
t. Figure 1 shows that there is significant variation in per capita subscriptions across
states. Somewhat surprisingly, per capita subscriptions to gun magazines are higher in
some Democratic-leaning states (e.g. Oregon, Washington) than in some Republican-
leaning states (e.g. Texas, Georgia).29 This can partly be explained by the fact that

   25
      The Center for Responsive Politics provides information on the contributions received by individual
politicians for each Congress. In our analysis, we assign to each year of a Congress the total amount of
contributions received in that Congress.
   26
      Following Overby and Bell (2004), we classify as retiring those senators who voluntarily departed
(for personal reasons or to pursue other office), excluding those who were expelled or defeated in either
primary or general elections.
   27
      More precisely, Margin of victoryit = vvii −v
                                                 +vr , where vi and vr denote respectively the votes received
                                                    r


by the incumbent and the runner-up.
   28
      American Rifleman is the default magazine that individuals receive when joining the NRA. In
2010, American Rifleman had 53% of the total circulation of NRA magazines, followed by American
Hunter with 30% and America’s 1st Freedom with 17%. It was also the leading magazine in 49 of the
U.S. states (the exception was Wisconsin, in which American Hunter was the leading one). Our results
are unaffected if we use subscriptions to American Hunter instead of American Rifleman, or if we sum
subscriptions to both magazines to proxy for the size of the pro-gun minority.
   29
      For each of the four Presidential elections that have occurred during our sample period, we have


                                                     17
subscriptions to gun magazines tend to be higher in rural states.30

    Figure 1: Subscriptions to American Rifleman magazine per 1,000 inhabitants

                WA                                           ND
                                         MT
                                                                                       MN
                                                                                                                                                                             ME
                               ID                             SD                                       WI
                                                                                                                       MI                                          VT
                OR                                                                                                                                                      NH
                                              WY                                                                                                         NY
                                                                                            IA                                                                       MA
                                                               NE                                                                                                  CT RI
                                                                                                                                                 PA
                                                                                                            IL               OH                               NJ
                                                                                                                  IN
                          NV        UT
                                                    CO                                                                                                MD DE
                                                                                                                                                      DC
                                                                        KS                       MO                                   WV

                     CA                                                                                                KY                   VA


                                                                             OK                                   TN
                                                                                                                                           NC
                                                                                                 AR
                                    AZ             NM
                                                                                                                                      SC

                                                                                                       MS        AL         GA

                                                                   TX
                                                                                                  LA



                                                                                                                                 FL




                                              Quartiles of subscriptions to American Rifleman:
                                              1.2 - 4.7      4.7 - 5.9      5.9 - 7.0     7.0 - 15.3

 Notes: The figure shows quartiles of the average number of subscriptions to American Rifleman mag-
azine per 1,000 inhabitants for each of the 48 contiguous U.S. states. The corresponding numbers for
Alaska and Hawaii are 16.5 and 3.0, respectively. The average is taken over the period 1993–2010.


    The variable Crime ratejt is the number of violent crimes (murder and non-negligent
manslaughter, forcible rape, robbery, and aggravated assault) per 1 million inhabitants
in state j and year t, from the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI).
    The variable Educationjt indicates the proportion of the population of state j in year
t with a college degree. The sources are the Current Population Survey (CPS) for years
1994–2006 and the American Community Survey (ACS) for years 2007–2010.
    In some specifications we also include the dummy variable Swing statejt , which is
equal to 1 if in state j the margin of victory in the last presidential election was less
than 5%.31


4.4     Characteristics of votes
Snyder (1992) argues that, when interest groups list key votes in Congress, they select
a disproportionate number of close votes, exaggerating the degree of extremism and
computed the share of votes for the Republican candidate in each state. The correlation between this
variable and Gun magazine subscriptionsjt is 0.27.
    30
       Using information from the U.S. Census Bureau, we find that the correlation between the share of
each state’s population living in rural areas and per capita subscriptions to gun magazines is 0.39.
    31
       We can also construct the variable Gun productionjt , using information from the Bureau of Alcohol,
Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives. Unfortunately, this is only available for the period 1998-2010, so
including it in our analysis would dramatically reduce the size of the sample. When we tried including
it, it was never significant and our main results were unaffected.


                                                                                  18
bipolarity. This does not seem to be a concern for our sample of votes, since GOA
includes many votes that passed or were rejected by a wide margin (the margin of
passage or rejection for votes supported by GOA ranges between 2 and 91 votes, with a
median of 24). Nevertheless, in robustness checks, we include the dummy variable Close
votev , which takes the value of 1 if the vote was approved or rejected with a margin
smaller than the median margin of passage or rejection for all votes in our sample.
    In some specifications, we also control for the direction of the vote by including the
dummy variable Acceptv , which is equal to 1 if vote v is to accept pro-gun legislation
(rather than to reject gun-control legislation).


5     Empirical strategy
5.1    Testable hypotheses
We exploit the staggered structure of the U.S. Senate to assess the validity of our model’s
predictions. For the purposes of our empirical analysis, the first testable hypothesis of
our theoretical model can be restated as follows:

Prediction 1 Senators who are closer to re-election should be more likely to vote pro
gun.

Proposition 2 implies that election proximity should have no impact on the voting behav-
ior of senators who are not seeking re-election, who should vote according to their policy
preferences throughout their last term in office. This leads to our second prediction:

Prediction 2 Election proximity should have no impact on the voting behavior of retir-
ing senators.

Given the historical positions of U.S. political parties on gun control, Propositions 3 and
4 support the following prediction:

Prediction 3 Election proximity should only have a pro-gun effect on the voting behav-
ior of Democratic senators.

A final prediction follows from Proposition 5:

Prediction 4 Election proximity should only affect the voting behavior of Democratic
senators if the group of pro-gun voters in their constituency is of intermediate size.



                                            19
5.2     Identification
We follow two complementary strategies to identify the effect of election proximity of
senators’ votes on gun control. First, we exploit variation in the voting behavior of
different senators, depending on which generation they belonged to at the time of the
vote. We estimate the following probabilistic model:32

       P r(V oteijvt = 1) = Φ(β0 + β1 Senate3it + β2 Xit + β3 Wjt
                                  + β4 Zv + νj + ηt + ijvt )                                         (8)

where Φ (·) is the cumulative normal distribution. The dependent variable Voteijvt is
equal to 1 if senator i from state j votes pro gun on vote v in year t. In our main sample,
this occurs when a senator votes “yea” on a GOA-supported vote (either to introduce
pro-gun legislation or to reject gun-control measures).33
    The main variable of interest is Senate3it , the dummy variable for the third gener-
ation of senators, identifying legislators who are closest to facing re-election. For ease
of exposition, we combine the first and second generations of senators into one omitted
category.34 Our theoretical model suggests that there should be inter-generational dif-
ferences in senators’ voting behavior. In particular, if election proximity increases the
probability that a legislator votes pro-gun, as suggested by the first prediction of our
model, the coefficient of the variable Senate3it should be positive and significant.
    The matrix Xit includes additional controls for legislators (e.g. party affiliation,
gender, age), Wjt is a matrix of state-specific characteristics (e.g. crime rate, education),
and Zv includes vote-specific controls (e.g. whether the vote was close).
    In our benchmark specifications, we include two sets of fixed effects: νj are state
dummies, capturing time-invariant characteristics of constituencies that may affect sen-
ators’ voting behavior (e.g. rural); ηt are year dummies, which allow us to account for
year-specific variables (e.g. share of Democratic senators in Congress). In alternative
specifications, we either replace the year dummies with vote dummies or add interac-
tions between state and year dummies. Notice that, when we include such interactions,
we identify the effect of election proximity based on differences in the voting behavior of
senators from the same state in the same year.35 We cluster standard errors at the state
  32
       In Section 6.5 we discuss the results of estimating a linear probability model.
  33
       There are 55 instances in which a senator did not cast a vote, representing 3% of the total number
of votes. Our results are unaltered if we include these observations, coding them as voting against the
bill (i.e. “nay”).
    34
       The results are virtually identical when including Senate2it in the regression: Senate3it remains
positive and significant and Senate1it and Senate2it are not statistically different from each other.
    35
       For simplicity, when discussing the regression results, we will drop all i, j, t and v sub-indexes.


                                                   20
level. Our results are very similar if we cluster standard errors at the vote level instead.
    Our first identification strategy relies on the staggered structure of the Senate. This
guarantees that, whenever a vote is cast in the Senate, a third of its members are close to
facing re-election, i.e. belong to the third generation. However, one might be concerned
that the timing of the votes could be correlated with characteristics of senators who
belong to the third generation. In particular, GOA-supported votes may be more likely
to occur when many pro-gun senators are close to re-election. If this is the case, a
positive correlation between belonging to the third generation and voting pro gun may
be driven by selection effects rather than the impact of election proximity.
    Our second empirical strategy, in which we compare the voting behavior of individual
senators over time, deals with this concern. In this case, if we find evidence of inter-
generational differences in senators’ voting behavior, they cannot be driven by selection
effects. We thus estimate the following specification:

         V oteijvt = λ0 + λ1 Senate3it + λ2 Xit + λ3 Wjt + λ4 Zvt + ρi + ηt + ijvt ,           (9)

in which we include senator fixed effects (ρi ), year fixed effects, and time-varying controls
for legislators and their constituencies. In this estimation, the effect of election proximity
is identified by comparing the voting behavior of the same senator over time, when he or
she belonged to different generations.36 We allow for correlation over votes of the same
legislator by clustering standard errors at the senator level.


6        Empirical results
6.1       Inter-generational differences
Table 1 presents our benchmark regressions, in which we verify the pro-gun effect of
election proximity, comparing the voting behavior of senators who are closest to the
end of their term when casting their vote (for whom the dummy variable Senate3it is
equal to 1) with that of senators who are further away from re-election. The various
specifications differ in terms of regressors, fixed effects included or sample of votes. In
column 1 we report the results of a parsimonious specification in which we only include
our key regressor of interest and year and state effects, while in column 2 we include
additional controls for senators and their constituencies. In column 3 we replace year
fixed effects with vote fixed effects (in our sample there are some years with more than
    36
   To estimate these regressions, we use a linear probability model, since the estimates of a probit
model would suffer from the incidental parameter problem.


                                                21
one vote). In column 4 we include Year×State dummies, identifying the effect of election
proximity only based on differences in the voting behavior of senators representing the
same state. Finally, in columns 5-8 we reproduce the same specifications as in columns
1-4, but restricting the analysis to votes that are directly gun-related (e.g. excluding
votes to reject regulations on lobbying activities).
    Focusing first on our key regressor, we see that the estimated coefficient for Senate3it
is always positive and statistically significant. The corresponding marginal effects—
reported at the bottom of the table—imply that senators in the last two years of their
term are between 3.4 and 9.6 percentage points more likely to vote pro gun, compared
to senators in their first four years. The analogous increase in the predicted probability,
also reported at the bottom of the table, ranges between 5.5 and 17.6 percent. Notice
that these results capture the impact of election proximity on the voting behavior of all
senators, independently of their party affiliation. We will later show that the effect is
much larger when focusing on Democratic senators. Regarding the other regressors, we
find—as expected—that Republican senators are much more likely to vote pro gun. Age
has a negative and significant effect, while the coefficient on gun-rights (respectively gun-
control) contributions is positive (respectively negative), though significant only in some
specifications. State-level variables are never significant because their limited variation
is captured by the state dummies. If we remove these dummies from the specifications in
columns 2-4 and 6-8, the estimated coefficient for gun magazine subscriptions becomes
positive and highly significant. Education, on the other hand, becomes negative and
significant, while crime rate remains statistically insignificant.




                                             22
                       Table 1: The pro-gun effect of election proximity, comparing across senators

      Dep. variable:                                                             Voteijvt
                                                              All                                  Directly gun-related
                                         (1)         (2)             (3)       (4)          (5)      (6)         (7)        (8)
      Senate3it                       0.279***     0.270***     0.320***     0.361**    0.382**    0.334***   0.440***     0.377**
                                       (0.097)      (0.095)      (0.117)      (0.156)   (0.152)     (0.109)     (0.126)    (0.174)
      Republicanit                                2.561***      3.102***     2.508***              2.285***   2.825***    2.114***
                                                    (0.305)      (0.422)      (0.349)               (0.309)     (0.441)    (0.346)
      Malei                                          0.318         0.442       0.349                  0.417      0.530       0.492
                                                    (0.268)      (0.346)      (0.488)               (0.420)     (0.522)    (0.630)
      Ageit                                       -0.029***     -0.038***   -0.039***             -0.026***    -0.033**   -0.031**
                                                    (0.009)      (0.012)      (0.012)               (0.010)     (0.013)    (0.013)
      Gun-control contributionsit                 -0.164***     -0.305***     -0.190*             -0.151***   -0.297***     -0.147
                                                    (0.054)      (0.107)      (0.107)               (0.058)     (0.100)    (0.095)
      Gun-rights contributionsit                    0.022*       0.058**       0.028                  0.022    0.056**       0.021
                                                    (0.012)      (0.023)      (0.029)               (0.017)     (0.026)    (0.028)
23




      Gun magazine subscriptionsjt                   0.083         0.032                              0.184       0.230
                                                    (0.139)      (0.205)                            (0.183)     (0.266)
      Violent crime ratejt                           0.015        0.022*                              0.007       0.005
                                                    (0.011)      (0.013)                            (0.014)     (0.017)
      Educationjt                                    -0.053       -0.075                             -0.064      -0.075
                                                    (0.048)      (0.069)                            (0.061)     (0.078)
      Senate3it (marginal effects)    0.060***    0.041***      0.034***    0.087**     0.078**   0.050***    0.047***    0.096**
                                       (0.020)     (0.014)       (0.013)    (0.038)     (0.031)    (0.016)     (0.013)    (0.044)
      Predicted probability             0.616       0.614         0.613      0.548       0.622      0.621       0.621      0.546
      Year dummies                       yes         yes             no        yes        yes        yes         no         yes
      State dummies                      yes         yes             yes       yes        yes        yes         yes        yes
      Vote dummies                       no          no              yes       no         no         no          yes        no
      Year×State dummies                 no          no              no        yes        no         no          no         yes
      Observations                      1,767       1,767           1,767      829       1,281      1,281       1,281       616
      Pseudo R-squared                  0.421       0.596           0.710     0.381      0.446      0.594       0.711      0.347

      Notes: The table reports coefficients of a probit model, with robust standard errors in parentheses, adjusted for clustering
     at the state level. The dependent variable voteijvt is coded as 1 when senator i from state j voted pro gun on vote v in
     year t. ***, ** and * indicate statistical significance at the 99%, 95% and 90%, respectively.
    As discussed above, we can also identify the role of election proximity by exploiting
changes in the voting behavior of the same senator over time, when he or she belonged
to different generations. Notice that in these specifications we cannot include senators’
time-invariant characteristics like gender (which are already accounted for by the sena-
tors’ fixed effects) and age (since we always include year dummies). However, we are able
to keep party affiliation since some senators changed party during our sample period.37


       Table 2: The pro-gun effect of election proximity, comparing within senators

       Dep. variable:                                            Voteijvt
                                                    All                      Directly gun-related
                                         (1)       (2)         (3)          (4)      (5)       (6)
       Senate3it                      0.040**    0.042**     0.038*    0.062**     0.064** 0.062**
                                      (0.019)    (0.020)     (0.020)   (0.024)     (0.030) (0.030)
       Republicani t                             0.200**     0.197**               0.184** 0.183**
                                                 (0.097)     (0.097)               (0.084) (0.084)
       Gun-rights contributionsit                 -0.000      0.000                 -0.001  -0.001
                                                 (0.000)     (0.000)               (0.002) (0.002)
       Gun-control contributionsit                 0.006      0.006                  0.006   0.006
                                                 (0.007)     (0.007)               (0.008) (0.008)
       Gun magazine subscriptionsjt                0.000      0.001                 -0.014  -0.015
                                                 (0.020)     (0.021)               (0.023) (0.023)
       Violent crime ratejt                     0.006***    0.006***               0.006** 0.006**
                                                 (0.002)     (0.002)               (0.002) (0.002)
       Educationjt                                -0.010      -0.010                -0.018  -0.018
                                                 (0.009)     (0.009)               (0.011) (0.011)
       Senator dummies                  yes        yes        yes        yes         yes       yes
       Year dummies                     yes        yes        no         yes         yes       no
       Vote dummies                     no         no         yes        no          no        yes
       Observations                    1,840      1,840      1,840      1,363       1,363     1,363
       R-squared                       0.190      0.201      0.317      0.223       0.230     0.350

     Notes: The table reports coefficients of a linear probability model, with robust standard errors
    in parentheses, adjusted for clustering at the senator level. The dependent variable Voteijvt
    is coded as 1 when senator i from state j voted pro gun on vote v in year t. ***, ** and *
    indicate statistical significance at the 99%, 95% and 90%, respectively.


    The results of six specifications estimated using this alternative methodology are
reported in Table 2. The estimated coefficients for Senate3 are always positive and
statistically significant. Since these are the estimates of a linear probability model, they
provide an immediate quantification of the effects of the regressors on the likelihood of
voting pro gun. They indicate that the probability that an individual senator supports
  37
     See footnote 24. The Republican dummy captures the effect of senators switching parties. Our
results on the effect of election proximity remain unchanged if we exclude party affiliation or remove
these senators.


                                                   24
pro-gun policies increases between 3.8 and 6.4 percentage points when close to re-election
–which is very similar to the marginal effects obtained in Table 1, when comparing the
voting behavior of different senators. Notice that these results are solely identified by
senators flip flopping on gun control, i.e. changing their voting behavior throughout
their terms.
    Concerning the other controls, one difference with Table 1 is that contributions from
lobbies no longer have a significant impact on senators’ voting behavior, suggesting that
there is little variation in the amount of money received by individual senators during
their mandates. In addition, an increase in violent crime rate in a senator’s constituency
is associated with more support for pro-gun policies.
    In conclusion, we find that election proximity has a robust pro-gun effect on senators’
voting behavior. This result is identified both by comparing the behavior of different
senators voting on the same legislation and the behavior of individual senators across
different votes. Inter-generational differences in senators’ voting behavior are also robust
to the inclusion of several control variables for the legislators and their constituencies.


6.2     Retiring senators
The empirical results presented so far provide clear support for the first prediction of our
theoretical model: third-generation senators are more likely to vote in favor of pro-gun
policies. In order to verify whether the pro-gun effect of election proximity is driven by
electoral incentives, we exploit information on senators who are not seeking re-election.
Our second prediction states that retiring legislators should be immune from electoral
incentives and thus vote according to their preferences throughout their terms.
    In Table 3 we include the dummy variable Retiring, as well as its interaction with
Senate3. In columns 1 and 2 we include state fixed effects, while in columns 3 and 4 we
include senator fixed effects. The estimated coefficients for Senate3 are significant and
larger than the corresponding ones in Table 1, indicating that non-retiring senators are
more likely to vote pro gun in the last two years of their mandate. Retiring senators,
on the other hand, do not change their voting behavior in the last two years of their
mandate: in all specifications, the test for the sum of Senate3 and Senate3 × Retiring
is not significant.38


   38
     Crucially, this result is not driven by the lack of precision of the estimates for Senate3 × Retiring.
As we show in the following subsection, the effect of election proximity varies by party. As our theory
would in fact suggest, the effect of Retiring on the likelihood of voting pro gun also varies by party,
with retiring Democrats being significantly less likely to vote pro gun, and retiring Republicans being
unaffected. If we allow for triple interactions between Senate3, Republican, and Retiring, we are


                                                    25
              Table 3: The pro-gun effect of election proximity, retiring senators

 Dep. variable:                                                              Voteijvt
                                                            All       Directly        All      Directly
                                                                     gun-related              gun-related
                                                            (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)
 Senate3it                                                0.296***    0.387***     0.045**     0.074***
                                                           (0.104)     (0.116)     (0.018)      (0.025)
 Retiringit                                                 -0.144      -0.051      -0.012       -0.030
                                                           (0.245)     (0.283)     (0.048)      (0.084)
 Senate3it × Retiringit                                     -0.181      -0.607      -0.052       -0.120
                                                           (0.310)     (0.477)     (0.056)      (0.099)
 Republicanit                                             2.531***    2.241***      0.189         0.153
                                                           (0.306)     (0.314)     (0.116)      (0.126)
 Malei                                                       0.342      0.454
                                                           (0.260)     (0.401)
 Ageit                                                   -0.027***    -0.023**
                                                           (0.010)     (0.011)
 Gun-rights contributionsit                                  0.020      0.019        -0.000      -0.002
                                                           (0.012)     (0.017)      (0.000)     (0.002)
 Gun-control contributionsit                             -0.160***    -0.130**        0.006       0.005
                                                           (0.052)     (0.053)      (0.005)     (0.005)
 Gun magazine subscriptionsjt                                0.080      0.159         0.001      -0.013
                                                           (0.140)     (0.181)      (0.024)     (0.027)
 Violent crime ratejt                                        0.015      0.008      0.006***     0.005*
                                                           (0.010)     (0.013)      (0.002)     (0.003)
 Educationjt                                                -0.053      -0.071       -0.011      -0.019
                                                           (0.048)     (0.060)      (0.010)     (0.011)
 Test Senate3it +Senate3it *Retiringit =0 (p-value)a       0.682         0.621      0.892       0.625
 Senate3it , not retiring (marginal effects)             0.044***     0.057***
                                                          (0.016)      (0.017)
 Senate3it , retiring (marginal effects)                   0.017        -0.034
                                                          (0.042)      (0.070)
 Predicted probability, not retiring                       0.617         0.624
 Predicted probability, retiring                           0.587         0.585
 Year dummies                                               yes          yes         yes         yes
 State dummies                                              yes          yes         no          no
 Senator dummies                                            no           no          yes         yes
 Observations                                              1,767        1,281       1,840       1,363
 R-squaredb                                                0.597        0.596       0.201       0.232

 Notes: Columns 1-2 report coefficients of a probit model, with robust standard errors in parentheses,
adjusted for clustering at the state level. Columns 3-4 report coefficients of a linear probability model,
with robust standard errors in parentheses, adjusted for clustering at the senator level. The dependent
variable Voteijt is coded as 1 when senator i from state j voted pro gun on vote v in year t. ***, **
and * indicate statistical significance at the 99%, 95% and 90%, respectively.
a 2
  χ -test in columns 1-2, F-test in columns 3-4. b Pseudo R-squared in columns 1-2.


    The marginal effects and predicted probabilities reported at the bottom of the ta-
ble for columns 1 and 2 indicate that senators running for re-election are between 4.4
and 5.7 percentage points more likely to vote pro-gun at the end of their terms. The


able to precisely estimate the effect of Senate3 × Retiring and can still reject flip flopping for retiring
Democrats. These results are available upon request.


                                                    26
corresponding increase in the predicted probability ranges between 7.1 and 9.1 percent.
We find similar results in columns 3 and 4, with non-retiring senators increasing their
probability of voting pro gun by between 4.5 and 7.4 percent.


6.3    Party differences
We now move to assess the validity of the third prediction of our model: inter-generational
differences should be stronger for members of the Democratic party. As in the previous
sections, we carry out this exercise on the samples of all votes and directly gun-related
votes, including year dummies and either state or senator dummies.
    To allow for different effects of electoral calendars between parties, in Table 4 we
introduce an interaction term between Senate3 and Republican. In this setup, the es-
timated coefficient for Senate3 captures the effect of election proximity on Democratic
senators, while the corresponding effect for Republican senators is found by summing
up this coefficient with the interaction term (see the tests at the bottom of the table).

    Columns 1 and 2 include state dummies, and therefore, as in Table 1, quantify the
effect of electoral proximity across senators. In columns 3 and 4 we include senator
dummies, which allow us to quantify the effect of electoral proximity for a given senator
(as in Table 2). Notice that identification of the interaction term Senate3 × Republi-
can does not rely on senators switching parties (we obtain similar results if we remove
these senators). When focusing on either all GOA votes (columns 1 and 3), or directly
gun-related votes (columns 2 and 4), we find that election proximity has no impact on
the stance of Republican senators: the tests at the bottom of the table indicate that
Republican senators are not more likely to vote pro gun in the last two years of their
mandate, compared to the previous four years (the only exception is column 1 where
the χ2 -test marginally rejects no flip-flopping with a p-value of 0.096). By contrast,
election proximity has a pro-gun effect on the voting behavior of Democratic senators:
in all specifications, the coefficient of the variable Senate3 is positive and significant.
These findings are in line with the third prediction of our model: Republicans’ pol-
icy preferences are aligned with their re-election motives, so they should vote pro gun
throughout their terms in office; by contrast, Democrats face a tradeoff between their
policy preferences and their re-election prospects, so they should be more likely to vote
pro gun at the end of their terms, when their policy choices have a greater impact on
their probability of retaining office.
    The results of Table 4 indicate that inter-generational differences are only driven
by changes in the voting behavior of Democratic senators. This implies that, for these

                                            27
             Table 4: The pro-gun effect of election proximity, party differences

 Dep. variable:                                                                 Voteijvt
                                                               All       Directly        All      Directly
                                                                        gun-related              gun-related
                                                               (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)
 Senate3it                                                   0.297**      0.388**      0.080**     0.098**
                                                             (0.141)       (0.153)     (0.039)     (0.045)
 Republicanit                                               2.579***     2.320***      0.245**     0.228**
                                                             (0.297)       (0.283)     (0.104)     (0.092)
 Senate3it × Republicani                                      -0.078        -0.139      -0.067      -0.074
                                                             (0.211)       (0.293)     (0.043)     (0.053)
 Malei                                                        0.309         0.401
                                                             (0.267)       (0.416)
 Ageit                                                      -0.029***    -0.027***
                                                             (0.009)       (0.010)
 Gun-rights contributionsit                                   0.024*        0.025       -0.000       0.000
                                                             (0.013)       (0.018)     (0.000)     (0.002)
 Gun-control contributionsit                                -0.173***     -0.166**       0.002       0.002
                                                             (0.059)       (0.069)     (0.007)     (0.008)
 Gun magazine subscriptionsjt                                 0.088         0.193        0.002      -0.011
                                                             (0.138)       (0.182)     (0.021)     (0.023)
 Violent crime ratejt                                         0.015         0.007     0.007***     0.005**
                                                             (0.011)       (0.014)     (0.002)     (0.002)
 Educationjt                                                  -0.055        -0.067      -0.011     -0.019*
                                                             (0.047)       (0.060)     (0.009)     (0.011)
 Test Senate3it +Senate3it ×Republicanit =0 (p-value)a         0.096       0.244        0.472        0.459
 Senate3it , Democrats (marginal effects)                    0.061**      0.075**
                                                             (0.029)      (0.031)
 Senate3it , Republicans (marginal effects)                   0.027*       0.034
                                                             (0.016)      (0.027)
 Predicted probability, Democrats                             0.367        0.396
 Predicted probability, Republicans                            0.850       0.809
 Year dummies                                                  yes          yes          yes          yes
 State dummies                                                 yes          yes          no           no
 Senator dummies                                               no           no           yes          yes
 Observations                                                 1,767        1,281        1,840        1,363
 R-squaredb                                                   0.596        0.594        0.203        0.232

 Notes: Columns 1-2 report coefficients of a probit model, with robust standard errors in parentheses,
adjusted for clustering at the state level. Columns 3-4 report coefficients of a linear probability model, with
robust standard errors in parentheses, adjusted for clustering at the senator level. The dependent variable
Voteijt is coded as 1 when senator i from state j voted pro gun on vote v in year t. ***, ** and * indicate
statistical significance at the 99%, 95% and 90%, respectively.
a 2
  χ -test in columns 1-2, F-test in columns 3-4. b Pseudo R-squared in columns 1-2.


legislators, the impact of election proximity is much larger than what found in Tables
1-2 for senators at large. The marginal effects in Table 4 imply that the probability that
Democratic senators vote pro gun increases by between 16.6 and 18.9 percent in the last
two years of their terms, an effect more than twice as large as the one found for the
“average” senator in Table 1 (columns 2 and 6) or Table 2 (columns 2 and 5).




                                                    28
6.4      Heterogenous effects across constituencies
Our results in the previous sections show that election proximity has a pro-gun effect
on the voting behavior of senators, and that this result is driven by senators who are
seeking re-election and who belong to the Democratic party. In this section, we examine
whether the size of the vocal pro-gun minority in a constituency, proxied by per capita
subscriptions to gun magazines, has a non-monotonic effect on the probability that
Democratic senators flip flop on gun control, in line with the fourth prediction of our
model.

         Table 5: The pro-gun effect of election proximity on Democratic senators

 Dep. variable:                                                          Voteijvt
                                                         American Rifleman        American Hunter
                                                           All       Directly        All       Directly
                                                                    gun-related               gun-related
                                                           (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)
 Senate3it                                                 -1.317     -3.051         -0.759      -1.361
                                                          (1.526)    (2.738)        (0.720)     (1.340)
 Senate3it *Gun magazine subscriptionsjt                    0.590     1.394          0.499*     1.008**
                                                          (0.421)    (0.901)        (0.261)     (0.509)
 Senate3it *Gun magazine subscriptions2jt                 -0.048*    -0.125*       -0.045**    -0.108**
                                                          (0.029)    (0.074)        (0.022)     (0.045)
 Gun magazine subscriptionsjt                             0.891**    1.258**        1.307**    2.663***
                                                          (0.383)    (0.552)        (0.551)     (0.976)
 Gun magazine subscriptions2jt                           -0.036**   -0.067***       -0.062*   -0.162***
                                                          (0.015)    (0.017)        (0.036)     (0.056)
 Malet                                                     -0.033      0.201         -0.050       0.253
                                                          (0.402)    (0.710)        (0.378)     (0.625)
 Ageit                                                  -0.029***   -0.044***     -0.033***   -0.052***
                                                          (0.010)    (0.012)        (0.012)     (0.014)
 Gun-rights contributionsit                              0.083***     0.084        0.098***    0.138***
                                                          (0.028)    (0.058)        (0.027)     (0.050)
 Gun-control contributionsit                             -0.262**     -0.191       -0.289**      -0.228
                                                          (0.133)    (0.191)        (0.133)     (0.168)
 Violent crime ratejt                                      -0.006      0.006         -0.006       0.005
                                                          (0.022)    (0.025)        (0.024)     (0.028)
 Educationjt                                                0.048     0.100          -0.006      -0.041
                                                          (0.092)    (0.155)        (0.084)     (0.166)
 Joint test for Senate3it and interactions (p-value)      0.005       0.000         0.006       0.000
 Year dummies                                              yes         yes           yes         yes
 State dummies                                             yes         yes           yes         yes
 Observations                                              703         548           703         548
 Pseudo R-squared                                         0.511       0.601         0.512       0.604

 Notes: The table reports coefficients of a probit model, with robust standard errors in parentheses,
adjusted for clustering at the state level. The dependent variable voteijvt is coded as 1 when senator
i from state j voted pro gun on vote v in year t. The variable Gun magazine subscriptionsjt is the
number of magazine subscriptions to American Rifleman in columns 1 and 2, and American Hunter in
columns 3 and 4, per 1,000 inhabitants. ***, ** and * indicate statistical significance at the 99%, 95%
and 90%, respectively.



                                                   29
    To this end, we restrict our sample to only Democratic senators and we interact Sen-
ate3 with Gun magazine subscriptions and its square term.39 According to Prediction 4,
we should find an inverted U-shape relationship between the probability that a Demo-
cratic senator flip flops and per capita subscriptions to gun magazines in her state. This
implies that, when interacting the variable Senate3 with linear and quadratic terms of
Gun magazine subscriptions, the estimate for the linear term should be positive, while
the square term should have a negative sign. To identify this non-monotonic relation-
ship, we exploit the fact that Democratic senators are elected in a wide range of states
in terms of our proxy for the size of the pro-gun minority. Figure 1 in Section 4 shows
that there is significant variation in per capita subscriptions across states. When looking
at Democratic senators in our sample, we find that many are elected in states that are
traditionally Democratic leaning, which have either low (e.g. California and New Jersey)
or high levels of per capita subscriptions to gun magazines (e.g. Oregon or Vermont).
Some are even elected in states that are traditionally Republican leaning and have high
per capita subscriptions (e.g. Montana and North Dakota).
    The results of the four specifications reported in Table 5 clearly support the last
prediction of our model. In the first two columns we use subscriptions to American
Rifleman magazine to proxy for the size of the vocal pro-gun minority and we consider
all GOA votes (column 1) or only directly gun-related votes (column 2). Although the
coefficients of interest are not precisely estimated, the test at the bottom of the table
indicates that Senate3 and the two interaction terms are jointly significant at 1%.
    Since the results on the heterogenous effects across constituencies hinge on the proxy
for the size of the pro-gun minority, in the last two columns of Table 5 we re-estimate
the same specifications using per capita subscriptions to American Hunter magazine,
which, as discussed earlier, is the second most important gun magazine after American
Rifleman. This set of results is very similar to the first two columns.
    We provide a graphical representation of these results in Figure 2, based on the spec-
ification of column 2. This figure shows the marginal effects for Democratic senators
belonging to Senate3 for different percentiles of the distribution of gun magazine sub-
scriptions. This allows us to illustrate how the impact of election proximity on senators’
voting behavior varies with the size of the pro-gun minority in their constituency.
    Figure 2 clearly supports the non-monotonic relationship implied by Prediction 4:
election proximity only affects the voting behavior of Democratic senators if the pro-gun
group in their constituency is neither too small nor too large. In particular, there is

  39
     We obtain similar results if we instead use the entire sample and introduce additional interactions
with Republican. The results are also similar if we exclude retiring senators from the sample.


                                                  30
no effect in constituencies with per capita subscriptions to American Rifleman in the
bottom 20th percentile. On the other hand, the minority has to be quite large (i.e.
above the 80th percentile) to eliminate flip-flopping behavior.40


       Figure 2: The pro-gun effect of election proximity on Democratic senators
        .2
        .1
        0




                                        Marginal effect             95% Confidence interval
        -.1




              10th      20th       30th      40th     50th       60th    70th      80th     90th
                     Percentile of subscriptions to American Rifleman per 1,000 inhabitants

Notes: The figure shows average marginal effects for various percentiles of gun magazine subscriptions.
These are computed using estimates from column 2 in Table 5. Error bars are ±95% confidence intervals.




6.5     Additional robustness checks
In what follows, we discuss the results of a series of additional estimations to verify the
robustness of our main finding, i.e. the impact of election proximity on senators’ voting
behavior. The results of these regressions can be found in Appendix B.3.
    First, in Table B-6 we reproduce the same specifications of Table 1 using a linear
probability model, so that marginal effects are easily interpreted. Our results are unaf-
fected when employing this alternative methodology, and the point estimates for Senate3


  40
    The qualitative results would be identical if the figure were based on any other specification of
Table 5.


                                                    31
are very similar to the marginal effects computed using a probit model. The only differ-
ences are the loss of significance of the contributions from lobby groups and the crime
rate being now significant for the sample of all votes.
    Second, in Table B-7 we add two sets of additional votes to our original sample.
In columns 1 to 4 we include two key votes on gun control that were cast in 1993,
the year before GOA started collecting congressional votes. The first vote was on an
amendment “Prohibiting the Possession of Semi-Automatic Assault Weapons” (S Amdt
1152), which introduced restrictions on the manufacture, transfer, and possession of
certain semiautomatic assault weapons and large capacity ammunition feeding devices.
The second vote was on the “Brady Handgun Violence Prevention Act Federal” (H.R.
1025), which instituted federal background checks on firearm purchasers in the United
States. The bill was named after James Brady, who was shot during an attempted
assassination of President Ronald Reagan on March 30, 1981 (see Lipford, 2000 for more
details). In columns 5-8, we include all gun-related votes listed by Project Vote Smart,
a non-profit organization dedicated to disseminate information about candidates and
elected officials. Project Vote Smart keeps track of key U.S. congressmen’s decisions
on various policy issues. Key votes are identified based on various criteria, including
whether they received media attention and whether they passed by a small margin. For
gun control, Project Vote Smart lists 14 votes between 1993 and 2010.41 In all columns of
Table B-7 we find that the coefficient on Senate3 is positive and statistically significant.
Even though the size of the coefficient decreases in the Vote Smart sample (columns
5-8), the marginal effects are comparable to those reported in Table 1.
    Finally, in Table B-8 we include additional controls to account for other potential
drivers of senators’ voting behavior on gun control. In columns 1 and 5, we include the
state-specific variable Swing statejt , which identifies battleground states (i.e. states in
which no Presidential candidate had an overwhelming majority in the previous election).
In columns 2 and 6, we include two senator-specific variables: Margin of victoryit , which
captures the gap in votes between senator i and the runner-up in the last election; and
Tenureit , which accounts for senators’ length of service. In columns 3 and 7, we add
two vote-specific controls: the dummy variable Close votev , which takes the value of 1
if the vote was closer than the median margin of passage or rejection for all votes in
our sample; and the dummy variable Acceptv , which identifies votes to accept pro-gun

  41
     Unfortunately, Project Vote Smart does not specify the direction of the vote, so we manually code
votes as pro or anti gun. We exclude one vote (“Charging Teens as Adults for Crimes Involving a
Firearm” (S Amdt 1117), co-sponsored by senators Carol Moseley Braun (D-IL) and Christopher Bond
(R-MO)) that is also listed as a key crime vote, since senators may have opposite views on guns and
crime.


                                                 32
legislation (rather than to reject gun-control legislation). Finally, in columns 4 and 8, all
variables are included together. The results presented in Table B-8 show that including
these additional controls does not affect our main result concerning the pro-gun effect
of election proximity, as Senate3 remains positive and highly significant. The other
regressors are also unaffected. Among the new controls, only the estimated coefficients
for Close votev and Acceptv are statistically significant in some specifications.


7     Conclusions
In this paper, we have argued that electoral incentives can help explain the “gun control
paradox,” i.e. why U.S. congressmen are reluctant to support even mild gun-control
regulations, notwithstanding broad public support for these measures.
    The general idea is that politicians may prefer to support the interests of a vocal
minority of voters, on issues that are of secondary importance to the rest of the electorate.
In the case of gun control, although a majority of voters favors stricter regulations, a
minority opposes them with greater intensity.
    To capture this idea, we have described a simple model of gun control choices, in
which incumbent politicians are both office and policy motivated. There are two groups
of voters in the electorate: anti-gun voters, who represent a majority of the electorate
and care less about gun control than about other policy issues; and pro-gun voters, who
are a minority of the electorate and care more intensely about gun control. The model
delivers testable predictions about the impact of election proximity on politicians’ voting
behavior on gun regulations.
    To assess the validity of these predictions, we have studied the voting behavior of
U.S. senators on gun-related legislation since the early 1990’s. The staggered structure
of the U.S. Senate, in which members serve six-year terms and one third is up for re-
election every two years, allows to compare the voting behavior of different generations
of senators. We have obtained four main results. First, senators who are closer to facing
re-election are more likely to vote pro gun. Second, election proximity has no effect
on the voting behavior of senators who are retiring. Third, only Democratic senators
flip flop on gun control during their terms in office. Finally, election proximity has an
impact on the voting behavior of Democratic senators only when the pro-gun group in
their constituency is neither too small nor too large. Our results are robust to focusing
on different subsets of gun votes, using alternative econometric methodologies to identify
the impact of election proximity, and including a rich set of controls for legislators and
their constituencies.

                                             33
    Our analysis suggests that in representative democracies policy choices may often
diverge from what the majority of the electorate wants. This is because citizens have
only one vote to make representatives accountable on a bundle of issues. Besley and
Coate (2008) argue that direct initiatives allow to unbundle policy issues, improving the
congruence between citizens’ preferences and policy outcomes. One might thus expect
to see stricter gun regulations in the sixteen U.S. states that allow for direct initiatives.42
However, there are at least three reasons to believe that the outcome of initiatives on gun
control may not always coincide with the preferences of the majority of voters. First,
there may be a pro-gun bias in terms of which propositions end up on the ballot. This
is because organizing initiatives is very costly in terms of both time and money, and
citizens who strongly oppose gun regulations may be more willing to incur such costs.43
In addition, gun-rights lobbies can provide them with the means to successfully organize
initiatives.44 Second, gun-related initiatives are likely to suffer from a pro-gun bias in
voters’ turnout, if citizens who are against gun regulations are more willing to incur the
costs of voting (e.g. spending time to register, rearranging work schedules, getting to the
polls, and gathering information on the candidates). Finally, opponents of initiatives to
introduce even mild gun regulations can be very effective at framing them as a threat
to citizens’ fundamental rights and freedoms.45 Notwithstanding these issues, several
ballot propositions did result in the introduction of stricter gun regulations.46

   42
       The direct initiative process allows ordinary citizens to draft a petition in the form of a legislative
bill or constitutional amendment. If the petition receives sufficient popular support, the measure is
then placed directly on a ballot, without the need to first submit it to the legislature.
    43
       Organizing an initiative is a complex legal process, involving several steps: 1) preliminary filing
of a proposed petition with a designated state official; 2) review of the petition for conformance with
statutory requirements and, in several states, a review of the language of the proposal; 3) preparation
of a ballot title and summary; 4) circulation of the petition to obtain the required number of signatures
of registered voters, usually a percentage of the votes cast for a statewide office in the preceding general
election; and 5) submission of the petition to the state officials, who must verify the number of signatures.
Organizing a successful initiative is also financially very costly, e.g. it usually requires hiring specialized
firms to run opinion polls before drafting the petition and to collect the required number of signatures.
    44
       An example of a pro-gun initiative is I-591, which was filed in the state of Washington on May 23,
2013 by Protect Our Gun Rights, a group organized by several gun-rights organizations. If approved on
the November 4, 2014 ballot, initiative I-591 would prevent the government from confiscating firearms
without due process and from implementing background checks deemed more stringent than those at
the federal level. Opponents to I-591 filed a competing initiative, Washington Universal Background
Checks for Gun Purchases (I-594), which will be voted on the same date. This seeks to regulate firearms
sales between private individuals, including implementing extensive background checks.
    45
       See “Gun safety versus gun control,” The Economist, January 24, 2013.
    46
       For example, in 1990 84,5% voters in Florida supported a constitutional amendment to introduce
a mandatory period of three days between retail purchase and delivery of any handgun. Similarly,
in 1998 72% of voters in Florida supported constitutional amendment to introduce a three-day delay
between retail purchase and delivery of any handgun. Background checks for transfers of firearms were
also introduced in Oregon through an initiative in 2000.


                                                      34
    An important avenue for future research is to explore the role of lobbies on secondary
policy issues. Financial contributions from gun-rights groups do not account for the
pro-gun effect of election proximity on senators’ voting behavior. However, gun-rights
organizations such as the NRA or GOA can affect politicians’ decisions through other
channels.47 The intensity of preferences of pro-gun voters can explain why “the NRA is
considered by many the most powerful lobbying group in the country, despite relatively
modest financial resources and just 4 million members. (. . . ) The NRA focuses almost
exclusively on gun control, which enables its leaders to doggedly pursue their legislative
ends. Perhaps more important, many NRA members are as single-minded as the orga-
nization itself. Polls often show that more Americans favor tightening gun control laws
than relaxing them, but gun rights advocates are much more likely to be single-issue
voters than those on the other side of the question. As a result, the NRA can reliably
deliver votes.”48
    The logic of our theoretical model can be used to analyze the role of electoral incen-
tives on other policy issues such as environment, which only a minority of the electorate
cares intensely about (Conconi et al., 2014b). However, more work is needed to under-
stand politicians’ choices on other secondary policy issues such as abortion, for which
there are intense minorities of voters on both sides.


References
Alesina, A., and A. Drazen (1991). “Why are stabilizations delayed?” American Eco-
       nomic Review 81, 1170-1188.
Amacher, R. C., and W. J. Boyes (1978). “Cycles in senatorial voting behavior: Impli-
       cations for the optimal frequency of elections,” Public Choice 33, 5-13.
Ansolabehere, S., J. Snyder, and C. Stewart III (2001). “The effects of party and
       preferences on congressional roll-call voting,” Legislative Studies Quarterly 26, 533-
       572.
Bernhard, W., and B. R. Sala (2006). “The remaking of an American Senate: The 17th
       amendment and ideological responsiveness,” Journal of Politics 68, 345-357.


  47
       Lobbyists may help to mobilize their members to influence policy decisions in Congress (Kollman,
1998). They may also provide access to politicians to special interests, and issue-specific information
to politicians (Blanes-i-Vidal et al, 2012; Bertrand et al, 2014).
    48
       “Why is the NRA so powerful? How the gun lobby leverages modest resources into outsized
influence” (Slate, June 29, 2012).


                                                  35
Bertrand, M., M. Bombardini, and F. Trebbi (2014). “Is it whom you know or what
     you know? An empirical assessment of the lobbying process,” American Economic
     Review, forthcoming.
Besley, T., and S. Coate (2008). “Issue unbundling via citizens’ initiatives,” Quarterly
     Journal of Political Science 3, 379-397.
Blanes i Vidal, J., M. Draca, and C. Fons-Rosen (2012). “Revolving door lobbyists,”
     American Economic Review 102, 3731-3748.
Center for Responsive Politics (1993-2010). “Money to Congress,”
     http://www.opensecrets.org/ (accessed November 18, 2012).
Conconi, P., G. Facchini, and M. Zanardi (2014a). “Policymakers’ horizon and trade
     reforms: The protectionist effect of elections,” Journal of International Economics,
     forthcoming.
Conconi, P., F. J. Pino, and M. Zanardi (2014b). “The greening effect of elections,”
     mimeo, Université Libre de Bruxelles.
DellaVigna, S. and E. La Ferrara (2010). “Detecting illegal arms trade,” American
     Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2, 26-57.
Dewatripont, M. and G. Roland (1995). “The design of reform packages under uncer-
     tainty,” American Economic Review 85, 1207-1223.
Dixit, A., and J. Londregan (1995). “Redistributive politics and economic efficiency,”
     American Political Science Review 89, 856-866.
Dube, A., O. Dube, and O. Garcı́a-Ponce (2013). “U.S. gun laws and violence in
     Mexico,” American Political Science Review 107, 397-417.
Duggan, M. (2001). “More guns, more crime,” Journal of Political Economy 109, 1086-
     1114.
Duggan, M., R. Hjalmarsson, and B. Jacob (2011). “The short-term and localized effect
     of gun shows: Evidence from California and Texas,” Review of Economics and
     Statistics, 93 786-799.
Enelow, J., and M. Hinich (1982). “Nonspatial candidate characteristics and electoral
     competition,” Journal of Politics 44, 115-130.
Federal Bureau of Investigation (1993–2010). “Uniform crime reporting statistics,”
     http://www.ucrdatatool.gov/ (accessed November 15, 2012).



                                          36
Ferejohn, J. (1986). “Incumbent performance and electoral control,” Public Choice 50,
     5-25.
Fernandez, R., and D. Rodrik (1991). “Resistance to reform: Status quo bias in the
     presence of individual specific uncertainty,” American Economic Review 81, 1146-
     1155.
Fiorina, M. P. (1981). Retrospective Voting in American National Elections. New Haven,
     CT: Yale University Press.
Glazer, A. and M. Robbins (1985). “How elections matter: A study of U.S. senators,”
     Public Choice 46, 63-172.
Goss, K. A. (2006). Disarmed: The Missing Movement for Gun Control in America,
     Princeton University Press.
Grossman, G. M., and E. Helpman (1996). “Electoral competition and special interest
     politics,” Review of Economic Studies 63, 265-286.
Gun Owners of America, GOA (1997-2010). “Key votes in the Senate,”
     http://www3.capwiz.com/gunowners/keyvotes.xc (accessed October 29, 2013).
Harbridge, L., and N. Malhotra (2011). “Electoral incentives and partisan conflict
     in Congress: Evidence from survey experiments,” American Journal of Political
     Science 55, 1-17.
Healy, A., and G. S. Lenz (2014). “Substituting the end for the whole: Why voters
     respond primarily to the election-year economy,” American Journal of Political
     Science 58, 31-47.
Huber, G. H., S. J. Hill, and G. S. Lenz (2012). “Sources of bias in retrospective decision
     making: Experimental evidence on voters’ limitations in controlling incumbents,”
     American Political Science Review 106, 720-741.
Kahane, L. H. (1999). “Gun lobbies and gun control: Senate voting patterns on the
     Brady Bill and the Assault Weapons Ban,” Atlantic Economic Journal 4, 384-393.
Knight, B. (2013). “State gun policy and cross-state externalities: Evidence from crime
     gun tracing,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 5, 200-229.
Kollman, K. (1998). Outside Lobbying: Public Opinion and Interest Group Strategies.
     Princeton University Press.
Langbein, L., and Lotwis, M. A. (1990). “The political efficacy of lobbying and money:
     Gun control and the U.S. House, 1986,” Legislative Studies Quarterly 15, 413-440.

                                            37
Leip, D. (2008). Dave Leip’s Atlas of U.S. Presidential Elections.
Levitt, S. D. (1996). “How do senators vote? Disentangling the role of voters’ pref-
     erences, party affiliation and senators ideology,” American Economic Review 86,
     425-441.
Lewis-Beck, M. S., and M. Stegmaier (2000). “Economic determinants of electoral
     outcomes,” Annual Review of Political Science 3, 183-219.
Lindbeck, A., and J. W. Weibull (1987). “Balanced-budget redistribution as the out-
     come of political competition,” Public Choice 52, 273-297.
Lipford, J. (2000). “Political economy of gun control: An analysis of senatorial votes
     on the 1993 Brady Bill,” The Journal on Firearms and Public Policy 12, 33-64.
List, J. A., and D. M. Sturm (2006). “How elections matter: Theory and evidence from
     environmental policy,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 121, 1249-1281.
Lott, J. (1998). More guns, Less Crime: Understanding Crime and Gun Control Laws.
     University of Chicago Press.
Lott, J., and D. Mustard (1997). “Crime, deterrence, and right-to-carry concealed
     handguns,” Journal of Legal Studies 26, 1-68.
Mian, A., A. Sufi, and F. Trebbi (2010). “The political economy of the U.S. mortgage
     default crisis,” American Economic Review 100, 1967-1998.
Olson, M. (1965). The Logic of Collective Action, Harvard University Press.
Overby, L. M., and L. C. Bell (2004). “Rational behavior or the norm of cooperation?
     Filibustering among retiring senators,” Journal of Politics 66, 906-924.
Persson, T., and G. Tabellini (2001). Political economics, MIT Press.
Peltzman, S. (1985). “An economic interpretation of the history of congressional voting
     in the twentieth century,” American Economic Review 75, 656-675.
Project Vote Smart (1993–2010). “Gun issues, key votes,”
     http://votesmart.org/bills/NA/2010/37 (accessed February 25, 2013).
Robbins, L. (1938). “Interpersonal comparisons of utility,” Economic Journal 48, 635-
     641.
Rogoff, K. (1990). “Equilibrium political budget cycles,” American Economic Review
     80, 21-36.
Rogoff, K., and A. Sibert (1988). “Elections and macroeconomic policy cycles,” Review
     of Economic Studies 55, 1-16.

                                          38
Roll Call (1993-2010). “Casualty list,” http://www.rollcall.com/politics/casualtylists/
     (accessed February 18, 2013).
Sarafidis, Y. (2007). “What Have you Done for me Lately? Release of Information and
     Strategic Manipulation of Memories,” Economic Journal 117, 307-326.
Schuman, H., and S. Presser (1977–1978). “Attitude measurement and the gun control
     paradox,” The Public Opinion Quarterly 4, 427-438.
Shepsle, K., R. P. Van Houweling, S. J. Abrams, P. C. Hanson (2009). “The Senate elec-
     toral cycle and bicameral appropriations politics,” American Journal of Political
     Science 53, 343-359.
Snyder, J. (1992). “Artificial extremism in interest group ratings,” Legislative Studies
     Quarterly 17, 319-345.
Snyder, J. and T. Groseclose (2000). “Estimating party influence in congressional roll-
     call voting,” American Journal of Political Science 44(2), 193-211.
Stromberg, D. (2004). “Mass media competition, political competition, and public
     policy,” Review of Economic Studies 71, 265-284.
Thomas, M. (1985). “Election proximity and senatorial roll call voting,” American
     Journal of Political Science 29, 96-111.
United States Congress (1993–2010). “Biographical Directory,”
     http://bioguide.congress.gov/biosearch/biosearch1.asp (accessed January 25, 2013).
United States Government Printing Office (1993–2010). “Official Congressional Direc-
     tory,” Washington, DC.
Voteview (1993–2010). “Roll call data,” http://voteview.com/ (accessed January 25,
     2013).
Webster, D., J. Vernick, and M. Bulzacchelli (2009). “Effects of state-level firearm
     seller accountability policies on firearm trafficking,” Journal of Urban Health 86,
     525-537.
Washington, E. L. (2008). “Female socialization: How daughters affect their legislator
     fathers’ voting on women’s issues,” American Economic Review 98, 311-332.
Weingast, B. R., K. A. Shepsle, and C. Johnsen (1981). “The political economy of
     benefits and costs: A neoclassical approach to distributive politics,” Journal of
     Political Economy 89, 642-664.



                                          39
                                       Appendix

A.1      Proofs
Proof of Proposition 1
From (3) and (4) , we have that U (1) ≥ U (0) if and only if

      1 γX                                   1 γX
       +    nj φj (χj Wj (1) − ū) + θω (1) ≥ +    nj φj (χj Wj (0) − ū) + θω (0) .
      2 φ j                                  2 φ j

From (1), this boils down to
      γ
        (nm φm χm αm − nM φM χM αM ) ≥ θ (ω (0) − ω (1)) .
      φ

                                                                                     


Proof of Proposition 3
The strategy (s∗1 , s∗2 ) = (0, 1) is an equilibrium for an anti-gun incumbent. From
(3) and (4) , we have that U (0, 1) ≥ U (0, 0) if and only if

 1 γX                                       1 γX
  +    nj φj (χj Wj (0, 1) − ū)+θω (0, 1) ≥ +    nj φj (χj Wj (0, 0) − ū)+θω (0, 0) .
 2 φ j                                      2 φ j

From (1), this boils down to
      γ
        (nm φm χm αm − nM φM χM αM ) ≥ θ (ω (0, 0) − ω (0, 1)) .
      φ

From (3) and (4) , we have that U (0, 1) ≥ U (1, 0) if and only if

γ (nm φm χm αm − nM φM χM αM + δ (nM φM χM αM − nm φm χm αm )) ≥ θ (ω (1, 0) − ω(0, 1)) .

which is always satisfied since ω (1, 0) − ω(0, 1) = 0, nm φm χm αm − nM φM χM αM > 0,
and δ < 1.
From (3) and (4) , we have that U (0, 1) ≥ U (1, 1) if and only if
                                 γ
     θ (ω (0, 1) − ω (1, 1)) ≥     δ (nm φm χm αm − nM φM χM αM ) .
                                 φ

The strategy (s∗1 , s∗2 ) = (1, 0) is never an equilibrium: From (3) and (4) , we have


                                              40
that U (1, 0) ≥ U (0, 1) if and only if
                                  γ
      θ (ω (1, 0) − ω (0, 1)) ≥     (1 − δ) (nm φm χm αm − nM φM χM αM ) ,
                                  φ

which is never satisfied since ω (1, 0) − ω (0, 1) = 0, nm φm χm αm − nM φM χM αM > 0, and
δ < 1.                                                                                   


Proof of Proposition 4
For a pro-gun incumbent, neither (0, 1) nor (1, 0) are equilibrium strategies:
From (3) and (4) , we have that U (0, 1) ≥ U (1, 1) if and only if
      γ
        δ (nM φM χM αM − nm φm χm αm ) ≥ θ (ω (1, 1) − ω (0, 1)) .
      φ

which is never satisfied since nM φM χM αM − nm φm χm αm < 0 and ω (1, 1) − ω (0, 1) > 0
for a pro-gun incumbent.
   From (3) and (4) , we have that U (1, 0) ≥ U (1, 1) if and only if
      γ
        (nM φM χM αM − nm φm χm αm ) ≥ θ (ω (1, 1) − ω (1, 0)) .
      φ

which is never satisfied since nM φM χM αM − nm φm χm αm < 0, and ω (1, 1) − ω (1, 0) > 0
for a pro-gun incumbent.                                                               


Proof of Proposition 5
The proof is in four steps. First, we define nm and nm , and show that nm < nm . Second,
we identify the conditions under which (s∗1 , s∗2 ) = (0, 0) is an equilibrium. Third, we do
the same for (s∗1 , s∗2 ) = (1, 1). Finally, we show that there is a unique equilibrium for the
different values of nm .
First, we define nm and nm , and show that nm < nm . Let
                                                            
                 1     θφ
     nm =                 (ω (0, 0) − ω (0, 1)) + nM φM χM αM , and
             φm χm αm γ
                                                            
                 1     θφ
     nm =                 (ω (0, 1) − ω (1, 1)) + nM φM χM αM .
             φm χm αm γδ

From δ (ω (0, 0) − ω (0, 1)) < ω (0, 1) − ω (1, 1) , we have that nm < nm .
Second, conditions for (s∗1 , s∗2 ) = (0, 0) to be an equilibrium. From (3) and (4) ,
we have that U (0, 0) ≥ U (0, 1) if and only if nm < nm , and that U (0, 0) ≥ U (1, 1) if


                                               41
and only if
                                   γ
      θ (ω (0, 0) − ω (1, 1)) ≥      (1 + δ) (nm φm χm αm − nM φM χM αM ) .
                                   φ

From δ < 1, it is obvious that U (0, 0) ≥ U (1, 0).
Third, conditions for (s∗1 , s∗2 ) = (1, 1) to be an equilibrium. From (3) and (4) , we
have that U (1, 1) ≥ U (0, 1) if and only if nm > nm , and that U (1, 1) ≥ U (0, 0) if and
only if
       γ
         (1 + δ) (nm φm χm αm − nM φM χM αM ) ≥ θ (ω (0, 0) − ω (1, 1)) .
       φ

From δ < 1, it is obvious that U (1, 1) ≥ U (1, 0).
Finally, for any nm there is a unique equilibrium. From Proposition 3 and the two
first steps of its proof, it is straightforward to see that (s∗1 , s∗2 ) = (0, 1), (s∗1 , s∗2 ) = (1, 1),
and (s∗1 , s∗2 ) = (0, 0) never coexists. It remains to prove that an equilibrium always
exists. We proceed in two steps.
First, from steps two and three in this proof, we have that if nm < nm , then (s∗1 , s∗2 ) =
(0, 0) is the unique equilibrium only if nm < nm . Otherwise (s∗1 , s∗2 ) = (0, 1) is the unique
equilibrium.
    Second, from step three in this proof, we have that if nm > nm , then (s∗1 , s∗2 ) = (1, 1)
is the unique equilibrium only if
                                                                               
               1                θφ
      nm >                             (ω (0, 0) − ω (1, 1)) + nM φM χM αM          .
           φm χm αm          γ (1 + δ)

This condition is always satisfied when nm > nm . Indeed, from nm > nm , we have that
       γ
         δ (nm φm χm αm − nM φM χM αM ) > θ (ω (0, 1) − ω (1, 1)) .
       φ

From nm < nm , we have that nm > nm implies nm > nm . Therefore, we have
       γ
         (nm φm χm αm − nM φM χM αM ) > θ (ω (0, 0) − ω (0, 1)) ,
       φ

Together, these two conditions give
       γ
         (1 + δ) (nm φm χm αm − nM φM χM αM ) > θ (ω (0, 0) − ω (1, 1)) .
       φ

                                                                                                      



                                                   42
A.2        Social welfare implications
In this appendix, we discuss the implications of our theoretical results from a utilitarian
welfare standpoint. The utilitarian social welfare is given by the sum of the utility of all
citizens.49 We will say that a policy is socially efficient if it corresponds to the utilitarian
optimum.50
    The utilitarian optimum is influenced both by the number of citizens with given
preferences, and by the intensity of those preferences. For instance, for gun regulations,
the weight of the anti-gun group is nM αM whereas the weight of the pro-gun group is
nm αm . On any issue, the optimal policy is the one preferred by the group with the
highest weight.

One-period model
In the one-period model, the utilitarian social welfare is

       U SW (s) = −nM αM |sM − s| − nm αm |sm − s|,                                               (A.1)

where sM and sm are the bliss points of majority and minority voters, respectively. The
following proposition characterizes the utilitarian optimum:

Proposition 6 When nM αM ≥ nm αm , s = 0 is socially efficient. When nm αm ≥
nM αM , s = 1 is socially efficient.

Proof: From A.1, we have that U SW (0) ≥ U SW (1) if and only if nM αM ≥ nm αm . We
also have that U SW (1) ≥ U SW (0) if and only if nM αM ≤ nm αm .                 
    Comparing Propositions 1 and 2 with Proposition 6, we directly notice that the
policy platform implemented by an anti-gun incumbent may not be socially efficient.
For instance, when χm φm is sufficiently larger than χM φM , it is possible that s = 1 is
the strategy adopted by an anti-gun incumbent even if s = 0 is the socially efficient
platform. Similarly, for χm φm sufficiently smaller than χM φM , it is possible that s = 0
is the strategy adopted by an anti-gun incumbent even if s = 1 is the socially efficient
platform.
    This comparison highlights the two reasons underlying socially inefficient choices by
the incumbent in our model: i) differences in how the two groups are informed about
the incumbent’s actions, and ii) differences in the homogeneity of the two groups.




  49
      The results in this appendix continue to hold under the assumption that the social welfare function
does not take into account the recency bias of citizens, i.e. for δ = 1.
   50
      This efficiency concept is subject to the same criticism as any social welfare function: it suffers
from problems surrounding interpersonal utility comparisons, as first pointed out by Robbins (1938).


                                                   43
Two-period model
In the two-period model, the utilitarian social welfare is

   U SW (s1 , s2 ) = −nM αM (δ|sM − s1 | + |sM − s2 |) − nm αm (δ|sm − s1 | + |sm − s2 |) (A.2)

The following proposition characterizes the utilitarian optimum in the two-period model,
and shows that it never involves flip flopping:51

Proposition 7 When nM αM ≥ nm αm , (0, 0) is socially efficient. When nm αm ≥
nM αM , (1, 1) is socially efficient. Generically, neither (0, 1), nor (1, 0) is socially ef-
ficient.

Proof: From A.2, we have that U SW (0, 1) ≥ U SW (0, 0) if and only if nm αm ≥ nM αM ,
and that U SW (0, 1) ≥ U SW (1, 1) if and only if nm αm ≤ nM αM . This proves that,
generically, (0, 1) is not a maximizer of the utilitarian social welfare function. We can
prove in a similar fashion that, generically, the same is true for (1, 0).
    From A.2, we have that i) U SW (0, 0) ≤ U SW (1, 1) if and only if nm αm ≥ nM αM ,
ii) U SW (1, 1) ≥ U SW (1, 0) if and only if nm αm ≥ nM αM , and that iii) U SW (1, 1) ≥
U SW (0, 1) if and only if nm αm ≥ nM αM . This proves that (1, 1) is the utilitarian
optimum when nm αm ≥ nM αM . Similarly, we can prove that (0, 0) is the utilitarian
optimum when nm αm ≥ nM αM .                                                            
    Proposition 7 has an interesting implication in terms of social efficiency: an incum-
bent who is “flip flopping” during his mandate cannot be adopting an optimal policy.
Under our working assumptions, Propositions 3 and 4 show that only an anti-gun incum-
bent is likely to behave in that specific inefficient way. Yet, this neither means that an
anti-gun incumbent will always behave inefficiently, nor that a pro-gun incumbent will
always behave efficiently. First, it is easy to show that there are values of the parameters
such that an anti-gun incumbent adopts the socially efficient policy, i.e. voting “yea” in
both periods when nm αm > nM αM , and “nay” in both periods when nm αm < nM αM .
Second, we can show that for all values of the parameters under consideration, a pro-gun
incumbent always votes “yea” in both periods. This is so even when voting “yea” in
both periods is socially inefficient, i.e. nm αm < nM αM .
    The propositions underlying Predictions 1-2 can be proven both for i) αM = αm and
φM χM < φm χm , and ii) αM < αm and φM χM = φm χm . Therefore, finding empirical
support for those three hypotheses does not allow us to make any statement regarding the
relative efficiency of the policies implemented. In particular, even if observing “cycling”
by some incumbents does suggest the existence of social inefficiencies, observing no
cycling by other incumbents might be a sign of even more inefficiencies. This would be
the case if an incumbent were to vote “yea” in both periods (which is always the case
for pro-gun incumbents), whereas the social optimum is to vote “nay” in both periods.
From a utilitarian standpoint, such an outcome would be worse than “cycling.”
  51
      The only case in which flip flopping can occur is when the two groups have the exact same weight,
i.e. nM αM = nm αm . This is a non-generic case, in which all combinations of policies are optimal.


                                                  44
A.3       Informational lobbying
The two-period version of the model shows that, if voters suffer from a recency bias, an
anti-gun incumbent may support gun regulations in the first period, but oppose them in
the second. One might argue that such a recency bias would be compensated by a lobby
providing its members information about what the incumbent did during her mandate
when they go to the polls. In this appendix, we extend the model to allow for such
“informational lobbying”. Our objective is twofold: we want to get some insights about
the impact of informational lobbying on the behavior of voters and verify whether cycles
in politicians’ behavior persist.
    We assume that voters who care intensely about gun regulations are able to over-
come the free-riding problem described by Olson (1965) and form a lobby. The lobby
maximizes the utility of its members and provides them with information about the
incumbent’s policy choices. Importantly, the lobby does not suffer from a recency bias:

      Wl (s1 , s2 ) = −αm (|sm − s1 | + |sm − s2 |) .                                   (A.3)

    The lobby chooses a level of effort e that affects χm , the fraction of group m voters
who know what the incumbent has done during her mandate. The relation between χm
and e is as follows: χm = χ̄e, where χ̄ ∈ (0, 1). The higher the effort, e, the higher the
fraction of informed voters in group m. For the sake of simplicity, we also assume that
χM = χ̄.
    Following Persson and Tabellini (2001), the objective function of the lobby is

                                                              1
      max Π (s1 , s2 ) Wl (s1 , s2 ) + (1 − Π (s1 , s2 ))ūl − e2 ,                     (A.4)
       e                                                      2
where ūl is the (exogenously given) utility of lobby members when the incumbent is not
reelected. Solving for the optimal e for a given (s1 , s2 ) (under the constraint that e ≥ 0),
we get
                      (
                        γ
                          n φ (χ̄Wm (s1 , s2 )) (Wl (s1 , s2 ) − ūl )
                        φ m m
                                                                       if positive
      e∗ (s1 , s2 ) =
                        0                                              otherwise

We thus have
                  γ
      e∗ (0, 0) =    nm φm χ̄αm (1 + δ) (2αm + ūl ) ,
                  φ
                  γ
      e∗ (0, 1) =    nm φm χ̄αm δ (αm + ūl ) ,
                  φ
                  γ
      e∗ (1, 0) =    nm φm χ̄αm (αm + ūl ) ,
                  φ
      e∗ (1, 1) = 0.



                                                  45
To avoid corner solutions, we work under the assumption that αm + ūl > 0. This ensures
that e∗ (s1 , s2 ) ≥ 0 ∀s1 , s2 . We can directly observe that e∗ (1, 1) < e∗ (0, 1) < e∗ (1, 0) <
e∗ (0, 0) . This means that the lobby makes sure that pro-gun voters know more about
the action of the incumbent when she behaves “badly” from the viewpoint of pro-gun
voters. Interestingly, the lobby’s optimal e is affected by the recency bias even though
the lobby’s planner does not suffer from such a bias. This is because pro-gun voters are
more sensitive to information when (s1 , s2 ) is “bad”.
    The incumbent maximizes her expected utility taking into account the lobby’s reac-
tion:
       1 γ
max + (nM φM (χ̄WM (s1 , s2 ) − ūM ) + nm φm (χ̄e∗ (s1 , s2 ) Wm (s1 , s2 ) − ūm ))+θω (s1 , s2 ) .
s1 ,s2 2 φ


    In order to verify how informational lobbying affects our results concerning the cy-
cling behavior of the incumbent, we consider a situation in which (s∗1 , s∗2 ) = (0, 1) is not
an equilibrium without lobbying (i.e. when χM = χ̄ = χm ) but may be an equilibrium
with lobbying (i.e. when χm = χ̄e∗ (s1 , s2 )). In particular, suppose that

        αM = αm = 1, φM = φm , and nM > nm .                                                          (A.5)

For the sake of expositional clarity, we also assume that θ = 0.52 Under the assumption in
(A.5), it is easy to show that, without lobbying, any incumbent chooses (s∗1 , s∗2 ) = (0, 0),
i.e. the platform preferred by anti-gun voters.
     The following proposition shows that this is not necessarily the case when informa-
tional lobbying is allowed:

Proposition 8 The strategy (s∗1 , s∗2 ) = (0, 1) is an equilibrium if and only if

               1             (nm )2            1
                           ≤        χ̄γ ≤              .
        (1 + δ) (1 + ūl )    nM          δ (1 + ūl )


There are values of the parameters such that these conditions are simultaneously satisfied.

Proof: The first part of the proof is very similar to the proof of Proposition 4. We
therefore omit the details of how we obtain the following three conditions, that are




    That assumption alone is enough to prevent the existence of an equilibrium in which (s∗1 , s∗2 ) = (0, 1)
   52

without lobbying.


                                                     46
necessary and sufficient for (s∗1 , s∗2 ) = (0, 1) to be an equilibrium:

      (nm )2                       1
             χ̄γ ≥         2                           ,
       nM          (1 + δ) (2 + ūl ) − δ 2 (1 + ūl )
      (nm )2            1
             χ̄γ ≤              ,
       nM          δ (1 + ūl )
      (nm )2               1
             χ̄γ ≥                    .
       nM          (1 + δ) (1 + ūl )
Given that

       1 + δ + δ 2 (1 + ūl ) < 1 + 2δ + δ 2 (2 + ūl )
                                           


is always satisfied (from δ > 0 and 1 + ū > 0), we have that

                    1                              1
                2                         <                    .
      (1 + δ) (2 + ūl ) − δ 2 (1 + ūl )   (1 + δ) (1 + ūl )

Therefore, we only have to check that

           1         (nm )2              1
                   ≥        χ̄γ ≥
      δ (1 + ūl )    nM          (1 + δ) (1 + ūl )

is possible. This requires

      (1 + δ) (1 + ūl ) > δ (1 + ūl ) ,
                                                           2
which is always true. It remains to check that (nnmM) χ̄γ can belong to [ (1+δ)(1+ū
                                                                               1
                                                                                       , 1 ].
                                                                                    l ) δ(1+ūl )
There is no constraint on the parameters’ values that excludes such a possibility. This
                          1             1
is so even when both δ(1+ū l)
                               and (1+δ)(1+ūl)
                                                are larger than 1. Indeed, given χ̄ ∈ (0, 1),
                (nm )2                                             (nm )2
this requires    nM
                       γ   > 1, which is satisfied if nm > 1, or    nM
                                                                            < 1 and γ > 1.    
    The intuition for this result is as follows. First, note that the additional information
provided by the lobby decreases the probability of re-election of the incumbent. Second,
remember that the lobby provides more information when the platform is “bad” than
when it is good, i.e. e∗ (1, 1) < e∗ (0, 1) < e∗ (1, 0) < e∗ (0, 0). Obviously, this gives
incentives for the incumbent to move away from “bad” platforms (i.e. (0, 0) and (1, 0))
toward “good” platforms (i.e. (0, 1) and (1, 1)). The proposition shows that this effect
might be strong enough so that the incumbent neither adopts (0, 0) nor (1, 0), but not
so strong that she adopts (1, 1). Thus, even under the presence of a pro-gun lobby that
does not suffer from a recency bias, we can have (s∗1 , s∗2 ) = (0, 1) as an equilibrium.




                                                  47
     B.1         Variables and descriptive statistics
                                              Table B-1: Definition of variables and sources

     Variable                       Definition                                                      Source
     Voteijvt                       Dummy equal to 1 if senator i from state j votes “yea”          GOA (website and newsletters), Voteview and
                                    (“nay”) on pro-gun (anti-gun) vote v                            Project Vote Smart
     Senate3it                      Dummy equal to 1 if senator i is in the last two years of his   Congressional Directory
                                    or her mandate
     Republicani                    Dummy equal to 1 if congressman i is a Republican               Biographical Directory of the U.S. Congress
     Malei                          Dummy equal to 1 if senator i is male                           Biographical Directory of the U.S. Congress
     Ageit                          Age of congressman i in year t                                  Biographical Directory of the U.S. Congress
     Gun-rights contributionsit     Contributions in thousands US$ received by senator i in year    Center for Responsive Politics
                                    t from gun-rights lobbies
     Gun-control contributionsit    Contributions in thousands US$ received by senator i in year    Center for Responsive Politics
                                    t from gun-control lobbies
     Retiringit                     Dummy equal to 1 if senator i retires (voluntarily leaves       Overby        and      Bell      (2004)    and
48




                                    office) at the end of the mandate                               http://www.rollcall.com
     Margin of victoryit            Difference in votes of winner and runner-up in last election    Statistics of the Congressional Elections
     Tenureit                       Senators’ length of service in number of congresses             Biographical Directory of the U.S. Congress
     Gun magazine subscriptionsjt   Number of subscriptions to American Rifleman per 1,000          American Audited Media
                                    inhabitants in state j and year t
     Violent crime ratejt           Number of violent crimes per 1 million inhabitants in state     Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI)
                                    j and year t
     Educationjt                    Proportion of the population of state j with a college degree   CPS (1994-2006) and ACS (2007-2010)
     Swing statejt                  Dummy equal to 1 if in state j the margin of victory in the     Leip (2008)
                                    last presidential election was less than 5%
     Close votev                    Dummy equal to 1 if the margin of passage or rejection for      Voteview
                                    vote v was smaller than the median margin
     Acceptv                        Dummy equal to 1 if vote v was to accept pro-gun legislation    GOA (website and newsletters) and Voteview
                                    (rather than to reject gun-control legislation)
                                Table B-2: Summary statistics

 Variable
 A. Senator-level characteristics                      Democrats      Republicans           All
 Vote (1= pro gun)                                       0.300           0.883             0.595
 Senate3                                                 0.323           0.348             0.336
 Male                                                    0.838           0.928             0.883
 Age                                                      60.7            60.8              60.7
 Republican                                                0                1              0.501
 Gun Rights contributions                                0.270           4.712             2.493
 Gun Control contributions                               0.414           0.029             0.221
 Retiring                                                0.151           0.139             0.145
 Margin of victory                                       0.219           0.247             0.233
 Tenure                                                   7.06            6.21              6.64
 B. State-level characteristics              Mean          St. Dev.          Min            Max
 Gun magazine subscriptions                   6.36           2.78            2.38           22.50
 Violent crime rate                           44.8           21.8            6.7            121.0
 Education                                    25.0            5.0            11.4            40.4
 Swing State                                 0.227          0.419              0              1
 C. Vote-level characteristics
 Close vote                                   0.53            0.51             0              1
 Approve                                      0.53            0.51             0              1

Notes: See definition of variables in Table B-1. Panel A reports averages of senator-year observations,
while Panel B reports averages of state-year observations.




B.2         Gun votes and ratings
As discussed in Section 4, since 1994 Gun Owners of America (GOA) has been keeping
track of key votes in the U.S. Congress, classifying them into two categories. The first
category includes votes supported by GOA, which are meant to strengthen the rights of
gun owners or to reject existing of proposed gun-control legislation. The second category
includes votes not supported by GOA, which often involve relatively uncontroversial gun-
control measures.
    In what follows, we show that senators’ decisions on the first category of votes have
a larger impact on their ratings by gun-rights organizations. Both GOA and the NRA
produce ratings on the pro-gun position of politicians. In particular, GOA produces
ratings for all senators by assigning a letter grade from A+ for a “Pro-Gun Leader”
to F- for “Philosophically committed anti-gunner.” Similarly to GOA, the NRA rates


                                                  49
politicians on a scale from A+ for someone “who has also made a vigorous effort to
promote and defend the Second Amendment” to F for a “True enemy of gun owners’
rights.” However, the NRA only produces ratings for senators who are up for re-election,
i.e. are in the last two years of their mandate.
     We construct the dummy variable Pro-gun rating ijt , which takes the value of 1 when
a senator receives a letter grade C- or above.53 We then regress this variable on the
senators’ voting behavior. In particular, we construct two variables: In favor of votes
supported by GOAijt , which captures the share of “yeas” in votes supported by GOA;
and Against votes not supported by GOAijt , which measures the share of “nays” in votes
not supported by GOA.
     In the first four columns of Table B-3 we report regressions based on GOA ratings,
including different sets of dummy variables. The last two columns show the results for
NRA ratings. These are based on a much smaller sample, since NRA ratings are only
available for a shorter period and only for senators who are up for re-election. Notice that
the coefficient for the variable In favor of votes supported by GOAijt is always positive
and highly significant, indicating that a “yea” on GOA-supported votes increases the
probability of being rated as a gun-rights supporter. A “nay” on votes not supported
by GOA has a much smaller impact on senators’ gun ratings. In all regressions, this
difference is statistically significant, as indicated in the tests at the bottom of the table.
Looking at the coefficients from column 4, we find that a one standard deviation increase
in the variable In favor of votes supported by GOA raises the predicted probability that
a senator is rated as pro-gun by 32 percent. By contrast, an analogous increase in the
variable Against votes not supported by GOA only raises the predicted probability of a
pro-gun rating by 13 percent.
     Even in the smaller sample of NRA ratings (columns 5 and 6), the weight attached
to a “yea” on GOA-supported votes is significantly larger than a “nay” on votes that
GOA did not support These results provide evidence that senators’ decisions on GOA
supported votes better capture their stance on gun control.




  53
     We choose C- as the pro-gun/anti-gun threshold based on GOA’s description of each letter grade:
C and C- are given to senators leaning GOA’s way occasionally, while D and D- are given to senators
usually against GOA’s interests. For the NRA ratings, we similarly choose C- as the threshold since a
senator is described as “anti-gun candidate” starting with the letter grade D.


                                                 50
                                              Table B-3: Gun ratings and votes

      Dep. variable:                                                                  Pro-gun ratingijt
      Source for ratings:                                                          GOA                                 NRA
                                                                (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)        (5)           (6)
      In favor of votes supported by GOAijt                   4.557***   4.432***      4.166***    4.190***   4.947*** 4.809***
                                                               (1.366)    (1.369)       (1.508)     (1.488)    (1.400)  (1.504)
      Against votes not supported by GOAijt                   1.428***   1.426***      1.546***    1.555***   1.771*** 2.326***
                                                               (0.284)    (0.283)       (0.378)     (0.381)    (0.494)  (0.587)
      Republicanit                                            2.454***   2.393***      2.419***    2.440***   1.327***   0.723
                                                               (0.335)    (0.334)       (0.558)     (0.584)    (0.510)  (0.534)
      Malei                                                  1.197***    1.162***      1.116**     1.141**      -0.600  -0.968*
                                                               (0.353)    (0.350)       (0.484)     (0.545)    (0.514)  (0.500)
      Ageit                                                  -0.049***   -0.048***    -0.102***   -0.103***     0.026    0.039
                                                               (0.011)    (0.011)       (0.022)     (0.023)    (0.025)  (0.029)
      Gun-rights contributionsit                                            0.000                    -0.000             0.087**
                                                                          (0.000)                   (0.000)             (0.044)
51




      Gun-control contributionsit                                          -0.000                    -0.000
                                                                          (0.000)                   (0.000)
      Test In favor of votes supported by GOAijt =             0.023       0.028        0.085       0.079      0.015         0.061
       Against votes not supported by GOAijt (p-value)
      Congress dummies                                          yes         yes          yes         yes        yes           yes
      State dummies                                             no          no           yes         yes        no            no
      Observations                                              478         478          305         305        75             75
      Pseudo R-squared                                         0.721       0.722        0.789       0.789      0.637         0.686

      Notes: The table reports coefficients of probit regressions, with robust standard errors in parentheses. The dependent
     variable Pro-gun ratingijt is coded 1 when senator i from state j is assigned a letter grade above C- in congressional period
     t. In favor of votes supported by GOAijt (respectively Against votes not supported by GOAijt ) is the proportion of votes
     supported by GOA (resp. not supported by GOA) in which senator i from state j voted “yea” (resp. “nay”) during
     Congress t. In column 6 the variable Gun-control contributions is not included since no senator in the sample receives
     positive contributions. ***, ** and * indicate statistical significance at the 99%, 95% and 90%, respectively.
                                                  Table B-4: List of votes supported by GOA

     Date   Vote           Description provided by GOA                                                                           Yeas-    Result   Directly
                                                                                                                                 Nays              gun-
                                                                                                                                                   related?
     Nov.   H.J.R.115,     The Senate rejected a first vote on the Simpson-Istook provision which would restrict welfare to lobby 46-49   Failed   no
     9,     amendment      organizations.
     1995   No. 3049
     Nov.   H.J.R.115,     The Senate passed a compromise version of the Simpson-Istook provision. The compromise which passed 49-47      Passed   no
     9,     amendment      would only limit those non-profit groups with budgets of more than $3 million from both lobbying and
     1995   No. 3049       receiving federal grants.
     July   Smith          Pro-gun Senator Bob Smith (R-NH) introduced an “Anti-Brady” amendment. The Smith amendment 69-31               Passed   yes
     21,    amendment      would prohibit the FBI from using Brady background checks to tax or register gun owners. Further, the
     1998   No. 3234       amendment requires the “immediate destruction of all [gun buyer] information, in any form whatsoever.”
     July   Boxer          Vote to table an amendment that would prohibit the transfer of guns which are not equipped with a     61-39    Passed   yes
     21,    amendment      locking device.
     1998   No. 3230
     July   Durbin         The Senate defeated a “lock-up-your-safety” amendment introduced by Sen. Dick Durbin (D-IL). 69-31             Passed   yes
52




     22,    amendment      Durbin’s provision would make it a federal crime to keep a firearm and ammunition on your premises
     1998   No. 3260       under the following conditions: you know or should know that a juvenile can gain access to your firearm,
                           and a juvenile does obtain access to it and does as little as exhibit it.
     July   Feinstein      Senator Dianne Feinstein (D-CA) offered an anti-gun provision as an amendment to S. 2312. Her         54-44    Passed   yes
     28,    amendment      language would prohibit the importation of firearm magazines holding over 10 rounds that were manu-
     1998   No. 3351       factured before the 1994 ban was enacted.
     May    S.      254 The Senate defeated an amendment introduced by anti-gun Senator Frank Lautenberg (D-NJ). The pro-        51-47    Failed   yes
     12,    amendment   vision would have banned private sales of firearms at gun shows unless buyers submitted to background
     1999   No. 331     registration checks. Draconian restrictions would have also been imposed on gun show promoters.
     May    S.      254 Feinstein Modified Amendment, to provide for a ban on importing large capacity ammunition feeding 39-59           Failed   yes
     13,    amendment   devices, prohibit the transfer to and possession by juveniles of semiautomatic assault weapons and large
     1999   No. 343     capacity ammunition feeding devices, and enhance criminal penalties for transfers of handguns, ammu-
                        nition, semiautomatic assault weapons, and large capacity ammunition feeding devices to juveniles.
     May    S.      254 Hatch/Craig Amendment No. 344, to provide for effective gun law enforcement, enhanced penalties,         3-94     Failed   yes
     13,    amendment   and facilitation of background checks at gun shows.
     1999   No. 344
     May    S.      254 Internet firearms sales. Schumer Amendment No. 350, to amend title 18, United States Code, to 50-43               Passed   yes
     14,    amendment   regulate the transfer of firearms over the Internet.
     1999   No. 350
     July    H.R.   5441, The amendment, introduced by Sen. David Vitter (R-LA), provides that no money can be used by 84-16              Passed   yes
     13,     amendment    federal agents to confiscate firearms during a declared state of emergency. The amendment was added
     2006    No. 4615     to the Department of Homeland Security appropriations bill (H.R. 5441).
     Jan.    S. 1, amend- The Senate narrowly passed the Bennett amendment to strike language in S.1 that would infringe upon 55-43       Passed   no
     18,     ment 20.     the free speech rights of groups like GOA. Offered by Sen. Robert Bennett (R-UT), the amendment
     2007                 struck requirements that would have required GOA to monitor and report on its communications with
                          its members, and could easily have led to government demands for GOA’s membership list.
     Sept.   H.R.   2764, The Vitter provision stipulates that no U.S. funds can be used by the United Nations – or organizations 81-10   Passed   no
     6,      amendment    affiliated with the UN – to restrict or tax our gun rights. Hence, the amendment would give a mildly
     2007    No. 2774     pro-gun administration the excuse to stop sending US taxpayer funds to the United Nations as soon as
                          they adopt any policy to restrict the Second Amendment rights of Americans.
     Feb.    S.     1200, Vote to adopt an amendment that would prohibit funds in the Indigenous Health Bill (S 1200) from       78-11    Passed   yes
     25,     amendment    being used to “carry out any anti-firearm program, gun buy-back program, or program to discourage
     2008    No. 4070     or stigmatize the private ownership of firearms for collecting, hunting, or self-defense.”
     Feb.    S.      160, On February 26, the Senate passed a pro-gun amendment offered by Senator John Ensign (R-NV). 62-36              Passed   yes
     26,     amendment    The Ensign amendment would completely repeal D.C.’s gun ban. The amendment passed as a rider
     2009    No. 575      to S. 160, the D.C. Voting Rights Act. That bill that is designed to give Washington, D.C. full voting
                          privileges in the House of Representatives, thus providing one more anti-gun vote in that chamber.
     April   S.Con.Res.     Amendment that seeks to reverse a gun prohibition on Amtrak trains. The provision, sponsored by 63-35         Passed   yes
53




     2,      13, amend-     Sen. Roger Wicker (R-MS), passed as part of the annual budget resolution (S. Con. Res. 13). Amtrak
     2009    ment     No.   regulations prohibit firearms on both checked and carry on baggage, which means that sportsmen who
             798            wish to use an Amtrak carrier for a hunting trip cannot take a shotgun even in their checked luggage.
     May     H.R.     627, The Senate passed a pro-gun amendment – offered by Senator Tom Coburn (R-OK) – that would 67-29                Passed   yes
     12,     amendment     effectively overturn the gun ban on National Park Service lands. The amendment will in no way change
     2009    No. 1067      or override state, local or federal law, but will simply allow those laws (enacted by legislation, and not
                           by bureaucrats or judges) to govern firearms possession.
     July    S.     1390, Vote to pass an amendment allowing individuals who have conceal and carry permits in their home        58-39    Failed   yes
     22,     amendment    state to carry concealed firearms across state lines.
     2009    No. 1618
     March H.R.  4872, The U.S. Senate defeated an amendment to repeal the Veterans Disarmament Act on March 25, 2010. 45-53              Failed   yes
     25,   amendment   During the Clinton Administration, the Department of Veteran Affairs (VA) began sending the names of
     2010 No. 3700     many of its beneficiaries to the FBI so they could be added to the NICS list, denying these individuals
                       their right to purchase a firearm. To combat this outrage, pro-gun Senator Richard Burr (R-NC)
                       authored S. 669, the Veterans Second Amendment Protection Act, which stipulates that a veteran
                       cannot lose his or her gun rights “without the order or finding of a judge, magistrate, or other judicial
                       authority of competent jurisdiction that such person is a danger to himself or herself or others.”
       Sources: Website and newsletters of Guns Owners of America (GOA). In the interest of space, some descriptions have been shortened.
     B.3   Additional robustness checks
                             Table B-6: The pro-gun effect of election proximity, linear probability model

              Dep. variable:                                                          Voteijvt
                                                                    All                                Directly gun-related
                                                  (1)        (2)           (3)      (4)          (5)     (6)        (7)         (8)
              Senate3it                        0.060***   0.039**     0.036**      0.044*  0.075**     0.048**    0.047**      0.053*
                                                (0.021)    (0.016)     (0.016)     (0.023) (0.030)      (0.023)    (0.023)     (0.030)
              Republicanit                                0.479***    0.478***    0.480***             0.412***   0.412***    0.423***
                                                           (0.044)     (0.045)     (0.065)              (0.045)    (0.045)     (0.065)
              Malei                                          0.048      0.046        0.033                0.076      0.077       0.052
                                                           (0.045)     (0.046)     (0.053)              (0.051)    (0.052)     (0.061)
              Ageit                                        -0.003*     -0.003*      -0.003              -0.003*    -0.003*      -0.003
                                                           (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.002)              (0.002)    (0.002)     (0.002)
              Gun-rights contributionsit                    -0.000      0.000       -0.000                0.000      0.000       0.000
                                                           (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)              (0.002)    (0.002)     (0.003)
54




              Gun-control contributionsit                   -0.006      -0.005       0.001               -0.005     -0.005      0.001
                                                           (0.007)     (0.007)     (0.012)              (0.007)    (0.007)     (0.011)
              Gun magazine subscriptionsjt                   0.027      0.027                             0.028      0.028
                                                           (0.020)     (0.020)                          (0.025)    (0.025)
              Violent crime ratejt                        0.005***    0.005***                            0.004      0.004
                                                           (0.002)     (0.002)                          (0.002)    (0.002)
              Educationjt                                   -0.007      -0.007                           -0.006     -0.006
                                                           (0.009)     (0.009)                          (0.010)    (0.010)
              Year dummies                        yes        yes           no       yes       yes        yes        no          yes
              State dummies                       yes        yes           yes      yes       yes        yes        yes         yes
              Vote dummies                        no         no            yes      no        no         no         yes         no
              Year×State dummies                  no         no            no       yes       no         no         no          yes
              Observations                       1,840      1,840         1,840    1,840     1,363      1,363      1,363       1,363
              R-squared                          0.475      0.593         0.643    0.701     0.502      0.590      0.644       0.692

              Notes: The table reports coefficients of a linear probability model, with robust standard errors in parentheses, adjusted
             for clustering at the state level. The dependent variable Voteijvt is coded as 1 when senator i from state j voted pro
             gun on vote v in year t. ***, ** and * indicate statistical significance at the 99%, 95% and 90%, respectively.
                       Table B-7: The pro-gun effect of election proximity, alternative samples

      Dep. variable:                                                          Voteijvt
      Sample:                            All GOA +         GOA gun-related +              All GOA +      GOA gun-related +
                                        key votes 1993      key votes 1993                Votesmart         Votesmart
                                        (1)        (2)       (3)        (4)              (5)     (6)       (7)       (8)
      Senate3it                       0.200**    0.193** 0.249**      0.233**      0.196**      0.140* 0.247**      0.183**
                                      (0.084)    (0.096)  (0.124)     (0.108)      (0.076)      (0.078) (0.105)     (0.082)
      Republicanit                              2.329***             2.103***                  2.036***            1.888***
                                                 (0.265)              (0.268)                   (0.189)             (0.194)
      Malei                                      0.506**               0.701*                   0.442**             0.564**
                                                 (0.243)              (0.374)                   (0.204)             (0.270)
      Ageit                                     -0.029***            -0.028***                 -0.014**            -0.014**
                                                 (0.008)              (0.009)                   (0.006)             (0.006)
      Gun-rights contributionsit                  0.018                0.017                     0.013                0.013
                                                 (0.013)              (0.016)                   (0.010)             (0.012)
55




      Gun-control contributionsit               -0.174***            -0.156***                   0.010               0.011
                                                 (0.043)              (0.047)                   (0.061)             (0.060)
      Gun magazine subscriptionsjt                0.064                0.060                     0.066                0.101
                                                 (0.110)              (0.131)                   (0.069)             (0.085)
      Violent crime ratejt                      0.024***             0.028***                   0.015*               0.016*
                                                 (0.008)              (0.010)                   (0.008)             (0.009)
      Educationjt                                 -0.053               -0.062                   -0.061*             -0.071*
                                                 (0.046)              (0.053)                   (0.034)             (0.037)
      Senate3it (marginal effects)    0.044**   0.030**    0.054**    0.036**      0.047**     0.026*    0.059**   0.034**
                                      (0.019)   (0.015)    (0.027)    (0.017)      (0.018)     (0.014)   (0.025)   (0.015)
      Predicted probability            0.597     0.595      0.598      0.596        0.548       0.547     0.545     0.544
      Year dummies                      yes       yes        yes        yes          yes         yes       yes       yes
      State dummies                     yes       yes        yes        yes          yes         yes       yes       yes
      Observations                     1,957     1,957      1,467      1,467        2,523       2,523     2,113     2,113
      Pseudo R-squared                 0.411     0.585      0.425      0.582        0.377       0.524     0.389     0.524

      Notes: The table reports coefficients of a probit model, with robust standard errors in parentheses, adjusted for
     clustering at the state level. The dependent variable Voteijvt is coded as 1 when senator i from state j voted pro gun
     on vote v in year t. ***, ** and * indicate statistical significance at the 99%, 95% and 90%, respectively.
                        Table B-8: The pro-gun effect of election proximity, additional controls
     Dep. variable:                                                                 Voteijvt
     Sample:                                               All                                       Directly gun-related
                                       (1)         (2)             (3)        (4)              (5)     (6)         (7)         (8)
     Senate3it                      0.270***    0.298*** 0.272***            0.301*** 0.334***       0.318***    0.371***   0.365***
                                     (0.096)     (0.107)   (0.096)            (0.107)  (0.108)        (0.119)     (0.112)     (0.124)
     Republicanit                   2.553***    2.400*** 2.586***            2.422*** 2.286***       2.223***    2.474***   2.422***
                                     (0.302)     (0.308)   (0.312)            (0.312)  (0.309)        (0.308)     (0.352)     (0.352)
     Malei                             0.306      0.417      0.317              0.402   0.419          0.420        0.452       0.457
                                     (0.266)     (0.339)   (0.269)            (0.339)  (0.421)        (0.446)     (0.457)     (0.491)
     Ageit                          -0.028***    -0.021*  -0.029***           -0.020* -0.026***        -0.017   -0.029***      -0.018
                                     (0.009)     (0.011)   (0.009)            (0.011)  (0.010)        (0.014)     (0.011)     (0.015)
     Gun-rights contributionsit       0.021*      0.018     0.023*              0.018   0.022          0.023        0.027       0.028
                                     (0.012)     (0.013)   (0.012)            (0.013)  (0.017)        (0.017)     (0.017)     (0.018)
     Gun-control contributionsit    -0.160***   -0.175*** -0.171***         -0.180*** -0.151**       -0.149**   -0.183***   -0.187***
                                     (0.055)     (0.059)   (0.054)            (0.059)  (0.059)        (0.060)     (0.062)     (0.065)
     Gun magazine subscriptionsjt      0.068      0.036      0.081              0.026   0.186          0.127        0.162       0.097
56




                                     (0.128)     (0.127)   (0.140)            (0.123)  (0.182)        (0.170)     (0.204)     (0.187)
     Violent crime ratejt              0.015      0.011      0.015              0.010   0.008          0.006        0.007       0.007
                                     (0.011)     (0.012)   (0.011)            (0.012)  (0.014)        (0.015)     (0.015)     (0.016)
     Educationjt                      -0.051      -0.029    -0.053             -0.029   -0.065         -0.054      -0.063      -0.058
                                     (0.049)     (0.050)   (0.048)            (0.051)  (0.061)        (0.062)     (0.064)     (0.067)
     Swing Statejt                    -0.178                                   -0.103    0.020                                 0.062
                                     (0.192)                                  (0.181)  (0.284)                                (0.318)
     Margin of Victoryit                          0.545                         0.564                 0.265                     0.442
                                                 (0.562)                      (0.559)                (0.668)                  (0.724)
     Tenureit                                     -0.028                       -0.028                 -0.029                   -0.037
                                                 (0.026)                      (0.026)                (0.029)                  (0.032)
     Close votev                                                   0.165        0.188                           1.162***     1.200***
                                                                  (0.167)     (0.167)                            (0.228)      (0.230)
     Acceptv                                                     0.454***   0.517***                            1.381***     1.397***
                                                                  (0.117)     (0.134)                            (0.235)      (0.243)
     Senate3it (marginal effects)   0.040***    0.047***         0.041***   0.047***      0.050***   0.049***   0.051***    0.051***
                                     (0.014)     (0.017)          (0.014)    (0.017)       (0.016)    (0.018)    (0.016)     (0.017)
     Predicted probability            0.614       0.625            0.614      0.625         0.621      0.630      0.622       0.631
     Year dummies                      yes        yes              yes        yes           yes        yes         yes         yes
     State dummies                     yes        yes              yes        yes           yes        yes         yes         yes
     Observations                     1,767      1,624            1,767      1,624         1,281      1,225       1,281       1,225
     Pseudo R-squared                 0.596      0.574            0.599      0.578         0.594      0.580       0.628       0.617

     Notes: Same as in Table B-7.
