                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           BEYOND ZEROES AND ONES:
                 THE INTENSITY AND DYNAMICS OF CIVIL CONFLICT

                                        Stephen Chaudoin
                                       Zachary Peskowitz
                                       Christopher Stanton

                                       Working Paper 20258
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w20258


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2014




We thank Luke Condra, Raymond Hicks, Michael Horowitz, Sarah Hummel, Paul Poast, Burcu Savun,
Scott Schaefer, Jacob Shapiro, and Kathryn Shaw. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Stephen Chaudoin, Zachary Peskowitz, and Christopher Stanton. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Beyond Zeroes and Ones: The Intensity and Dynamics of Civil Conflict
Stephen Chaudoin, Zachary Peskowitz, and Christopher Stanton
NBER Working Paper No. 20258
June 2014
JEL No. C23,D74,N40

                                             ABSTRACT

There is tremendous variation in conflict intensity both across and within civil conflict spells. Using an
instrumental variables approach and a rich set of dynamic, empirical models, we find that the intensity
of conflict is negatively related to per-capita income. Economic conditions also affect conflict dynamics,
as higher per-capita income reduces the persistence of past conflict intensity.


Stephen Chaudoin                                    Christopher Stanton
Department of Political Science                     University of Utah
University of Illinois                              David Eccles School of Business
stephen.chaudoin@gmail.com                          1655 East Campus Center Drive
                                                    Salt Lake City, UT 84112
Zachary Peskowitz                                   and NBER
Department of Political Science                     christopher.t.stanton@gmail.com
Ohio State University
zachary.peskowitz@gmail.com
   Over the last decade, a significant amount of research has sought to explain the extensive margin
of civil conflict, i.e. the causes of civil war onset and occurrence in a particular country and
year. However, much less attention has been paid to variation in the intensive margin of civil
conflicts, i.e. how many combatants lose their lives during battle. The amount of variation in the

intensity of civil conflict is tremendous and multifaceted. Over the last half-century, the number
of combat deaths during a year of civil conflict has ranged from less than 100 to over 100,000.
The intensity of civil conflict is also dynamic. Within particular conflict spells, the intensity of
fighting can rise and fall sharply at some times and remain steady at others. Approximately 20%
of the low intensity conflicts that occurred between 1993 and 2004 escalated to large-scale civil

wars (Melander, Möller and Öberg, 2009). Some conflicts are persistent, with fighting simmering
at consistent levels over longer periods of time, while other conflicts become more volatile.
   This paper puts the dynamics and intensity of civil conflict front and center. Specifically, we
take one of the most prominent explanations for the onset and occurrence of civil conflict, the level

of per-capita income, and ask two related questions: Does variation in economic conditions affect
the intensity of civil conflict and the dynamics of civil conflict? We find an affirmative answer to
both questions.
   Using cross-national data on the number of battle deaths resulting from combat between gov-

ernments and rebel groups from 1960 to 2008, we find that the effect of per-capita income on the
number of battle deaths in conflict is both statistically and substantively meaningful. The best es-
timate from a Blundell and Bond (1998) model of the effect of income on battle deaths is that a
unit change in the logarithm of per-capita income leads to a reduction of 321 battle deaths in the
current year and 720 deaths overall, after accounting for the full dynamic effect. By taking into

account variation at the intensive margin of conflict, we find that the magnitude of these estimates
is approximately twice as large as the analogous estimate that would be derived from analysis of
only the extensive margin of conflict.
   The second and most important set of results provides estimates of conflict dynamics. Ana-


                                                 2
lyzing the severity of civil conflicts allows us to estimate rich models of how conflicts evolve and
persist over time. We initially describe the overall level of persistence of conflict intensity. To
our knowledge, this is the first analysis to document the degree to which past conflict intensity
affects future conflict intensity. We find that conflict intensity is mean-reverting but persistent. In

dynamic AR(1) models, we find an average AR(1) coefficient that is between 0.55 and 0.78. The
AR(1) coefficient describes the degree to which the level of conflict intensity in period t affects
conflict intensity in period t + 1. Our estimates are positive and less than one, which indicates that
conflict intensity is persistent across time, but does not tend to be explosive. Here, too, we find that
modeling the intensive margin of conflict yields a richer understanding of conflict dynamics than

analysis that only considers the extensive margin. The estimated AR(1) coefficient governing the
extensive margin of civil conflict is much larger than the estimated AR(1) coefficient governing
the intensity of conflict, suggesting that conflicts smolder, with low levels of fighting, but conflicts,
in expectation, do not erupt in response to past fighting.

   We then examine which factors can change the persistence of conflict intensity. We find that a
country’s income level has a significant effect on conflict dynamics. To make these results more
tangible, we show how income also affects the “half-life” of conflict, i.e. the amount of time it
takes a conflict to return to “normal” levels after a spike in intensity. For observed conflicts, in

country-years in the top 5 percent of the income distribution, it takes less than 1 year for the deaths
from a conflict shock to decline to half the level of the shock. In stark contrast, for country-years in
the bottom 5 percent of the income distribution, it takes over 9 years for the deaths from a conflict
shock to decline to half the level of the shock.
   Throughout the analysis, we take seriously the endogeneity of economic performance, spillovers

across countries, and unobserved heterogeneity. For a variety of reasons, a country’s level of civil
conflict can influence its economic performance, and unobservable factors potentially influence
both economics and civil conflict. To account for this endogeneity problem, we use the economic
performance of a country’s export partners as an instrument for per-capita income. This identifica-


                                                   3
tion strategy is similar to Acemoglu et al. (2008) in their study of the relationship between income
and democracy. A valid instrument must satisfy the exclusion restriction, i.e. that the instrument
affects the explanatory variable of interest (per capita income) but be uncorrelated with the error
term. The exclusion restriction here is plausible, requiring that economic fluctuations in a coun-

try’s distant export destinations are related to civil conflict only through their effect on income. To
make the exclusion restriction more plausible, we modify the Acemoglu et al. (2008) instrument
by removing adjacent countries when calculating the per-capita income of export partners, further
reducing the potential for geographic spillovers and spatially-correlated shocks that may violate
the exclusion restriction.

   We also take seriously the possibility of measurement error. It is well known that precisely
measuring the number of deaths from civil conflict is difficult. Measurement error in the depen-
dent variable is only a potential problem because the dynamic models include lags of regressors
that contain measurement error, and serially correlated measurement error may bias estimates when

using dynamic models and panel-style instruments. We take a number of steps to assess the sensi-
tivity of the estimates to this potential problem, all of which yield the conclusion that the dynamics
of civil conflict are essential for our understanding of the conflict process.
   This research represents an important addition to understanding conflict dynamics. Deaths

from combat are one of the most immediate and direct consequences of civil conflict, so under-
standing variation in conflict intensity is of inherent importance. Furthermore, many of the most
pressing policy questions regarding civil conflict also deal with dynamics. For example, once a
conflict has broken out, understanding the conditions under which conflicts escalate or de-escalate
should inform decisions over the appropriateness of outside actions, be they military or economic.

Our research contributes to a growing body of work that emphasizes the interdependence of con-
flict decisions over time (Findley, 2013) and the effects of outside influences, like mediation, on
limiting conflict escalation (Greig, 2013).
   While we extensively analyze the relationship between economic variation and conflict dynam-


                                                   4
ics, our findings suggest that much remains to be learned from deeper inquiry into the evolution
and dynamics of civil wars. We find that, among four other factors identified in the prior literature
as correlates of civil war, ethnic fractionalization is most associated with prolonged conflict per-
sistence.1 Oil producing countries have conflicts that die out relatively quickly, possibly because

oil producing countries tend to be relatively wealthy. Countries with high religious fractionaliza-
tion and mountainous terrain do not differ from other countries in terms of conflict persistence. A
deeper understanding of the micro- and macro-level relationships between these variables and the
intensity and dynamics of civil conflict is a warranted next step.
   The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 lays out the theoretical link between economic vari-

ation, conflict intensity, and conflict dynamics. Section 3 describes the main dependent variables,
the instrumental variable, and the first stage relationship between the instrument and variation in
national income. Section 4 describes results from models of the effect of economic fluctuations
on conflict intensity and average conflict persistence. Section 5 describes results from models in

which conflict persistence can vary according to a country’s income level or other factors. The
final section concludes.



1 Theory

There are several excellent survey articles that review recent advances in the study of civil war, so
we only make a few relevant observations that motivate the study of the intensity and dynamics

of civil conflicts.2 Most importantly, the extensive margin of civil conflict and the number battle
deaths, although correlated with one another, are distinct phenomena. The extensive margin is akin
to well known variables coding the onset or occurrence of civil war in a particular country-year
observation. While this is an important source of variation, there is also tremendous variation at
the intensive margin, i.e. how intense is conflict for a particular country-year. Figure 1 plots the

distribution of the logged number of battle deaths for country-years with positive battle deaths,

                                                  5
showing the magnitude of this variation. In our sample, the number of battle deaths from civil
conflict ranges from 0 to 115,000. The standard deviation for the number of battle deaths is over
seven times as large as the sample mean.
   One aspect of this variation is obvious- conflict intensity varies across conflicts; some conflicts

are much costlier in terms of human lives than others. However, not all of this variation can be
attributed to across-conflict differences. Civil conflicts are also dynamic phenomena. In its decades
long civil war, Angola experienced years with as few as 25 battle deaths from civil conflict and
years with as many as 20,000 deaths. This is an example of variation in conflict dynamics, with
conflict intensity rising and falling over time.



                                        [Figure 1 About Here]


Economic Conditions and Conflict Intensity

What factors might affect the intensity and dynamics of civil conflict? Here we establish that one

of the most commonly studied explanations for the extensive margin of civil conflict –variation
in economic conditions– is also plausibly related to the intensive margin of conflict. At least two
mechanisms motivate prior studies on the link between income and civil conflict: opportunity costs
and state capacity. In opportunity cost theories, low per-capita income increases the likelihood of

civil conflict through the relative cost of rebellion. For an individual choosing between lawful
participation in the economy and insurgency, economic downturns may increase the attractiveness
of fighting relative to employment.3 The second mechanism describes the possibility that poor
states may be unable to buy-off or effectively suppress rebellious groups’ capacity.4 Poor economic

conditions hinder the state’s ability to provide public goods or placate a large enough subset of the
population to avert armed rebellion.
   The empirical work linking income conditions with the extensive margin of civil conflict has
produced varying results. Among the most recent papers, Miguel, Satyanath and Sergenti (2004)

                                                   6
find that economic growth, instrumented by a country’s rainfall, has a negative effect on the prob-
ability of civil war in sub-Saharan Africa from 1979-1999. Brückner and Ciccone (2010) also
find that decreases in the price of a country’s exports increase the probability of civil war in
a similar sample. Djankov and Reynal-Querol (2010) find no relationship between poverty and

the probability a country is engaged in civil war using a broader sample and different estimators.
Bazzi and Blattman (2011) find weak/inconsistent evidence linking commodity price variation and
civil war across a broad array of specifications.
   The theoretical mechanisms relating economic downturns and the extensive margin of civil war
apply equally well to the intensive margin of conflict. For opportunity costs mechanisms, poor eco-

nomic conditions may make rebellion relatively more attractive for each individual citizen, which
increases the number of combatants at risk of dying in combat. For state capacity mechanisms, de-
creased ability to buy-off or suppress rebellion may also increase the number of individuals fight-
ing and therefore the number at risk of dying. More combatants could directly increase conflict

intensity. Some micro-level evidence supports this possibility. Using data on recruitment during
the Sierra Leone civil war, Humphreys and Weinstein (2006) find that individual-level poverty is
associated with an increased probability of joining both the rebellion and the government counter-
rebellion. On the other hand, Berman et al. (2011) find that higher unemployment levels were not

associated with higher rates of insurgent attacks against government forces in Afghanistan, Iraq,
and the Philippines.
   Despite the possible theoretical links between economic conditions and conflict intensity, we
are aware of few empirical studies of this relationship. To the best of our knowledge, only Lacina
(2006), Bazzi and Blattman (2011) and Esteban, Mayoral and Ray (2012) study the severity of

civil conflicts cross-nationally. Lacina (2006) and Bazzi and Blattman (2011) find limited effects
of economic changes on conflict severity, while Esteban, Mayoral and Ray (2012) explain vari-
ation in the intensity of civil conflict using several different indices of the distribution of ethnic
types within a country.    Both Lacina (2006) and Bazzi and Blattman (2011) select the sample


                                                    7
based on cases where conflict is occurring; their goal is to study whether economic fluctuations
matter conditional on conflict. As will become clear later, we take a different approach because
characterizing the dynamics of conflict requires use of the years without conflict as well. Lacina
(2006) regresses the number of battle deaths in 114 country-year observations between 1946 and

2002, for which there were over 900 battle deaths, on the log of the country’s GDP, lagged one
year, and a set of control variables. She finds no effect for logged GDP on the number of bat-
tle deaths. Bazzi and Blattman (2011) regress battle deaths from civil conflict on variation in the
prices of a country’s commodity exports, a count of the number of years of conflict, and an indica-
tor for civil war onset. They find a negative effect for commodity prices; increases in the prices of

a country’s commodity exports decrease the number of battle deaths experienced by a country-year
in some of their specifications. In related studies specific to Colombia, Angrist and Kugler (2008)
and Dube and Vargas (2013) study the effects of commodity prices on the intensity of ongoing
civil conflicts in particular regions, which vary in their sensitivity to variation of the particular

commodity price. Angrist and Kugler (2008) find that increases in coca prices and production in-
creased violence in coca cultivating regions. Dube and Vargas (2013) find that commodity prices
have differential impacts on violence, depending on location and the labor intensity of the good in
question.


Economic Conditions and Conflict Persistence

Existing work recognizes that the extensive margin of civil conflicts tends to be persistent over
time. For a variety of reasons, countries can become mired in conflict traps, where a civil conflict
in year t increases the likelihood of a civil conflict in year t + 1 (Collier et al., 2003). In dynamic

models of the extensive margin of civil war, Elbadawi and Sambanis (2002) find that conflict in
year t has a large, positive, and significant effect on the probability of war in year t + 1.5
   The persistence of conflict intensity, however, has not received much attention. Existing theo-
retical work suggests that, as with the extensive margin of civil conflict, conflict intensity should

                                                   8
also be persistent, with the intensity of conflict in time t positively associated with conflict in-
tensity in time t + 1. Both of the theoretical mechanisms linking economic downturns with the
extent of civil conflict suggest that conflict intensity should be state-dependent, with past shocks
affecting the future trajectory of conflict. For a combatant who is comparing the costs and benefits

of rebellion versus lawful employment, choosing rebellion entails significant sunk costs. Once
associated with rebellious groups, a combatant cannot always easily return to lawful employment,
even if improving economic conditions make fighting sufficiently unattractive. Choosing to be-
come a rebel, especially in conflicts where the incumbent government retains power, may entail
the significant risk of being labeled a traitor, resulting in future prosecution or execution. Similarly,

the competence or inadequacy of state capacity is likely to be persistent. The ability of states to
provide adequate public goods and suppress rebellions is slow-moving. Weak states are likely to
stay weak, even when transitory economic improvements make them stronger temporarily.
   It is also possible that conflict intensity is an explosive process, where an increase in conflict

intensity during year t results in an even greater increase in conflict intensity during year t + 1.
If adverse economic conditions increased the intensity of conflict in year t, the resulting deaths
from combat could create conditions for increased conflict severity in year t + 1. In the usual
opportunity costs models of rebellion, an individual chooses to rebel if the expected utility of legal

participation in the economy is lower than that of choosing to join in armed conflict. If particularly
intense conflict in year t further depressed the expected utility of legal participation in the economy,
then this could drive even more individuals into combat. It is possible that a country’s susceptibility
to this type of feedback loop depends on their overall level of income. A better economy may be
more resistant to this type of snowball or cascade effect than a poorer one.

   While our paper focuses most heavily on economics, several other factors which have been
proposed in the literature as correlates of civil war could also affect the time-paths of civil conflicts.
For example, ethno-linguistic or religious fractionalization or polarization have been linked to the
occurrence of civil conflict (Montalvo and Reynal-Querol, 2005). Fractionalization might also


                                                    9
make conflicts more persistent, in addition to making conflict more likely. Once ethnic or religious
tensions boil over to violent conflict, this may make divisions between groups more salient or more
precisely defined, making a negotiated settlement more difficult. The presence of natural resources,
such as oil, has also been linked to the occurrence of civil conflict (Ross, 2004). The theoretical

link between natural resources and conflict dynamics is less clear. The presence of a consistent
flow of rents from natural resources might make conflicts more persistent. On the other hand, one
group capturing a valuable, resource rich area might be able to translate that wealth into increased
military capacity, which they could use to escalate or win (and potentially end) a particular conflict.
Finally, the terrain of a country has also been linked to the occurrence of conflict, with mountainous

terrain favoring insurgency.6 This theoretical mechanism could also affect conflict persistence. If
terrain affords insurgents the ability to mount persistent guerilla attacks, while limiting the state’s
ability to conduct counter-insurgency operations, then we would expect mountainous terrain to be
associated with persistent, simmering conflicts.

    The empirical models that follow shed light on both the static and dynamic relationship be-
tween per-capita income and the costliness of civil conflict. The opportunity cost theory and the
state-capacity theory provide the same qualitative predictions and are tested jointly against a null
hypothesis that there is no relationship between economic measures and civil conflict. This null

hypothesis has gained prominence in the literature and is rejected when employing data on conflict
intensity in the first part of the paper.7
    The second part of the paper then tracks the evolution of the severity of civil conflict. We pro-
vide overall estimates of the persistence of conflict intensity, and then examine whether particular
country characteristics -fractionalization, oil exports, and mountainous terrain- are associated with

increased persistence of conflict intensity.




                                                   10
2 Data

2.1 Dependent Variable: Battle Deaths

The dependent variable in our analysis is BattleDeathsit , which describes the number of battle
deaths resulting from civil conflict in country i during year t. The battle deaths data are from
the UCDP/PRIO Armed Conflict Dataset and accompanying Battle Deaths Dataset, which collects
data on civil conflicts defined as “internal armed conflict [occurring] between the government of
a state and one or more internal opposition group(s)” (Gleditsch et al., 2002, p. 9). Battle deaths

are “deaths resulting directly from violence inflicted through the use of armed force by a party
to an armed conflict during contested combat” (Lacina and Gleditsch, 2005, p. 3). The Armed
Conflict Dataset distinguishes between civil conflicts with and without outside intervention from
a foreign state. We focus on civil conflicts without outside intervention. The definition of battle

deaths excludes deaths not related to combat, e.g. violence solely against civilians or execution of
prisoners of war. 8 The battle deaths data cover civil conflicts in 196 countries from 1960-2008.
   Table 1 provides summary statistics for each measure of civil conflict for different regional
breakdowns: the full sample, a sample restricted to sub-Saharan Africa, the full sample excluding

Western Democracies and Japan, and the full sample excluding sub-Saharan Africa. In all break-
downs, conflict intensity varies greatly. Standard deviations of battle deaths are approximately 6-8
times the means, emphasizing the variation in conflict intensity.


                                       [Table 1 About Here]

   Before proceeding, it is well known that battle deaths data are difficult to collect and are sus-
ceptible to measurement error. Measurement error in the dependent variable does not affect the
consistency of the parameter estimates. However, measurement error also occurs on the right hand

side of the estimating equations through the lagged dependent variable. In the classical errors in



                                                11
variables problem, if the right hand side x variable is measured with error (in this case, the lagged
dependent variable), it is possible to use an instrumental variable, z, to consistently estimate the
parameter of interest so long as any measurement error in z is independent of the measurement
error in x.Panel instruments based on lags of the data, may not solve the consistency problem

because the measurement error may be autocorrelated. For example, if data are interpolated, the
interpolation procedure will introduce correlated measurement error.
   We use a number of approaches, including the use of instrumental variables that are more or
less susceptible to serially correlated measurement error, to assess the sensitivity of results. One
approach is to use relatively coarse functions of the lagged data as instruments for the lagged

dependent variable.     These coarse functions do not capture as much information as the orig-
inal lagged dependent variable, but they are less likely to be measured with error that is cor-
related with the measurement error in the lagged dependent variable.            While the intensity of
fighting in any given year may be measured with error, the start dates and end dates of con-

flict are subject to less measurement error than data on the timing of battle deaths.         Because
of this, we construct an instrument defined as lags of a conflict indicator times conflict duration,
I (BattleDeathsit ≥ 25) × (t − lastY earOf P eaceit ).         Measurement error in this measure, if
there is any, is likely to have very little correlation with measurement error in yi,t−1 .9

   In addition to the steps taken in this paper, we would emphasize that there are advantages and
disadvantages to using the number of battle deaths as compared to using binary data about the
onset or occurrence of civil war. The main advantage of the battle deaths data is that it allows us to
say something about the intensity and dynamics of civil conflict. These data also avoid the difficult
issue of defining what constitutes civil war. The existing literature does not have a consensus on

what constitutes a civil war and uses (at least) 11 different datasets. According to Sambanis (2004),
the correlation between pairs of datasets concerning civil war onset is often low, sometimes even as
low as 0.42, and the average correlation is only 0.68. In some instances, the choice of threshold for
civil war classification can double the number of country-years considered to be at war. These def-


                                                   12
initional discrepancies are non-trivial. Classification error with a binary dependent variable results
in inconsistent parameter estimates. In finite samples, the biases that emerge from misclassifica-
tion can be severe. In a series of Monte Carlo simulations, Hausman, Abrevaya and Scott-Morton
(1998) show that even classification error of 2 percent yields parameter estimates that are biased by

15 to 25 percent of the true value. Sambanis (2004) and Hegre and Sambanis (2006) demonstrate
that choices regarding the definition of civil wars can indeed change empirical conclusions. They
estimate the effect of economic growth on the onset and occurrence of civil war using a set of com-
monly used datasets and find that the sign of economic growth is positive in approximately half the
regressions and negative in the other half. Bazzi and Blattman (2011) find similar inconsistencies

in their analysis of the effects of commodity prices. Sambanis (2004) speculates that “one way
around these problems is to stop trying to ... analyze civil wars as a distinct phenomenon and,
instead, to code levels of violence along a continuum” (p. 819). Analyzing the intensity of civil
conflict does exactly this, avoiding definitional problems by focusing on the level of violence in a

particular country-year rather than focusing on whether or not to call that country-year a civil war.
Our point is not that battle deaths data are a panacea for these problems. Rather, it is important to
recognize that there are strengths and weaknesses to the binary and continuous approaches.


2.2 Excluded Instruments

Endogeneity concerns are well established in the literature linking economic factors with civil
war. Because civil wars and more intense civil conflicts are likely to be associated with decreased
income, we use an instrumental variables approach to identify the effect of per-capita income. An
instrumental variable is a variable which (a) affects the explanatory variable of interest income and

(b) does not have a direct effect on the dependent variable, conflict intensity.10 The first statement
describes the strength of the instrument, something we test directly below. The second statement,
often called the exclusion restriction, is an untestable assumption. Below, we describe steps taken
to make this assumption more plausible.

                                                 13
   The instrument used here is similar to that described in Acemoglu et al. (2008) of income and
democratization. The instrument measures export-weighted variation in the GDP of a country’s
trading partners. The instrument theoretically affects income because business cycles are transmit-
ted from one country to another via international trade. As one country’s economic fortunes rise

or fall, this can affect the economies of its trading partners (Acemoglu et al., 2008, p. 824). Our
construction of the instrument leverages the fact that some economies affect each other more than
others. A country is most affected by conomic windfalls or recessions in countries which receive
a higher share of their exports.
   The first step is to construct a set of time-invariant weights, wij , that measure the degree of con-

nectivity between country i and country j through exports from i to j, as a percentage of country
i’s GDP. It is possible that civil conflict in one country could have a direct effect on the economy of
geographically proximate trading partners, because fighting or refugees may spill across borders.
This would violate the exclusion restriction. To ameliorate this possibility, the instrument construc-

tion sets geographically connected countries’ weights to 0. That is, to help alleviate geo-spatial
spillovers that may violate the exclusion restriction, when constructing the weights for country i,
all countries that are contiguous with i are excluded.11 Also, the Acemoglu et al. (2008) instrument
uses total trade -imports and exports- to construct their weights. Here, the weights are distinctly

based only on exports. This change is made because the effect of an economic fluctuation to an
import partner is likely to have a different effect on income than a fluctuation in an export partner.12
   The weight for dyad ij, wij , is constructed by:

                                                         1989
                                 I (Non − Contiguousij ) X Xijs
                           wij =                                                                     (1)
                                          Υij           s=1980
                                                               GDPis

where Υij is the number of years for which bilateral trade data are available for dyad i, j between
1980 and 1989.13 Xijs is the value of exports from country i to country j in year s in 1967 U.S.

dollars.14 GDPis measures the total GDP of country i in year s in 1967 U.S. dollars.15



                                                  14
    The instrument, Zit , is constructed by:

                                                               N
                                                                         
                                                                X
                                                                    wij 
                                  N
                                  X                                       
                                                           j=1,j6=i       
                         Zit =          wij Ijtlog(GDPjt)  N                                   (2)
                                                           X              
                               j=1,j6=i                           Ijt wij 
                                                             j=1,j6=i

where Ijt is an indicator for whether data for log(GDPjt) are available. The final term, in paren-
theses, corrects for the unbalanced nature of the panel by adjusting the weights to ensure that the
sum of the weights is the same for country i across time. In a balanced panel, this term equals one.

The total GDP of country j in year t is measured the same as in equation 1.


2.3 Explanatory Variable and First Stage Results

The main explanatory variable of interest is logged per capita GDP of country i in year t in 1967
U.S. dollars.16 Because panel GMM estimators are used later, the relevant first stage regression to

assess instrument strength is:


                         ∆ log (GDPit /P opulationit ) = β∆Zit + δt + uit                        (3)

where δt is a year fixed effect. Some specifications are estimated with country-specific time trends,
making the model ∆ log (GDPit /P opulationit ) = β∆Zit + δt + αi + uit where αi is a country
fixed effect.
    Table 2 shows results from the first stage. The model is estimated on four samples: all countries

with available data, sub-Saharan African countries, all countries except western democracies, and
all countries except sub-Saharan Africa. Each specification in Panel A corresponds to parameter
estimates from Equation 3.       In each sub-sample, the relationship between the instrument and
logged per capita GDP is positive and significant. The instrument is comparably strong in this
sample as in the sample used by Acemoglu et al. (2008).17 In addition, the F-statistic is larger than


                                                 15
10 in each of these four samples, meeting the often-used standard for instrument strength. Panel
B of Table 2 adds country fixed effects to 3, which corresponds to country-specific time trends in
levels. The instrument retains its strength, although the F-statistic falls slightly below 10 in the
some of the regional sub-samples.


                                        [Table 2 About Here]



3 Economic Fluctuations, Intensity, and Average Dynamics

The three questions asked in this paper are: (1) How do economic fluctuations affect the intensity
of civil conflict? (2) How persistent is conflict intensity? and (3) What explains the persistence of
conflict intensity? In this section, we focus on the first two questions. We discuss a “restricted”

model that recovers the average effect of income variation on the intensity of civil conflict and the
average AR (1) parameter governing the persistence of conflicts. We call this the restricted model
because the autoregressive coefficient is constrained to be common across all countries. In the
following section, we focus on the third question and discuss an “unrestricted” model, where the

autoregressive coefficient is allowed to vary based on country characteristics, like income level or
degree of fractionalization. For each of the two models (restricted and unrestricted), we discuss
the model used, then discuss interpretation of the relevant parameters, and then discuss the results.


3.1 Restricted Model

The model is based on the dynamic panel data model proposed in Blundell and Bond (1998). The
Blundell-Bond estimator can accommodate unobserved heterogeneity in a country’s intensity of
civil conflict, serial correlation in the civil conflict process, and endogenous realizations of income
variation. The model in levels is:




                                                  16
                      yit = αi + γyi,t−1 + β log (Incomeit /P opulationit ) + δt + εit              (4)

    where yit is the dependent variable of interest, γ measures the persistence of the process, β is

the effect of a unit change in log per-capita income on yit , αi is a country fixed effect, and δt is a
year fixed effect.
    The Blundell-Bond estimator allows for instruments outside of the system, and the export-
weighted income measure is employed as an instrument for log (GDPit /P opulationit ) . The es-

timator used is a “system” GMM estimator as opposed to a “difference” GMM estimator. We use
the system estimator because of the poor performance of the difference estimator when elements
of the history of the process in levels yi,t−2 , ..., yi,1 are weak instruments for lagged differences
(yi,t−1 − yi,t−2 ).    This insight about the weakness of instruments was originally developed by
Blundell and Bond in part to accommodate the case where the process {yit } is close to a unit root;

in such settings lagged levels of the process will have little predictive power for future differences.
In this setting, because many adjacent years of the process have zero battle deaths, levels are poor
instruments for future differences for the same reason.18
    In the difference equation, the instruments for (yi,t−1 − yi,t−2 ) are adjusted based on the results

of autocorrelation tests. We dynamically adjust the instrument matrix; if s is the order of auto-
correlation detected at the 10 percent level, then the instruments for (yi,t−1 − yi,t−2 ) will consist
of yi,t−s−2, yi,t−s−3, and yi,t−s−4 (assuming data availability; otherwise, suitable lags will be used
subject to the serial correlation tests). The instruments for yi,t−1 in the level equation are the cor-

responding instruments in lagged differences. The instrument for log (Incomeit /P opulationit )
is only the contemporaneous trade-weighted measure. The forward orthogonal deviations trans-
formation is used to preserve available observations (Arellano and Bover, 1995) and statistical
inference is based on panel robust standard errors.




                                                    17
3.2 Restricted Model: Parameter Interpretation

The two parameters of interest in the restricted model are β and γ. In the restricted model, γ
is the autoregressive coefficient that describes the degree of persistence in conflict intensity. Its

interpretation is familiar to many time series applications. We are primarily interested in whether
it exceeds 1, since this would suggest explosive conflict dynamics. We are also interested in the
rate at which conflicts return to “normal” levels after spikes or lulls in conflict intensity. We can
calculate the half-life of conflict intensity as log (0.5) / log (γ).
    The parameter β in the restricted model, Equation 4, is the combined intensive and extensive

marginal effect of log income on battle deaths. To understand what this means, some background
on the traditional tobit model may help with intuition. In OLS, with censored data, the slope
parameter (in this case β) is biased toward zero because of the mass of data censored at the origin.
If there is a corner solution–that is, zero is the actual choice agents make rather than the result of

censoring–then the slope parameter from OLS captures the marginal effect from crossing into the
uncensored portion of the data and the slope once moving into the uncensored portion. This is the
combined (overall) empirical marginal effect. If, on the other hand, the mass is due to censoring,
the OLS parameter estimate does not have this interpretation–and the parameter β is neither the

extensive, intensive, or overall marginal effect.
    While there is a point-mass of battle deaths at 0, we do not correct for this in the sense of a
tobit model, as 0 is the theoretical minimum number of possible battle deaths in a year. Therefore,
β, the marginal effect of income variation is the combined marginal effects on the intensive and

extensive margin.       The marginal effect on the extensive margin can be recovered easily using
the extensive margin indicator as the dependent variable. However, the marginal effect on the
intensive margin is much more difficult to recover because it requires an explicit hurdle crossing
model (like tobit).19




                                                    18
3.3 Restricted Model: Results

Having described the empirical strategy, we now turn to the presentation of the results on the rela-
tionship between civil conflict severity and per-capita income. Panel A of Table 3 shows parameter

estimates of Equation 4 using the number of battle deaths from civil conflict as the dependent
variable and suitable lags of battle deaths as instruments for battle deathsi,t−1 . Column 1 con-
tains estimates of the parameters for all countries in the sample. The estimated marginal effect
of a unit increase in the logarithm of per-capita income is −321 battle deaths per year. In addi-
tion to this contemporaneous effect of income on the intensity of civil war, the results strongly

show that these battle deaths will propagate into additional deaths in the future. The coefficient
on BattleDeathsi,t−1 , γ̂, is 0.55. Using the coefficient on income and lagged battle deaths, the total
decrease in expected number of deaths from a one-unit increase in log-income is approximately
 β̂          −321
1−γ̂
        =   1−0.55
                     ≈ −720.20 The next specifications in Panel A provide results for the regional sub-

samples. In all specifications, log-income is negatively and significantly associated with battle
deaths.
       The lagged battle deaths variable is also positive and statistically significant across the speci-
fications. The degree of persistence exhibits some heterogeneity across the specifications, ranging

from 0.71 in the sub-Saharan Africa sample to 0.42 in the sample that excludes sub-Saharan Africa.
The point estimates for the reduction in the expected number of long-run battle deaths range from
676 to 998 across the samples.21 The specification also allows us to estimate the expected half-life
of conflict deaths. The expected half-life of battle deaths is 1.2 years for the entire sample and is

largest, 2 years, when we restrict the analyses to sub-Saharan nations.


                                            [Table 3 About Here]

       Panel B of Table 3 repeats the analysis in Panel A with the alternative instruments for lagged
battle deaths, I (warit ) × (t − lastY earOf P eaceit ). The possibility of correlated measurement


                                                     19
error in battle deaths (one potential ramification of interpolation in the battle deaths data) motivates
the need to check the sensitivity to alternative instruments for lagged battle deaths.22 The use
of the interaction of lagged binary war indicators and conflict duration as instruments instead of
lagged battle deaths in Panel B alleviates some potential concern. As in Panel A, variation in

the trading partners’ GDP is also included as an instrument. The results with these alternative
instruments largely corroborate the findings in Panel A. In all samples, the coefficient estimate on
log per capita GDP is statistically significant, ranging from -225.7 to -127.6. The magnitude of the
autoregressive parameter is even greater than in Panel A. The estimates of the long-run decrease in
expected number of battle deaths from a one unit increase in log per capita GDP range from -538

to -1062. The estimated half-life of battle deaths are slightly higher in these specifications than in
the results in Panel A. The estimated half-life for the entire sample of nations is 2.5 years and once
again the largest estimate is found in the sub-Saharan African sample.
   The specifications reported in Panels A and B include year fixed effects. Panels C and D

add country-specific time trends to allow the conflict process to evolve idiosyncratically across
countries. Again, battle deaths decrease in response to increases in log per capita GDP, across
all specifications. These results are statistically significant in all samples with the exception of
the sample that excludes western democracies. The magnitude of the long-run decrease in battle

deaths from a unit increase in log per capita GDP is -1640 in the specification with lagged battle
deaths as instruments and -1359 in the specification with the lagged interaction of the binary war
indicator and conflict duration. These magnitudes are even larger than the results in Panels A
and B. Unlike in Panels A and B, where we fail to reject the validity of the instruments in all
specifications, an overidentification test rejects the lags of battle deaths used as instruments in some

of the specifications employed in Panel C. None of the models using the interaction of lagged war
indicators and duration as instruments (Panel D) are rejected. The estimated half-lives are generally
similar to the results in Panels A and B. The estimates range across sample regions from 0.7 to 1.5
years in the Panel C specifications and 1.2 to 7 years in the Panel D specifications. Again, the


                                                  20
sub-Saharan Africa sample has the highest estimated half-life.
    The qualitative consistency of results across specifications and across sub-samples suggests a
negative relationship between civil conflict severity and income per-capita. This is consistent with
existing theories of civil conflicts. The differing estimates of γ̂ across specifications suggests that

the choice of instruments matter. It is not surprising that γ̂ is largest using the set of instruments
least prone to serially correlated measurement error.


3.3.1 Model Fit and Average Dynamics

The prior results suggests that conflicts do not exhibit explosive dynamics, on average. The ex-
tensive margin of conflict appears substantially more persistent than the severity of conflict. The

autocorrelation coefficient governing the extensive margin of civil conflict is much larger than the
autocorrelation coefficient governing the severity of conflicts, suggesting that conflicts do not es-
calate in intensity solely because of past fighting, but conflicts are likely to smolder after they have
started.23

    Data visualization confirms that the autoregressive parameter estimates in the previous section
fit the conflict intensity data well. Figure 2 plots log battle deaths at time t against log battle
deaths in t − 1 in the restricted sample that only includes conflict years.24 Using a locally weighted
regression, the figure displays a semi-parametric model governing the relationship between log

battle deaths and lagged log battle deaths. A similar model is then fit using OLS. The locally
weighted model and OLS both fit the data well, and inspection suggests that the linear fit does not
differ significantly from the locally weighted fit. The estimated slope of the linear fit is around
0.8, but it is important to note that this estimate is not comparable to γ̂ from the dynamic panel
data models because observations with zero battle deaths (a return to peace) are not included in the

sample. The goal here is not to estimate the γ parameter corresponding to the previous models but
to assess whether modeling γ as uniform in response to past fighting is a reasonable assumption.




                                                  21
                                       [Figure 2 About Here]

    This provides compelling evidence that an estimate of γ < 1 is reasonable. During spells

of conflict with at least 25 battle deaths, the probability of escalation to a higher number of bat-
tle deaths in the next year is 0.327. Again, this raw statistic suggests that conflict severity isn’t
explosive in expectation.



4 Heterogenous Dynamics

We now turn to the question of whether economic factors and other explanations for civil war
also affect the persistence of conflict. In this section, we use an unrestricted model in which the
persistence of conflict can vary by a country’s income level. We also examine whether persistence

varies by other factors such as a country’s degree of fractionalization, amount of mountainous
terrain, or oil wealth.


4.1 Unrestricted Model

The model used in the section is very similar to the one from the previous section. The main
                                                                                     25
difference is that this model allows potential heterogeneity in conflict dynamics.        We call this
the unrestricted model, since the autoregressive coefficient is allowed to vary across countries. We
estimate the following mode, in which dynamics can vary by income level:




             yit = αi + γ1 yi,t−1 + γ2 yi,t−1 × log (Incomei,t−1 /P opulationi,t−1 ) +             (5)

                      β log (Incomeit−1 /P opulationit−1 ) + δt + εit .


    In estimating the unrestricted model, the coarsened instrument interacted with the income-

                                                 22
instrument, Zit × I (BattleDeathsit ≥ 25) × (t − lastY earOf P eaceit ) , is included. The model
uses lagged income rather than concurrent income to ease interpretation of the interaction of lagged
income and lagged battle deaths.


4.2 Unrestricted Model: Parameter Interpretation

The parameters of interest in the unrestricted model are γ1 , γ2 , and β. The interpretation of β is
the same as in the previous section. γ2 and γ1 are difficult to interpret individually. It is easier to
describe the overall intertemporal spillover of fighting across years. If yi,t−1 > 0, then the overall
intertemporal spillover is:



                    γ̃i,t−1 = γ̂1 + γ̂2 yi,t−1 × log (Incomei,t−1 /P opulationi,t−1 )              (6)

    As with the restricted model, we can calculate the half-life of the battle deaths process. In the

unrestricted model, this quantity is calculated as log (0.5) / log (γ̃i,t−1 ).


4.3 Unrestricted Model: Results

Table 4 presents the results from the unrestricted model. For a comparison with previous estimates,
estimates of the model with γ2 constrained to 0 are presented in Columns 1 and 3.26 Estimates of
summary measures of the distribution of γ̃i,t−1 are presented in the bottom portion of Table 4.

    Overall, conflict persistence does appear to be heterogeneous depending on income, as past
fighting is most likely to spill over into future fighting for poor countries. This allows a more
nuanced tests of whether conflicts are explosive, in expectation, by allowing dynamics to be het-
erogeneous. In Column 4, we cannot reject that the dynamics of conflict at the extensive margin

vary based on lagged income. For the poorest country-years at war in the sample, the estimated
γ̃i,t−1 is greater than 1. The mean is around 0.74 in our preferred specification (Column 4) with a




                                                    23
standard deviation of about 0.14.
                                         [Table 4 About Here]

   Countries in war years in the top 5 percent of the distribution of γ̃ have estimated persistence

that is 7.9 times the bottom 5 percent of persistence in Column 2 and over 10 times the level of
persistence in Column 4. This substantial amount of heterogeneity highlights the very different
evolution of civil conflicts in poor versus wealthy countries.        Wealth mediates the persistence
of conflict over time. In 98 percent of the country-years with positive battle deaths (936 of 959

observations), γ̃ is less than 0.95, where γ̃ is an estimate of persistence that is allowed to depend
on lagged-income.
   Another possibility is that persistence depends on distinct characteristics that are largely time-
invariant, such as ethnic or religious fractionalization, mountainous terrain, and oil wealth, which
have all been linked to the incidence of civil war. To investigate if the dynamic evolution of

conflict varies across countries with and without these characteristics, the models in Table 3 are
estimated on samples restricted to countries that (a) are in the top half in terms ethnic and religious
fractionalization and mountainous terrain and (b) are oil exporters. The results are presented in
Table 5.

   As above, the parameter estimate on log per-capita income is negative in all samples and statis-
tically significant in all but the religious fractionalization sample. The effect of per-capita income
was highest in mountainous countries, where the long-run effect of a unit increase in income is
approximately 1,260 fewer battle deaths. This magnitude is greater than the full sample estimate

of 720 and is consistent with the Fearon and Laitin finding that mountainous countries may be
more likely to experience war. However, mountainous countries do not seem to be more prone to
sustained fighting in response to past conflict. The estimated long-run magnitudes are smaller than
the full sample for the top quartile of religious fractionalization and oil-exporting countries while

it is slightly larger for the top quartile of ethnic fractionalization countries.



                                                   24
   The persistence parameter estimate is positive and statistically significant across all samples.
In virtually all sub-samples, the hypothesis that γ = 1 in Equation 4 is rejected.27 In general, con-
flicts are most persistent in ethnically fragmented countries. For the most ethnically fractionalized
countries, the persistence of conflict was approximately twice as large as the next highest category.

For ethnically fractionalized countries, the half life of conflict ranged from 1.5 to 7.9, depending
on the specification. The half lives for the other sub-samples were generally smaller and estimated
to be in narrower ranges. For religiously fractionalized countries, the half life estimates ranged
from 0.7 to 1.3. For mountainous countries, the estimates ranged from 0.9 to 3.1. Oil exporters
had the least persistent conflicts, with half lives ranging from 0.6 to 0.9.



                                         [Table 5 About Here]



5 Conclusion

Civil wars are more than just discrete events. They are phenomena which vary in intensity, with

some conflicts much more severe than others. Using an instrumental variables strategy, we find
that economic downturns, which are often associated with the onset or occurrence of civil war,
significantly increase conflict intensity.
   More importantly, civil conflicts are dynamic phenomena which can escalate or de-escalate,

potentially in response to past fighting. Conflicts, on average, are persistent but not explosive.
Conflicts appear only to be explosive for the poorest countries. The persistence of conflict also
varies with income, with poorer countries having a much slower rate of mean-reversion. The
persistence of conflict also varies according to other country characteristics, with highly ethnically

fractionalized countries suffering from the most persistent conflicts.
   Our study compliments recent research that has emphasized the dynamics of how conflicts
transition between periods of peace and fighting (Findley, 2013). This study also points towards


                                                  25
a potentially fruitful area of future research. Cross-national work on the onset and occurrence of
civil war has triggered a rich body of within-country and micro-level work on the mechanisms of
conflict. This study points to how similar research might contribute to our understanding of the
dynamics of conflict intensity.




                                               26
Notes

   1
       Montalvo and Reynal-Querol (2005); Fearon and Laitin (2003); Ross (2004).

   2
       See: Blattman and Miguel (2010); Collier and Hoeffler (2007); Hegre and Sambanis (2006).

   3
       Collier and Hoeffler (1998); Besley and Persson (2011); Dal Bó and Dal Bó (2011); Dube and Vargas (2013).

   4
       Fearon and Laitin (2003).

   5
       Some models of civil war onset in year t include a variable indicating whether there was a distinct civil war in year
t − 1, but these estimates don’t describe the persistence of civil war since onset is coded distinctly from occurrence.
Typically, the coefficient for the effect of a lagged occurrence variable on onset is negative.

   6
       Fearon and Laitin (2003).

   7
       In the appendix, we show how static models of the relationship between economic fluctuations and civil conflict
may yield biased estimates in the presence of conflict dynamics.

   8
       We use version 4 of the Armed Conflict Dataset and version 3.0 of the Battle Deaths Dataset- the most recent
version of each. Note that a civil conflict must have at least 25 battle deaths to enter the Armed Conflict Dataset. The
Battle Deaths Dataset records a “low,” “high,” and “best” estimate for the number of battle deaths. We use the “best”
estimate.

   9
       Results are similar if the data are winsorized, suggesting that outliers due to erroneous data are not driving the
estimates. When alternative values of the series employing the lowest estimated battle deaths total are used, the
estimates of persistence are larger while the effect of income on deaths is smaller. The latter finding is consistent with
the fact that the mean number of battle deaths in the low series is less than half the mean of the “best” series. Results
also do not depend on whether interpolation is used to replace missing values. The combined results suggest that the
estimates are not sensitive to outliers, severely mis-measured dependent variables, or serially correlated measurement
error on the right hand side.

  10
       Existing literature uses a variety of instruments for income. Miguel, Satyanath and Sergenti (2004) use a function
of rainfall and Brückner and Ciccone (2010) use export weighted commodity prices. Hidalgo et al. (2010) also employ
rainfall as an instrument for income in their study of Brazilian land invasions and occupations. Bazzi and Blattman


                                                             27
(2011) use commodity prices. We chose our instrument because it afforded broader geographic coverage than the
rainfall instruments. We also did not use commodity prices as an instrument because it is plausible that they violate
the exclusion restriction. Commodities have futures markets. The prospect of civil conflict may affect the futures price
of a commodity, and it is well-established that futures prices can affect spot prices (Fama and French, 1987).

  11
       Contiguity is defined by the Correlates of War project. Contiguous countries are those that share a land or river
border or are separated by less than 400 miles of water.

  12
       Results using weights constructed with total trade are similar, but the instrument is not as strong.

  13
       Trade data are from the International Monetary Fund’s Direction of Trade Statistics (DOTS). We used the years
1980-1989 to maximize coverage, but for countries without trade data for the 1980s we constructed weights using
trade data from the 1970s, and 1990s when data for the 1970s and 1980s were unavailable. Xiis = 0 by construction.

  14
       Nominal data are deflated to U.S. 1967 dollars using the IMF’s World Development Indicators (WDI) inflation
data.

  15
       GDP data are constructed using the IMF’s WDI data and data from Goldstein, Rivers and Tomz (2007).

  16
       Data for P opulationit , the population of country i in year t are from the Penn World Tables.

  17
       Acemoglu et al. (2008) estimate a coefficient ranging from 0.402 to 0.529, using a lagged instrument, five-year
observations in the panel, and some additional covariates.

  18
       The level panel instrument fails weak instrument tests in the difference GMM equation.           Adding the system
component helps to alleviate concern about the strength of the panel instruments. Adding the levels equation, of
course, relies on additional assumptions about growth rates of the process being stationary. Year fixed effects remove
any aggregate failures of the stationarity assumption. Models are additionally estimated with country-specific time
trends to remove differential growth rates across countries.

  19
       We experimented with using a semi-parametric version of the panel data tobit model to accomplish this goal (the
traditional tobit model is inconsistent with fixed effects), but the estimator requires substantially more uncensored data
than were present. Therefore, the best that we can do is recover combined marginal effects and elasticities.

  20
       In terms of elasticities, the most intuitive measure is the short-run version elasticity: β̂/deaths ≈ −321/335 =
−0.96.


                                                             28
  21
       These results do not appear to be driven by outliers – estimates are very similar when we limit the sample to
conflict year pairs (current and lagged conflict years) with fewer than 50,000 battle deaths or when we winsorize the
conflict data.

  22
       Another possibility is to exclude observations with interpolated values of the dependent variable from the sample.
This analysis is in the appendix and the results are qualitatively similar. This approach is not preferred, however,
because the data show that missing year-to-year coverage of conflict intensity is associated with much more severe
conflicts. Difficulty in measurement is likely increasing with conflict severity, and discarding observations for which
interpolation is necessary potentially biases downward estimates of civil conflict severity.

  23
       In fact, the estimated half-life of conflict from the estimates using warit as the dependent variable is around 6
years.

  24
       The choice of logs is to aid in presentation by minimizing the appearance of outliers, but the substantive conclu-
sions appear similar if the analysis is conducted in levels.

  25
       An alternative interpretation is that this more flexible model captures the intensive margin of the effect of income
on civil conflict by conditioning the effect of income on lagged battle deaths.

  26
       Results using log (Incomei,t−1 /P opulationi,t−1) or log (Incomeit /P opulationit) appear similar.

  27
       The only exception is Column 1 of Panel D.




                                                             29
Appendix

Robustness

When deaths data are unavailable for particular years, the Uppsala/PRIO dataset does not report a
“best estimate". Interpolation using adjacent years of data is used to fill in missing observations
in these cases.   Sub-saharan Africa is the region with the most missing data.        There are 193
conflict-years that include a “best estimate" in the Uppsala/PRIO dataset for sub-saharan Africa,
but there are 121 observations missing when conflicts are occurring in the same country in adjacent

years. Interpolation thus provides an additional 121 country-years of data for sub-saharan Africa.
For other regions, the discrepancy is much smaller. There are 511 conflict-years outside of sub-
saharan Africa with an available “best estimate" in Uppsala/PRIO, and interpolation fills in another
182 conflict-years. Appendix Table 1 shows the results that exclude these observations and only

uses observations for which distinct, yearly deaths data were available. Estimates differ, especially
in sub-Saharan Africa, for two reasons: first, the number of observations with data on battle deaths
falls–reducing statistical power; second, the conflicts that remain are, on average, less severe than
the excluded conflicts that require interpolation.

   As a further robustness check regarding whether interpolation affects the results on dynamics,
Figure A1 re-produces the results from Figure 2 without using the interpolated measures of battle
deaths. The results suggest that interpolation does not substantively change the interpretation or
estimates of γ.
   Finally, as an additional assessment of the importance of measurement error, the models in

Tables 3 and 5 were re-estimated using the "low" battle deaths series. The mean number of battle
deaths in a country-year using the low series is 121compared to 335 deaths in the series used in
Tables 3 and 5. The "low" estimate is populated in all country years; in country years where both
the "low" series is populated and the "best" estimate is populated, the low series has a mean of 89

battle deaths and the best estimate has a mean of 173 battle deaths. Given these differences in


                                                 30
means, it is not surprising that the marginal effect of income is smaller when using the "low" data.
The estimated AR (1) parameter is also larger in these models, suggesting that prior estimates of
serial dependence are conservative.
   Readers who are interested in comparisons with the extensive margin should exercise caution

when combining results with the "low" series and estimates of the extensive margin from the text.
Calculations were conducted using the moments of the battle deaths data; because the first and
second moments of the "low" series and the "best" series differ, the results are not comparable
when using the "low" series.


Bias in Static Models


The estimates from the dynamic panel data models presented in the main paper suggest that the

conflict process is dependent. Many prior papers use static models, but the parameter estimates of
any parameter of interest from static models are likely to be inconsistent even with an instrument.
This is easiest to see using first differences, but the same logic applies to the within-transformed IV
estimator because the justification for the most prevalent instruments used in the literature–rainfall

shocks and the price of commodity exports–is that the instruments and the error are orthogonal
conditional on the unobserved fixed effects. However, these instruments are not likely to be valid
without the fixed effects–meaning that the instrument is correlated with the country effects. For
example, a country’s time-invariant mix of commodity exports or a country’s long-run average
weather patterns may influence the probability of civil war–but the within-country, time-varying

instruments would likely satisfy the exclusion restriction after accounting for the fixed effects if
the conflict process were static. If the process is dynamic, the fixed effects cannot be differenced
out, so the instrument is correlated with the error, violating the exclusion restriction.
   The bias can be signed in the case of the first-differenced IV estimator. Ignoring time fixed

effects for exposition, let the true model generating the data be given by yit = γyi,t−1 + xit β +


                                                  31
αi + εit , with E (x′it εit ) 6= 0, E (zit′ εit ) = 0, E (ε′it εis ) = 0 for s 6= t, and E (x′it zit ) 6= 0. Suppose
it is erroneously assumed that γ = 0, and estimation is via first-differenced instrumental variables.
The estimated parameter is β̂ = (∆zit′ ∆xit )−1 ∆zit′ ∆yit and the bias is

                                                                  
                                                       −1
                             E β̂ − β = E (∆zit′ ∆xit ) ∆zit′ ∆yi,t−1 γ.                                        (7)




     To sign the bias analytically, further assume that the time series relationship for the instrument
is zit = γz zi,t−1 + uit . 28 The bias is

                                                                                     
                     −1                                −1
      E (∆zit′ ∆xit ) ∆zit′ ∆yi,t−1 γ = E (∆zit′ ∆xit ) [(γz − 1) zit−1 + uit ]′ ∆yi,t−1 γ.


The first stage implies that E (∆zit′ ∆xit ) > 0 and γ is expected to be positive, so with these
                         !                               
restrictions, the term E [(γz − 1) zit−1 + uit ]′ ∆yi,t−1 determines the sign of the bias. After
substituting in zit−1 = γz zi,t−2 + uit−1 , the relevant term becomes

                                                                                                       

      E [γz zit−1 + uit − zit−1 ] yit−1 − γz2 zit−2 + γz uit−1 + uit − γz zit−2 − uit−1  yit−2  .
                                            |           {z          } |         {z      }
                                                             zit                     −zit−1



Assuming that E (uit yit−s ) = 0 for s > 0 and taking expectations, the sign of the bias is determined
by

                               E ([γz − 1]zit−1 yit−1 − [γz − 1]γz zit−2 yit−2 )

Suppose that the reduced form relationship E (yit zit ) < 0 is constant for all t. If zit is stationary,
then γz < 1, which implies (γz − 1) − (γz − 1) γz < 0 so that E (yit zit ) [(γz − 1) − (γz − 1) γz ] >

0. Combined with γ > 0 and E (∆zit′ ∆xit ) > 0, parameter estimates from static models are biased
upward.
     Presumably having an excluded instrument will alleviate some concern about the potential bias


                                                        32
from a static model. However, this intuition is only true if the instrument zit is orthogonal to
both country fixed effects, αi , and the error, εit . Otherwise, the instrument is only valid condi-
tional on the procedure to remove αi ; these procedures will suffer from Nickell (1981) bias in the
case of the within-transformation or the bias derived previously in the case of the first-difference

transformation.
   To test whether the instrument is orthogonal to αi , the null hypothesis is that the pooled OLS IV
estimator and the within-transformed IV estimator have the same probability limit.29 It is possible
to construct over-identified estimators from moment conditions that impose E (zit [αi + εit ]) = 0
or only E (zit εit ) = 0. Using 2 sets of moment conditions, the first of which corresponds to pooled

OLS IV and the second of which corresponds to within-transformed IV, equality of the estimates
is rejected at the 5 percent level using Hansen’s J-test. The results of this test confirm that the
variation used to estimate the effect of income in static models is valid only conditional on fixed
effects. However, if the true data generating process is dynamic, static estimates are biased.

   How large is the bias?       The empirical estimate of the bias term for the first-differenced
IV estimator, (∆zit′ ∆xit )−1 ∆zit′ ∆yi,t−1 , is 2, 381. This suggests that static models may be bi-
ased badly, and the bias is likely to be increasing in the degree of persistence.




                                                 33
References
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, James Robinson and Pierre Yared. 2008. “Income and Democ-
  racy.” American Economic Review 98(3):808–842.
Angrist, Joshua D. and Adriana D. Kugler. 2008. “Rural Windfall or a New Resource Curse? Coca,
  Income, and Civil Conflict in Colombia.” Review of Economics and Statistics 90(2):191–215.
Arellano, Manuel and Olympia Bover. 1995. “Another Look at the Instrumental Variable Estima-
  tion of Error-Components Models.” Journal of Econometrics 68(1):29 – 51.
Bazzi, Samuel and Christopher Blattman. 2011. “Economic Shocks and Conflict: The (Absence
  of?) Evidence from Commodity Prices.” Working Paper.
Berman, Eli, Michael Callen, Joseph H. Felter and Jacob N. Shapiro. 2011. “Do Working Men
  Rebel? Insurgency and Unemployment in Afghanistan, Iraq, and the Philippines.” Journal of
  Conflict Resolution 55(4):496–528.
Besley, Timothy and Torsten Persson. 2011. “The Logic of Political Violence.” Quarterly Journal
  of Economics 126(3):1411–1445.
Blattman, Christopher and Edward Miguel. 2010. “Civil War.” Journal of Economic Literature
  48(1):3–57.
Blundell, Richard and Stephen Bond. 1998. “Initial Conditions and Moment Restrictions in Dy-
  namic Panel Data Models.” Journal of Econometrics 87(1):115 – 143.
Brückner, Markus and Antonio Ciccone. 2010. “International Commodity Prices, Growth and the
  Outbreak of Civil War in Sub-Saharan Africa.” The Economic Journal 120(544):519–534.
Collier, Paul and Anke Hoeffler. 1998. “On Economic Causes of Civil War.” Oxford Economic
  Papers 50(4):563–573.
Collier, Paul and Anke Hoeffler. 2007. Civil War. Handbook of Defense Economics Elsevier North
  Holland.
Collier, Paul, V. L. Elliot, Havard Hegre, Anke Hoeffler, Marta Reynal-Querol and Nicholas Sam-
  banis. 2003. Breaking the Conflict Trap: Civil War and Development Policy. Oxford, UK:
  Oxford University.
Dal Bó, Ernesto and Pedro Dal Bó. 2011. “Workers, Warriors, and Criminals: Social Conflict in
  General Equilibrium.” Journal of the European Economic Association 9(4):646–677.
Djankov, Simeon and Marta Reynal-Querol. 2010. “Poverty and Civil War: Revisiting the Evi-
  dence.” Review of Economics and Statistics 92(4):1035–1041.
Dube, Oeindrila and Juan F. Vargas. 2013. “Commodity price shocks and civil conflict: evidence
  from Colombia.” Review of Economic Studies 80(4):1384–1421.

                                              34
Elbadawi, Ibrahim and Nicholas Sambanis. 2002. “How Much War Will We See? Explaining the
  Prevalence of Civil War.” The Journal of Conflict Resolution 46(3):pp. 307–334.

Esteban, Joan, Laura Mayoral and Debraj Ray. 2012. “Ethnicity and Conflict: An Empirical
  Study.” American Economic Review 102(4):179–204.

Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French. 1987. “Commodity Futures Prices: Some Evidence
  on Forecast Power, Premiums, and the Theory of Storage.” The Journal of Business 60(1):pp.
  55–73.

Fearon, James D. and David D. Laitin. 2003. “Ethnicity, Insurgency, and Civil War.” American
  Political Science Review 97(1):75–90.

Findley, Michael G. 2013. “Bargaining and the Interdependent Stages of Civil War Resolution.”
  Journal of Conflict Resolution 57(5):905–932.

Gleditsch, Nils Petter, Peter Wallensteen, Mikael Eriksson, Margareta Sollenberg and Håvard
  Strand. 2002. “Armed Conflict 1946-2001: A New Dataset.” Journal of Peace Research
  39(5):615–637.

Goldstein, Judith L., Douglas Rivers and Michael Tomz. 2007. “Institutions in International Re-
  lations: Understanding the Effects of the GATT and the WTO on World Trade.” International
  Organization 61(01):37–67.

Greig, J. Michael. 2013. “Nipping Them in the Bud: The Onset of Mediation in Low-intensity
  Civil Conflicts.” Journal of Conflict Resolution .

Hausman, J. A., Jason Abrevaya and F. M. Scott-Morton. 1998. “Misclassification of the Depen-
  dent Variable in a Discrete-Response Setting.” Journal of Econometrics 87(2):239 – 269.

Hegre, Håvard and Nicholas Sambanis. 2006. “Sensitivity Analysis of Empirical Results on Civil
  War Onset.” Journal of Conflict Resolution 50(4):508–535.

Hidalgo, F. Daniel, Suresh Naidu, Simeon Nichter and Neal Richardson. 2010. “Economic Deter-
  minants of Land Invasions.” Review of Economics and Statistics 92(3):505–523.

Humphreys, Macartan and Jeremy M. Weinstein. 2006. “Handling and Manhandling Civilians in
  Civil War.” American Political Science Review 100(3):pp. 429–447.

Lacina, Bethany. 2006. “Explaining the Severity of Civil Wars.” Journal of Conflict Resolution
  50(2):276–289.

Lacina, Bethany and Nils Petter Gleditsch. 2005. “Monitoring Trends in Global Combat: A New
  Dataset of Battle Deaths.” European Journal of Population 21(2/3):145–166.

Melander, Erik, Frida Möller and Magnus Öberg. 2009. “Managing Intrastate Low-Intensity
 Armed Conflict 1993-2004: A New Dataset.” International Interactions 35(1):58–85.

                                              35
Miguel, Edward, Shanker Satyanath and Ernest Sergenti. 2004. “Economic Shocks and Civil
 Conflict: An Instrumental Variables Approach.” Journal of Political Economy 112(4):725–753.

Montalvo, José G. and Marta Reynal-Querol. 2005. “Ethnic Polarization, Potential Conflict, and
 Civil Wars.” American Economic Review 95(3):796 – 816.

Nickell, Stephen. 1981.    “Biases in Dynamic Models with Fixed Effects.” Econometrica
  46(6):1417–1426.

Ross, Michael L. 2004. “How Do Natural Resources Influence Civil War? Evidence from Thirteen
  Cases.” International Organization 58(1):35–67.

Sambanis, Nicholas. 2004. “What Is Civil War? Conceptual and Empirical Complexities of an
  Operational Definition.” Journal of Conflict Resolution 48(6):814–858.




                                             36
Figure 1: Distribution of Log Battle Deaths in Conflict Years




Kernel density plot and histogram of log number of battle deaths for conflicts during years with positive
numbers of battle deaths. The distribution is truncated at approximately 3 because the battle deaths
data only contain years with at least 25 deaths.
Figure 2: Log Battle Deaths in Year t Versus Log Deaths in Year t-1




Scatterplot shows log battle deaths in year t-1 on the horizontal axis versus log deaths in year t on the
vertical axis for consecutive years with strictly positive battle deaths. The red line is the predicted values
from a regression of log deaths in year t on log deaths in t-1. The green line is from a locally weighted
semi-parametric model.
Table 1: Summary Statistics


                                                     Observations     Mean    Std. Dev.     Min       Max


                                           Panel A: Full Sample
Battle Deaths                                           8,142          335      2,473        0      115,000
Binary War Indicator (>25 Deaths)                       8,142         0.119     0.324        0         1
Log Income Per-Capita (1967 Dollars)                    8,142         6.171      1.46      2.701     9.946
                                       Panel B: Sub-Saharan Africa
Battle Deaths                                           1,184          528      3418         0      115,000
Binary War Indicator (>25 Deaths)                       1,184         0.158     0.365        0         1
Log Income Per-Capita (1967 Dollars)                    1,184         4.808      0.85      2.701     7.851
                         Panel C: Full Sample Excluding Western Democracies
Battle Deaths                                           7,182          379      2630         0      115,000
Binary War Indicator (>25 Deaths)                       7,182         0.131     0.338        0         1
Log Income Per-Capita (1967 Dollars)                    7,182         5.909     1.335      2.701     9.946
                          Panel D: Full Sample Excluding Sub-Saharan Africa
Battle Deaths                                           6,258          277      2104         0      100,500
Binary War Indicator (>25 Deaths)                       6,258         0.108      0.31        0         1
Log Income Per-Capita (1967 Dollars)                    6,258         6.582     1.352      2.803     9.946
                              Panel E: Top Half of Ethnic Fractionalization
Battle Deaths                                           4,737          422      2509         0      115000
Binary War Indicator (>25 Deaths)                       4,737         0.136     0.343        0         1
Log Income Per-Capita (1967 Dollars)                    4,737         5.826     1.392      2.706     9.946
                            Panel F: Top Half of Religious Fractionalization
Battle Deaths                                           4,499          329      2996         0      115000
Binary War Indicator (>25 Deaths)                       4,499         0.081     0.273        0         1
Log Income Per-Capita (1967 Dollars)                    4,499         6.025      1.44      2.701     9.946
                              Panel G: Top Half of Mountainous Countries
Battle Deaths                                           4,318          457      2753         0      115000
Binary War Indicator (>25 Deaths)                       4,318         0.138     0.344        0         1
Log Income Per-Capita (1967 Dollars)                    4,318         6.066     1.366      2.701     9.946
                                    Panel H: Oil Producing Countries
Battle Deaths                                           1,371          609      4698         0      115000
Binary War Indicator (>25 Deaths)                       1,371         0.163     0.369        0         1
Log Income Per-Capita (1967 Dollars)                    1,371         6.275     1.139      3.688     9.477



Notes: Summary statistics for the estimation samples presented in later tables. See the text for variable
definitions.
Table 2: First Stage Regressions

                                                        (1)              (2)               (3)               (4)
                                                                                       Excluding
                                                                    Sub-Saharan                        Excluding Sub-
                                                   Full Sample                          Western
                                                                       Africa                          Saharan Africa
                                                                                      Democracies


Panel A: Dependent Variable is First Differenced Per-Capita Income

Lag of First Differenced Exports Instrument          0.195***          0.995***         0.206***           0.144**
                                                     (0.0621)          (0.322)          (0.0631)          (0.0605)

Observations                                          8,055             1,862             7,095            6,193
R-Squared                                             0.157             0.197             0.148            0.158
F-Statistic                                           39.70             12.75             33.46            31.13

Panel B: Same as Panel A with country fixed effects (for country-specific time trends in level equation)

Lag of First Differenced Exports Instrument           0.159**          1.005***          0.161**           0.126**
                                                     (0.0653)          (0.364)          (0.0660)          (0.0640)

Observations                                          8,055             1,862             7,095            6,193
R-Squared                                             0.185             0.216             0.175            0.181
F-Statistic                                           10.69             8.837             9.893            9.614


Notes: Robust standard errors reported in parentheses. Table presents first differenced estimates of the first stage
regression of log gdp per-capita on the export-weighted income of trading partners in non-adjacent countries. Adjacent
countries are defined by the Correlates of War dataset. Adjacent countries share a land or river border or are
separated by less than 400 miles of water. All models contain year fixed effects. Panel B adds country fixed effects to
accomodate country-specific time trends. Numbers of observations differ between this and later tables because of
differences between first differenced and orthogonal deviations transformations and use of moment conditions in
levels.
Table 3: Estimates from Blundell-Bond Dynamic Panel Data Models of the Battle Deaths Process

                                                           (1)                (2)                   (3)                 (4)

                                                                                           Excluding Western      Excluding Sub-
                                                      Full Sample     Sub-Saharan Africa
                                                                                             Democracies          Saharan Africa


                        Panel A: Excluded instruments are shocks to export partners and lags of battle deaths

β: Parameter Estimate on Log Income/Capita              -321.3***          -289.4**              -295.4***           -482.6***
                                                         (118.2)            (124.8)               (112.6)             (133.6)
γ: Parameter Estimate on Battle Deaths t-1              0.554***           0.710***               0.563***            0.422***
                                                         (0.114)           (0.0734)               (0.115)             (0.104)
β / (1-γ)                                                 -720               -998                  -676                -835
Half-Life                                                  1.2                2                    1.2                  0.8
Observations                                             8,142              1,884                  7,182               6,258
Number of Countries                                        203                43                    183                 160
Overidentifying Restrictions p-value                     0.215                1                    0.599               0.938
AB Test of AR 1 p-value                                  0.0373             0.209                 0.0368              0.0959
AB Test of AR 2 p-value                                  0.667              0.428                  0.679               0.619

            Panel B: Excluded instruments are shocks to trading partners and lags of war indicators times conflict duration

β: Parameter Estimate on Log Income/Capita              -129.5**            -182.6*              -127.6***           -225.7***
                                                         (50.41)            (95.34)               (49.02)             (71.99)
γ: Parameter Estimate on Battle Deaths t-1              0.759***           0.828***               0.763***            0.584***
                                                        (0.0737)           (0.0412)              (0.0706)             (0.101)
β / (1-γ)                                                 -537              -1062                  -538                -543
Half-Life                                                  2.5                3.7                  2.6                  1.3
Overidentifying Restrictions p-value                     0.269                1                    0.587               0.949
AB Test of AR 1 p-value                                  0.0340             0.212                 0.0344              0.0997
AB Test of AR 2 p-value                                  0.894              0.449                  0.897               0.877

                                       Panel C: Panel A including country-specific time trends

β: Parameter Estimate on Log Income/Capita               -887.4*           -1,074***             -796.7*              -797.0
                                                         (455.8)            (413.7)              (479.8)              (518.6)
γ: Parameter Estimate on Battle Deaths t-1              0.459***            0.628***             0.468***            0.396***
                                                        (0.0993)           (0.0696)              (0.101)             (0.0989)
β / (1-γ)                                                -1640              -2887                 -1498                -1320
Half-Life                                                  0.9                1.5                  0.9                  0.7
Overidentifying Restrictions p-value                        0                 1                      0                   0
AB Test of AR 1 p-value                                  0.0457             0.209                 0.0438               0.102
AB Test of AR 2 p-value                                  0.500              0.424                  0.519               0.562

                                       Panel D: Panel B including country-specific time trends

β: Parameter Estimate on Log Income/Capita              -402.3**           -885.4**               -377.9*             -131.5
                                                         (188.4)            (370.6)               (205.4)            (90.43)
γ: Parameter Estimate on Battle Deaths t-1              0.704***           0.915***              0.712***            0.568***
                                                        (0.0768)           (0.0839)              (0.0777)            (0.102)
β / (1-γ)                                                -1359              -10416                -1312                -218
Half-Life                                                  2                  7.8                   2                   1.2
Overidentifying Restrictions p-value                        1                 1                      1                   1
AB Test of AR 1 p-value                                  0.0343             0.227                 0.0334              0.0962
AB Test of AR 2 p-value                                  0.848              0.465                  0.857               0.846

Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. Table reports Blundell-Bond estimates of the battle deaths model as described in the
text. All models include the export-weighted log per capita gdp of trading partners as instruments. Panel-style instruments are
described in the panel headings. A maximum of 3 lags of the panel-style instruments is used, and the beginning and ending lags are
dynamically adjusted based on the results of AB tests of autocorrelation as described in the text. The p-value of Hansen's test of
overidentifying restrictions is also reported. Observation counts are the same in all panels.
Table 4: Estimates Including Heterogeneous Dynamics

                                                                   (1)                  (2)                  (3)                   (4)

                                                                                DV: Battle Deaths;                         DV: Battle Deaths;
                                                                               IVs: Lags of Deaths,                        IVs: Lags of War *
                                                           DV: Battle Deaths; Exports, Exports * DV: Battle Deaths;        Duration, Exports,
                                                          IVs: Lags of Deaths,    Lags of War *     IVs: Lags of War *      Exports * Lags of
Specification:                                                  Exports              Duration        Duration, Exports       War * Duration

β: Parameter Estimate on Lag of Log Income/Capita               -279.1**              -144.6**             -124.4**              -73.20**
                                                                 (112.4)               (57.78)              (49.75)               (36.96)
γ1: Parameter Estimate on Battle Deaths t-1                     0.557***              1.345**              0.762***             1.348***
                                                                 (0.115)              (0.557)              (0.0714)              (0.212)
γ2: Parameter Estimate on Lag of Log Income/Capita x                                   -0.156                                    -0.114**
Battle Deaths t-1                                                                     (0.116)                                   (0.0466)

Observations                                                      8,062                8,062                 8,062                8,062
Number of Countries                                                203                  203                   203                  203
Overidentifying Restrictions p-value                              0.220                0.195                 0.269                0.301
AB Test of AR 1 p-value                                          0.0373               0.0541                0.0345               0.0412
AB Test of AR 2 p-value                                           0.690                0.465                 0.943                0.876

                                     Summary Measures of Persistence For Years With Deathst-1 > 0:
                             Persistence Calculated as γ1 * Deathst-1 +γ2 * Deathst-1 x Log Incomet-1 / Deathst-1

Mean                                                                                   0.512                                      0.741
Std. Dev                                                                               0.189                                      0.138

5th Percentile                                                                         0.131                                      0.463
10th Percentile                                                                        0.244                                      0.545
50th Percentile                                                                        0.531                                      0.755
90th Percentile                                                                        0.747                                      0.912
95th Percentile                                                                        0.773                                      0.931




Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. Table reports Blundell-Bond estimates of the battle deaths model with heterogeneous
persistence as described in the text. All models include the export-weighted log per capita gdp of trading partners as instruments. Columns 1
and 2 use lags of battle deaths as panel-style instruments and lags of battle deaths interacted with the exports measure as an IV style
instrument. Columns 3 and 4 use the war indicator times conflict duration as panel-style instruments and lags of the war indicator times
duration interacted with the exports measure as an IV style instrument. A maximum of 3 lags of the panel-style instruments is used, and the
beginning and ending lags are dynamically adjusted based on the results of AB tests of autocorrelation as described in the text.
Table 5: Estimates of Average Persistence on Samples Split by Country Characteristics

                                                           (1)                  (2)                 (3)               (4)

                                                    Top Half of Ethnic Top Half of Religious   Top Half of
                                                                                                                 Oil Producers
                                                     Fractionalization   Fractionalization     Mountainous


                        Panel A: Excluded instruments are shocks to export partners and lags of battle deaths

β: Parameter Estimate on Log Income/Capita              -242.8***            -314.0**            -562.9**           -228.0**
                                                         (74.29)              (148.4)             (224.7)            (102.0)
γ: Parameter Estimate on Battle Deaths t-1              0.719***             0.502***            0.553***           0.326***
                                                        (0.0787)              (0.135)             (0.147)           (0.0907)
β / (1-γ)                                                 -864                 -631               -1259              -338
Half-Life                                                  2.1                  1                  1.2                0.6
Observations                                              4,737                4,499               4,318             1,371
Number of Countries                                        125                  120                 115                32
Overidentifying Restrictions p-value                      1.000                1.000                 1                 1
AB Test of AR 1 p-value                                   0.162               0.0661              0.0468            0.0936
AB Test of AR 2 p-value                                   0.157                0.389               0.781             0.201

            Panel B: Excluded instruments are shocks to trading partners and lags of war indicators times conflict duration

β: Parameter Estimate on Log Income/Capita               -97.42*             -217.4**            -155.5*             -139.7*
                                                         (53.94)              (107.7)            (93.99)             (77.51)
γ: Parameter Estimate on Battle Deaths t-1              0.871***             0.592***            0.775***           0.470***
                                                        (0.0273)              (0.120)            (0.116)            (0.0768)
β / (1-γ)                                                 -755                 -533                -691              -264
Half-Life                                                   5                   1.3                2.7                0.9
Overidentifying Restrictions p-value                      1.000                1.000               1.000               1
AB Test of AR 1 p-value                                   0.170               0.0433              0.0692             0.101
AB Test of AR 2 p-value                                   0.159                0.533               0.973             0.158

                                       Panel C: Panel A including country-specific time trends

β: Parameter Estimate on Log Income/Capita              -961.1***             -1,030             -1,583***          -370.0
                                                         (371.4)             (817.6)              (582.2)           (497.9)
γ: Parameter Estimate on Battle Deaths t-1              0.626***             0.385***             0.448***          0.327**
                                                        (0.0690)             (0.115)              (0.151)           (0.135)
β / (1-γ)                                                 -2570               -1675               -2868              -550
Half-Life                                                  1.5                  0.7                0.9                0.6
Overidentifying Restrictions p-value                        0                    0                   0                 1
AB Test of AR 1 p-value                                   0.158               0.0817              0.0340            0.0868
AB Test of AR 2 p-value                                   0.166                0.261               0.590             0.268

                                       Panel D: Panel B including country-specific time trends

β: Parameter Estimate on Log Income/Capita              -526.5**              -659.5             -497.1**            -337.3
                                                         (232.5)             (712.2)              (251.8)           (242.0)
γ: Parameter Estimate on Battle Deaths t-1              0.916***             0.507***            0.799***           0.454***
                                                        (0.0741)             (0.124)              (0.135)           (0.130)
β / (1-γ)                                                 -6268               -1338               -2473              -618
Half-Life                                                  7.9                  1                  3.1                0.9
Overidentifying Restrictions p-value                        1                    1                   1                 1
AB Test of AR 1 p-value                                   0.177               0.0400              0.0770             0.107
AB Test of AR 2 p-value                                   0.157                0.512               0.981             0.237

Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. For details, see Table 3.
Figure A1: Non-Interpolated Log Battle Deaths in Year t Versus Log Deaths in Year t-1




Kernel density plot and histogram of log number of battle deaths for conflicts during years with positive
numbers of battle deaths. The distribution is truncated at approximately 3 because the battle deaths
data only contain years with at least 25 deaths. The data and estimates exclude all observations based
on interpolated battle deaths.
Appendix Table 1: Estimates from Blundell-Bond Models Without Interpolated Battle Deaths

                                                               (1)                   (2)                    (3)                      (4)
                                                                                                    Excluding Western          Excluding Sub-
                                                          Full Sample       Sub-Saharan Africa
                                                                                                      Democracies              Saharan Africa

                       Panel A: Excluded instruments are shocks to export partners and lags of battle deaths

β: Parameter Estimate on Log Income/Capita                  -221.9***               -58.12                -224.8***               -428.5***
                                                             (75.87)               (93.71)                 (75.80)                 (102.3)
γ: Parameter Estimate on Battle Deaths t-1                   0.406***              0.828***                0.410***               0.247***
                                                             (0.126)               (0.109)                 (0.126)                (0.0932)
β / (1-γ)                                                     -374                  -338                    -381                    -569
Observations                                                 7,788                 1,744                   6,828                   6,044
Number of ccode                                               203                     43                     183                     160
Overidentifying Restrictions p-value                         0.226                    1                    0.614                   0.985
AB Test of AR 1 p-value                                      0.0383                0.0423                  0.0380                  0.0746
AB Test of AR 2 p-value                                      0.747                  0.179                   0.761                   0.531

        Panel B: Excluded instruments are shocks to trading partners and lags of war indicators times conflict duration

β: Parameter Estimate on Log Income/Capita                  -79.99***               -80.06                 -80.44**               -169.5***
                                                             (31.04)               (61.21)                  (34.86)                (57.12)
γ: Parameter Estimate on Battle Deaths t-1                   0.698***              0.788***                0.701***               0.528***
                                                             (0.117)               (0.105)                  (0.114)                (0.154)
β / (1-γ)                                                     -265                  -378                    -269                    -359
Observations                                                 7,788                 1,744                   6,828                   6,044
Number of ccode                                               203                     43                     183                     160
Overidentifying Restrictions p-value                         0.221                    1                    0.586                   0.942
AB Test of AR 1 p-value                                      0.0504                0.0632                  0.0518                  0.0487
AB Test of AR 2 p-value                                      0.720                  0.197                   0.716                   0.592

                                        Panel C: Panel A including country-specific time trends

β: Parameter Estimate on Log Income/Capita                  -559.5**                 -388.6                -619.1**                -463.1
                                                             (258.6)                (262.6)                 (275.6)                (283.1)
γ: Parameter Estimate on Battle Deaths t-1                  0.364***               0.807***                0.365***                0.206**
                                                             (0.123)               (0.0965)                 (0.124)               (0.0865)
β / (1-γ)                                                     -880                  -2013                   -975                    -583
Observations                                                  7,788                 1,744                  6,828                   6,044
Number of ccode                                                203                    43                     183                     160
Overidentifying Restrictions p-value                            0                     1                       0                       0
AB Test of AR 1 p-value                                      0.0421                0.0424                  0.0415                  0.0845
AB Test of AR 2 p-value                                      0.624                  0.184                   0.628                   0.416

                                        Panel D: Panel B including country-specific time trends

β: Parameter Estimate on Log Income/Capita                  -319.2**               -598.6*                 -328.1**               -285.7*
                                                             (129.0)               (341.4)                  (146.6)               (164.1)
γ: Parameter Estimate on Battle Deaths t-1                  0.640***               0.753***                0.641***               0.458***
                                                             (0.125)               (0.101)                  (0.122)               (0.139)
β / (1-γ)                                                     -887                  -2423                   -914                    -527
Observations                                                  7,788                 1,744                  6,828                   6,044
Number of ccode                                                203                    43                     183                     160
Overidentifying Restrictions p-value                            1                     1                       1                       1
AB Test of AR 1 p-value                                      0.0484                0.0613                  0.0494                  0.0573
AB Test of AR 2 p-value                                      0.771                  0.204                  0.767                   0.742

Notes: See Notes for Table 3. Sample sizes differ because observations with interpolated data on battle deaths are excluded.
Appendix Table 2: Estimates from Blundell-Bond Dynamic Panel Data Models using the "Low" Battle Deaths Series

                                                      (1)             (2)            (3)            (4)              (5)                (6)              (7)            (8)
                                                                                 Excluding  Excluding Sub-   Top Half of       Top Half of
                                                                 Sub-Saharan                                                                   Top Half of
                                                 Full Sample                      Western     Saharan           Ethnic          Religious                  Oil Producers
                                                                    Africa                                                                     Mountainous
                                                                                Democracies     Africa     Fractionalization Fractionalization


                                         Panel A: Excluded instruments are shocks to export partners and lags of battle deaths

β: Parameter Estimate on Log Income/Capita         -52.22**           -60.01      -58.48**       -182.3***         -53.35**          -70.58***          -51.74         -20.65
                                                    (23.02)          (42.83)       (25.50)        (47.16)           (21.96)           (27.11)          (32.85)        (14.81)
γ: Parameter Estimate on Battle Deaths t-1         0.758***         0.813***      0.755***        0.330**          0.825***          0.819***         0.852***       0.555***
                                                   (0.0969)         (0.0680)      (0.0941)        (0.161)          (0.0695)          (0.0686)         (0.0360)       (0.0168)
β / (1-γ)                                            -216            -321           -239            -272             -305              -390             -350           -46
Half-Life                                             2.5             3.3            2.5            0.6              3.6                3.5             4.3            1.2
Observations                                        8,142            1,884         7,182          6,258            4,737              4,499            4,318          1,371
Number of Countries                                  203              43            183            160              125                120              115            32
Overidentifying Restrictions p-value                0.176              1           0.515          0.947            1.000              1.000            1.000            1
AB Test of AR 1 p-value                             0.0377           0.142         0.0370         0.0381           0.0546             0.0983           0.0448         0.166
AB Test of AR 2 p-value                             0.586            0.217         0.584          0.118            0.253              0.264            0.951          0.179

                            Panel B: Excluded instruments are shocks to trading partners and lags of war indicators times conflict duration

β: Parameter Estimate on Log Income/Capita         -34.60**          -83.40*      -39.79**       -115.6***           -54.59            -50.18           -26.37         -19.79
                                                    (14.66)          (47.47)       (15.98)        (41.24)           (38.87)           (32.33)          (26.14)        (13.77)
γ: Parameter Estimate on Battle Deaths t-1         0.861***         0.879***      0.864***        0.482**          0.905***          0.875***         0.916***       0.631***
                                                   (0.0582)         (0.0158)      (0.0538)        (0.208)          (0.0158)          (0.0152)         (0.0371)       (0.0592)
β / (1-γ)                                            -249            -689           -293            -223             -575              -401             -314           -54
Half-Life                                             4.6             5.4            4.7            0.9              6.9                5.2             7.9            1.5
Overidentifying Restrictions p-value                0.197              1           0.555          0.987            1.000              1.000            1.000            1
AB Test of AR 1 p-value                             0.0360           0.141         0.0367         0.0294           0.0560             0.0985           0.0464         0.170
AB Test of AR 2 p-value                             0.572            0.224         0.571          0.0690           0.256              0.279            0.944          0.200

                                                            Panel C: Panel A including country-specific time trends

β: Parameter Estimate on Log Income/Capita         -256.6**           -274.8      -257.3**        -309.5*            -245.7           -357.0           -313.2*       -139.3**
                                                    (100.4)          (214.4)       (107.4)        (161.2)           (163.9)          (218.9)           (173.4)        (68.04)
γ: Parameter Estimate on Battle Deaths t-1         0.634***         0.736***      0.636***        0.305*           0.777***          0.766***         0.828***       0.568***
                                                    (0.110)         (0.0865)       (0.104)        (0.161)          (0.0984)          (0.113)          (0.0716)       (0.0394)
β / (1-γ)                                            -701            -1041          -707            -445            -1102             -1526            -1821           -322
Half-Life                                             1.5             2.3            1.5            0.6              2.7                2.6             3.7            1.2
Overidentifying Restrictions p-value                   0               1              0              0                0                 0                 1             1
AB Test of AR 1 p-value                             0.0264           0.151         0.0266         0.0368           0.0583             0.106            0.0459         0.197
AB Test of AR 2 p-value                             0.598            0.210         0.596          0.109            0.257              0.255            0.976          0.175

                                                            Panel D: Panel B including country-specific time trends

β: Parameter Estimate on Log Income/Capita          -149.4          -598.9**       -169.3         -102.8*           -245.6            -430.1          -249.1*        -63.43**
                                                   (92.77)           (295.1)      (110.6)         (60.19)          (180.9)           (301.3)          (146.9)         (29.09)
γ: Parameter Estimate on Battle Deaths t-1         0.862***         1.010***      0.878***        0.456**          1.011***          1.068***         1.017***       0.661***
                                                   (0.104)          (0.0753)      (0.108)         (0.205)          (0.112)           (0.149)          (0.102)        (0.0725)
β / (1-γ)                                           -1083             N/A          -1388            -189             N/A               N/A              N/A            -187
Half-Life                                             4.7             N/A            5.3            0.9              N/A               N/A              N/A            1.7
Overidentifying Restrictions p-value                   1               1              1              1                1                 1                 1             1
AB Test of AR 1 p-value                             0.0343           0.227         0.0334         0.0962           0.0614             0.112            0.0503         0.208
AB Test of AR 2 p-value                             0.848            0.465         0.857          0.846            0.241              0.254            0.940          0.196

Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. Table reports Blundell-Bond estimates of the battle deaths model as described in the text. All models include the export-
weighted log per capita gdp of trading partners as instruments. Panel-style instruments are described in the panel headings. A maximum of 3 lags of the panel-style
instruments is used, and the beginning and ending lags are dynamically adjusted based on the results of AB tests of autocorrelation as described in the text. The p-value of
Hansen's test of overidentifying restrictions is also reported.
