                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   THE LIQUIDITY PREMIUM OF NEAR-MONEY ASSETS

                                             Stefan Nagel

                                        Working Paper 20265
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20265


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2014




I am grateful for comments to Arvind Krishnamurthy, Francis Longstaff, Paolo Pasquariello, Jose-Luis
Peydro, seminar participants at HEC Paris, Michigan, Stanford, Toulouse and participants at the American
Economic Association Meetings and the LBS Safe Assets Conference. Mike Schwert and Yesol Huh
provided excellent research assistance. I thank Henning Bohn, Daniel Hanson, Allan Mendelowitz,
and Paolo Pasquariello for providing data. The views expressed herein are those of the author and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Stefan Nagel. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
The Liquidity Premium of Near-Money Assets
Stefan Nagel
NBER Working Paper No. 20265
June 2014
JEL No. E41,E43,G12

                                              ABSTRACT

Treasury bills and other near-money assets provide owners with liquidity service benefits that are reflected
in prices in the form of a liquidity premium. I relate time variation in this liquidity premium to changes
in the opportunity cost of money: The liquidity service benefits of near-money assets are more valuable
when short-term interest rates are high and hence the opportunity cost of holding money is high. Consistent
with this prediction, the liquidity premium of T-bills and other near-money assets is strongly positively
correlated with the level of short-term interest rates. Once short-term interest rates are controlled for,
Treasury security supply variables lose their explanatory power for the liquidity premium. I argue
that an analysis of scarcity and price of near-money assets is incomplete without taking into account
the substitution relationship with money and its supply by the central bank. Payment of interest on
reserves (IOR) could potentially reduce liquidity premia because IOR reduces the opportunity cost
of at least one type of money (reserves). In the UK and Canada, however, the introduction of IOR
did not shrink liquidity premia. Apparently, the reduction in banks' opportunity cost of money did
not result in a broader fall in the opportunity costs of money for non-bank market participants.


Stefan Nagel
Ross School of Business and
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
701 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
and NBER
stenagel@umich.edu
I    Introduction

Investors pay a premium for the liquidity service flow provided by near-money assets such as

Treasury bills and recently issued (“on-the-run”) US Treasury Bonds. What determines the

magnitude of this liquidity premium? Does it vary over time? If so, why?

    In the past decade, much attention has been focused on investigating why liquidity premia

rise during times of crises (Longstaff 2004; Vayanos 2004; Brunnermeier 2009; Krishnamurthy

2010; Musto, Nini, and Schwarz (2014)), but little is known about the economic forces that

pin down this premium outside of these episodes. Recent work that tackles this question has

emphasized an asset supply channel: Bansal, Coleman, and Lundblad (2010), Krishnamurthy

and Vissing-Jorgensen (2012), Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2013), and Greenwood,

Hanson, and Stein (2014) argue that the liquidity premium varies with changes in the supply

of Treasury securities.

    Yet this asset-supply perspective neglects the substitution relationship between near-

money assets and money. A reduction in the supply of near-money assets should result in

a rise in the demand for money. If the central bank elastically supplies money to keep the

nominal interest rate at a target level, the reduction in Treasury supply may not have any

effect on the liquidity premium. By the same token, if the central bank changes the nominal

short-term interest rate, this changes the opportunity cost of holding money, which should

affect the premium that market participants are willing to pay for near-money assets. From

this perspective, it is the opportunity cost of money rather than the supply of near-money

assets that determines the liquidity premium.

    To work out the relationship between the opportunity cost of money and liquidity premia,

I present a model in which households obtain liquidity service flow from non-interest bearing

deposits and Treasury bills. Deposits and Treasury bills are perfect substitutes, but they

have different liquidity multipliers: one unit of deposits provides more liquidity service flow

than one unit of Treasury bills. The banking sector supplies these deposits, but requires

some reserve holdings at the central bank as a liquidity buffer. In this model, the level of


                                              1
                                0.7                                                                16




                                0.5                                                                12




                                                                                                        Fed funds rate/deposit spread
       GC Repo/T−Bill spread




                                0.3                                                                8




                                0.1                                                                4




                               −0.1                                                                 0
                                Jun1990 Mar1993 Dec1995 Sep1998 May2001 Feb2004 Nov2006 Aug2009 May2012

                                               Fed funds rate   3m GC Repo/3m T−Bill spread


Figure 1: Spread between 3-month General Collateral Repo Rate and 3-month Treasury Bill
yield


short-term interest rates represents households’ opportunity costs of holding money (in the

form of deposits). The liquidity premium of Treasury bills is proportional to the the level of

short-term interest rates. This prediction is the focus of the empirical analysis in this paper.

   Figure 1 illustrates the key empirical finding. The solid line shows the difference between

the interest rate on three-month general collateral repurchase agreements (GC repo, a form

of collateralized interbank lending) and the yield on three-month US T-bills. The GC repo

term loan is illiquid, as the money lent is locked in for three months. In contrast, a T-

bill investment can easily be liquidated in a deep market with minuscule bid/ask spreads.

Consistent with this difference in liquidity, the GC repo rate is typically higher than T-bill

yields. This yield spread reflects the premium that market participants are willing to pay

for the non-pecuniary liquidity benefits provided by T-bills. As the figure shows, there is



                                                                  2
substantial variation over time in this liquidity premium. Most importantly, the liquidity

premium is closely related to the level of short-term interest rates, represented in the figure

by the federal funds rate shown as dotted line. Thus, as the level of short-term interest rates

changes, the opportunity cost of holding money changes, and hence the premium that market

participants are willing to pay for the liquidity service flow of money substitutes changes as

well.

   GC repo rates are not available before the early 1990s, but I find that the spread between

three-month certificate of deposit (CD) rates and T-bills exhibits a similarly strong positive

correlation with the level of short term interest rates in data going back to the 1970s. A

similar relationship is also evident in data from Canada and the UK. By comparing US T-

bills with yields on discount notes issued by the Federal Home Loan Banks, which have the

same tax treatment as T-bills and are guaranteed by the US government, I am further able

to rule out that the variation over time in the liquidity premium with the level of interest

rates is a tax effect. The spread between illiquid Treasury notes and T-Bills (Amihud and

Mendelson 1991) and between on-the-run and off-the-run Treasury notes (Krishnamurthy

2002; Warga 1992) also reflects liquidity premia, albeit of a smaller magnitude. I show that

these liquidity premia, too, correlate positively with the level of short-term interest rates.

   Consistent with the opportunity cost of money theory of the liquidity premium, I find

that the Treasury supply variable of Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2012) loses its

explanatory power for the T-bill liquidity premium once the level short-term interest is con-

trolled for. Greenwood, Hanson, and Stein (2014) focus more narrowly on T-bill supply,

but I show that T-bill supply, too, loses explanatory power in the presence of the short-

term interest rate. Thus, what matters for the liquidity premium is the opportunity cost of

money, not the supply of near-money assets. The opportunity cost of money is ultimately

pinned down by central bank policy and the real economy. If the central bank follows an

interest-rate operating target (which, according to Bernanke and Mihov (1998) seems to be a

good description of the Federal Reserve’s policy for much of post-WWII history) the central



                                               3
bank’s elastic supply of money would neutralize any effect of near-money asset supply on the

short-term interest rate and hence the opportunity cost of money and the liquidity premium.

   As Figure 1 shows, the liquidity premium also exhibits some higher-frequency variation

around the cyclical interest-rate related component. Some of the spikes in the liquidity

premium are crisis-related, such as those in September 1998 (LTCM) crisis, and in August

2007 and September 2008 (financial crisis). A plausible explanation for these deviations is

that the relative liquidity service value of bank deposits is impaired during times of crises. As

a consequence, market participants find the liquidity service flow of T-bills relatively more

valuable during these periods. It is also possible that part of the higher-frequency variation

reflects short-lived supply effects, such as those studied by Sunderam (2013).

   The opportunity cost of money theory suggests that reserve remuneration policies of

central banks could potentially affect liquidity premia of near-money assets. Paying interest

on reserves (IOR) drastically reduces the opportunity cost of one type of money (central bank

reserves). To what extent IOR then also leads to a reduction in the opportunity cost of the

monies held by households and non-financial corporations is an open question, however. If

interest rates on the most liquid demand deposits remain close to zero, there should be little

effect on liquidity premia. My empirical findings are consistent with this latter view. The

introduction of IOR in the UK and Canada in 2001 and 1999, respectively, did not lead to

a detectable change in the relationship between the T-bill liquidity premium and short-term

interest rates. Apparently, offering IOR to a small number of financial institutions is not

sufficient to induce a market-wide reduction in the opportunity cost of money and liquidity

premia.

   The findings in this paper are relevant for a number of research questions and policy

issues related to liquidity premia. First, analyses whether there could be a “shortage” of

near-money assets—e.g., due to margin requirements for derivatives transactions or other

regulatory reasons (Committee on the Global Financial System 2013)—are incomplete with-

out also taking into account the substitution relationship between near-money assets and



                                               4
money. As long as the central bank elastically supplies money, even a substantial rise in

demand for near-money assets need not lead to a shortage. In case that a shortage does

arise, it should be apparent as a rise in the price of liquidity, i.e., the liquidity premium. My

findings imply that to judge whether the liquidity premium is abnormally high, one should

first remove the normal interest-rate related component.

   Second, the results in this paper suggest an interpretation of spreads between open-market

interest rates and T-bill rates that differs from the earlier literature. Bernanke and Gertler

(1995) note that the CD rate/T-bill spread rises during periods of monetary tightening. They

interpret this finding as indicative of an imperfectly elastic demand for bank liabilities when

banks respond to monetary tightening by looking for non-deposit funding. The results in

this paper suggest an alternative interpretation: Monetary tightening—to the extent that it

results in a rise in short-term interest rates—raises the opportunity cost of holding money

and the liquidity premium in near-money assets. This tight relationship between the liquidity

premium and short-term interest rates helps explain the finding of Bernanke and Blinder

(1992) that much of the information in the commercial paper (CP)/T-bill spread about future

real activity (as documented in Stock and Watson (1989), Bernanke (1990), and Friedman

and Kuttner (1992)) is captured by the federal funds rate. Whether a decomposition of

the CP/T-bill spread into the GC repo/T-bill spread (the liquidity premium, which could

be further decomposed into an interest-rate related and an abnormal component) and the

CP/GC repo spread (a credit risk component) could improve forecasts of real activity is an

interesting open question that is, however, beyond the scope of this paper.

   Third, the empirical evidence in this paper is relevant for applications in which liquidity

premia are used as an input to explain other phenomena. In the model of Drechsler, Savov,

and Schnabl (2014), the opportunity cost of (required) reserves limits the willingness of

banks to invest in risky assets which results in elevated risk premia. My evidence on the co-

movement between the opportunity cost of money and liquidity premia suggests that a more

general cost of precautionary liquidity holdings could play a similar role as the opportunity



                                               5
cost of reserves. Azar, Kagy, and Schmalz (2014) show that changes in the opportunity costs

of holding liquid assets in the post-WW II decades can explain variation over time in the

level of corporate liquid assets holdings. My findings suggest that the level of short-term

interest rates can be used as a single state variable to model the evolution over time in the

opportunity costs of holding liquid assets. This insight is also relevant for the construction of

Divisia monetary aggregates (Barnett 1980; Barnett and Chauvet 2011). In this method, the

outstanding stocks of different near-money assets are aggregated and weighted according to

their degree of moneyness which is measured by each assets’ liquidity premium. My finding

that these liquidity premia are strongly positively correlated with the level of short-term

interest rates should be useful for modeling the time series of the weights for different types

of near-money assets.

     The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section II presents a model that

clarifies the relationship between interest rates and liquidity premia. Empirical evidence on

the time-variation in liquidity premia follows in Section III. Section IV examines the effect of

reserve remuneration policies of central banks in the UK and Canada. Section V concludes.



II     A Model of the Liquidity Premium for Near-Money Assets

I start by setting up a model of an endowment economy in which near-money assets can earn

a liquidity premium. The economy is populated by households, and there is a government,

comprising the fiscal authority and the central bank. Moreover, there is a banking sector,

which is simply a technology to transform loans and reserve holdings into deposits that can

be held by households. The objective is to clarify the relationship between the liquidity

premium of near-money assets, the opportunity cost of money, and central bank policy.


II.A     Households

Households derive utility from holding a stock of liquid assets as in Poterba and Rotemberg

(1987) (see also, Woodford (2003), Chapter 3). Liquidity services are supplied by government

                                               6
securities and deposits created in the banking sector.

   There is a single perishable consumption good, and the representative household seeks to

maximize the objective
                                          ∞
                                          X
                                     E0         β t u(Ct , Qt ; ξt ),                        (1)
                                          t=1

subject to the budget constraint


                              Wt = Wt−1 rtW + Pt Yt − Tt − Pt Ct ,                           (2)


where Yt is the endowment of the consumption good, Ct is consumption, rtW is the nominal

gross return on wealth, and Tt denotes taxes paid to the government. Pt is the price, in terms

of money, of the consumption good. Prices in this economy are flexible and adjust without

frictions. Introducing nominal quantities and the price level serves the limited purpose of

allowing some scope for the central bank to influence nominal short-term interest rates. The

real rate will be fixed by the endowment process and preference shocks ξt . Qt represents an

aggregate of liquid asset holdings that provide households with utility from liquidity services.

For each value of ξt , u(Ct , Qt ; ξt ) is concave and increasing in the first two arguments. I

further assume that utility is additively separable in the utility from consumption and utility

from liquidity services.

   To map the model into the empirical analysis that follows, one can think of one period

as lasting roughly a quarter. The liquidity benefits of near-money asset holdings arise from

their use in (unmodeled) intra-quarter transactions, but the indirect utility from these benefits

throughout the period enters directly in the objective function in (1).

   Households can borrow from and lend to each other at a one-period nominal interest

rate it . Households can also borrow from banks and hold demand deposits, Dt , at banks.

Households perceive loans from other households and loans from a bank as perfect substitutes,

and hence the interest is the same it . Demand deposits with banks are special, however.

Unlike loans to other households, deposits with banks provide liquidity services. Treasury


                                                    7
bill holdings, Bt , also provide liquidity services to some extent. The T-bills mature in one

period and trade at yield ibt . Household T-bill holdings do not necessarily have to represent

direct holdings. They could also include money market mutual funds that invest in Treasury

bills. In contrast, money market mutual funds that invest in private-sector debt claims are

better thought of in this model as part of the direct loans from household to household.

   The households’ total stock of liquidity is a linear aggregate of the real balances of de-

mandable deposits and T-Bills


                             Qt = `d (ξt )(Dt /Pt ) + `b (ξt )(Bt /Pt ),                    (3)


i.e., D and B are perfect substitutes, but with different liquidity multipliers `d , `b . The

liquidity multipliers do not depend on the level of Dt and Bt , but they are potentially subject

to shocks ξt . As I show below, the assumption perfect substitutability of T-bills and deposits

leads to some strong empirical implications. The central objective of this paper is to find out

whether this stark model provides a useful characterization of the empirical behavior of the

liquidity premium.

   The representative household’s wealth portfolio is


                                   W t = At + B t + D t − L t ,                             (4)


where L represents loans from banks. A denotes the household’s position in assets other than

the ones discussed above.

   The household first-order conditions with respect to consumption yield the Euler equation

                                                                          −1
                                   1                uc (Ct+1 ; ξt+1 ) Pt
                          1 + it =         Et                                      ,        (5)
                                   β                   uc (Ct ; ξt ) Pt+1

where uc denotes the partial derivative with respect to consumption. The household first-




                                                        8
order conditions with respect to real liquid asset balances yield

                                        uq (Qt ; ξt )              it − idt
                                                      `d (ξt ) =            ,                               (6)
                                        uc (Ct ; ξt )              1 + it
                                        uq (Qt ; ξt )              it − ibt
                                                      `b (ξt ) =            ,                               (7)
                                        uc (Ct ; ξt )              1 + it

where uq denotes the partial derivative with respect to Q, and `d and `b the partial deriva-

tives of the liquidity aggregate with respect to real balances Dt /Pt and Bt /Pt , respectively.

Combining the two equations, we obtain a relationship between the liquidity premium of

T-bills, it − ibt , and the spread between it and deposit rates:

                                                      `b (ξt )
                                         it − ibt =            (it − idt ).                                 (8)
                                                      `d (ξt )

The liquidity premium priced into T-Bill yields is commensurate with the liquidity benefits

of T-bills relative to deposits, as captured by the ratio of the liquidity multipliers `b and `d .


II.B      Banks

Banks supply deposits and hold liquidity in the form of reserves Mt . I do not model the

banking sector in detail. Instead, I just view it as a technology for transforming liquidity

in the form of central bank reserves (which households cannot access) into deposits (which

households can access). The banks’ assets beyond reserve holdings are invested in loans to

the household sector at rate it . Any profits flow to households who own the banks.

       Two assumptions characterize the banking sector. First, the interest paid on demand

deposits is zero,1

                                                      id = 0.                                               (9)

To map this zero-interest assumption to the real world, it is useful to think of interest-bearing
   1
    This assumption is actually stronger than necessary to for the key empirical predictions that follow.
Similar predictions, apart from a constant term in the liquidity premium, would follow if demand deposit
rates are greater than zero, but insensitive to movements in it . Deposit rates in a calibrated model in Ireland
(2012) have this interest-rate insensitivity property.


                                                        9
deposits and money-market accounts offered by actual financial institutions as packaged port-

folios of treasury bills yielding ibt , loans yielding it , and possibly a non-interest bearing demand

deposit component. In the model, all but the demand deposit component should be thought

of to reside in the household sector. The real-world counterpart of the demand deposits in

this model are only the most liquid forms of deposits that are not subject to any restrictions

on their use and withdrawals. In the U.S., Regulation Q until July 2011 explicitly prohibited

payment of interest on such demand deposits. Starting in the early 1980s, banks were able to

offer alternative interest-bearing accounts (e.g., NOW accounts) that resembled demand de-

posits in many ways. Nevertheless, as I discuss in more detail in Appendix B, households and

corporations still maintained significant balances in non-interest bearing demand deposits.

Evidently, interest-bearing deposits are not fully equivalent to non-interest bearing ones in

the liquidity services that they provide.2 In Section IV, I investigate whether it might be

necessary to relax the id = 0 assumption if central banks pay interest on reserves at a rate

close to it .

       At least in the earlier part of the time periods that I study below, currency also plays

an important part in households’ stock of liquidity. I do not model currency separately here

from demand deposits, but one can think of currency as part of the non-interest bearing

deposits Dt . For currency, the zero-interest assumption is uncontroversial.

       If demand deposits do not pay interest, competition could lead banks to offer their cus-

tomers other banking services without charge or at subsidized rates. Thus, bank customers

might receive implicit interest through these other services. However, the key issue for the

purposes of the analysis here is the marginal benefit from an additional dollar in deposits.

The additional benefits offered in lieu of interest rates are typically not increasing in the level

of deposit balances (apart from some minimum balance thresholds that may be in place to
   2
    Gatev, Schuermann, and Strahan (2007) provide a piece of evidence that is consistent with the notion
that non-interest bearing deposits are, to some extent, still a preferred location to store liquidity. Studying
the deposit inflows that banks received during the LTCM crisis in 1998, they find that all of the increased
funding flows were directed towards non-interest bearing demand deposit accounts rather than interest-bearing
transaction deposit accounts.




                                                      10
limit eligibility for these benefits). Hence, even including these forms of implicit interest, the

marginal interest payment received on a dollar of deposits is still zero.

   The second assumption that characterizes the banking sector in this model concerns the

relationship between banks’ reserve holdings, Mt , and their supply of deposits, Dts . I assume

that

                                      Dts = φ(it , im
                                                    t ; ξt )Mt ,                             (10)

where φ(it , im
              t ; ξt ) is a multiplier that is potentially subject to random shocks through ξt .

The multiplier can depend on it and im
                                     t , because the magnitude of the spread between it

and im
     t may influence the degree to which banks try to economize on holding reserves. The

motivation for this specification is not necessarily that there are explicit reserve requirements,

but rather the precautionary need for banks to hold a certain level of reserves as a liquidity

buffer with the central bank. The multiplier could be microfounded by modeling banks’

reserve demand as in Ashcraft, McAndrews, and Skeie (2011) and Bianchi and Bigio (2013),

where banks hold excess reserves to hedge unexpected payment flows. In countries such as

Canada or New Zealand, where legal reserve requirements no longer exist, banks still exhibit

a small, but greater than zero demand for reserve holdings (Bowman, Gagnon, and Leahy

2010), even though reserves are remunerated at a rate below the interbank lending rate.

   These precautionary liquidity-buffer considerations motivate an inequality, where Dts is

constrained above by the right-hand side of (10). As the interest rate on deposits is below the

market interest rate it , banks should find it profitable, however, to create deposits (through

lending) up to the point that the constraint binds. For this reason, I write (10) directly as

an equality.


II.C    Government: Fiscal Authority and Central Bank

The government issues liabilities in the form of one-period Treasury bills through the fiscal

authority, and reserves, Mts , through the central bank. The central bank pays interest on

reserves at a rate im                      s m
                    t < it . The path of {Mt , it } is chosen by the central bank to meet an


                                                 11
interest-rate operating target i∗t . The central bank’s interest-rate operating target could be

set, for example, on the basis of a Taylor rule. I assume that monetary policy dominates, in

the sense that if the Treasury implements a change to the path of T-bill supply, this does not

change the central bank’s interest-rate operating target.

   To change Mts , the central bank conducts open-market operations, exchanging T-bills

against reserves. Let Bts denote the net supply of T-bills that remains available to the public

after the central bank has conducted its open-market operations.

   The government collects taxes and makes transfers of net amount Tt to satisfy the joint

flow budget constraint for government and the central bank consistent with the chosen paths

for Bts and Mts ,

                      Bts + Mts = Bt−1
                                   s
                                       (1 + ibt−1 ) + Mt−1
                                                       s
                                                           (1 + im
                                                                 t−1 ) − Tt .                 (11)


II.D    Equilibrium

Equilibrium in this model is given by a set of processes {Pt , it , ibt } that are consistent with

household optimization (7), (6), (5), the supply of deposits (10), and market clearing,


                         Ct = Yt ,    Dt = Dts ,      Mt = Mts ,          Bt = Bts ,          (12)


given the exogenous evolution of {Yt , ξt }, and processes {im    s    s
                                                             t , Mt , Bt } consistent with the

monetary policy rule.

   Given the evolution of {Yt , ξt }, the policy rule for it followed by the central bank, together

with the Euler equation (5), determines the current price level and expectations of future price

levels (see Woodford (2003)). For any targeted i∗t , given im
                                                            t , one can solve (6), with market

clearing conditions substituted in,

                                     uq (Qst ; ξt )              it
                                                    `d (ξt ) =        ,                       (13)
                                     uc (Ct ; ξt )             1 + it




                                                    12
where

                              Qst = `(φ(it , im        s        s
                                              t ; ξt )Mt /Pt , Bt /Pt ),                   (14)

for the Mts that the CB must supply to achieve it = i∗t . Concerning the conditions under

which a solution exists, and the question of determinacy of the price level, see the discussion

in Woodford (2003). For the purposes of this analysis, we can assume that the CB’s action

have resulted in a specific path for it and Pt , and ask what these paths imply for liquidity

premia.

   With a target-consistent money supply, and (9) substituted into (8), the liquidity premium

of Treasury bills can be written as

                                          `b (ξt )
                             it − ibt =            it ,   where   it = i∗t .               (15)
                                          `d (ξt )

Thus, time-variation in the liquidity premium is driven by changes in the opportunity cost

of holding liquidity in the form of deposits, it , and by changes in the relative magnitude

of the liquidity multipliers `b and `d , i.e., the relative usefulness of T-bills as a store of

liquidity compared with deposits. If T-bills become relatively more useful, the ratio `b /`d

rises, resulting in a lower yield on T-bills and hence a bigger liquidity premium.

   A liquidity demand shock to uq (Ct , Qt ; ξt ) has no direct effect on the liquidity premium,

because the CB would have to offset the shock by elastically changing Mts (which would

change the supply of deposits) to stay at the interest-rate target according to (13). Similarly,

an elastic reserve supply response of the CB would also offset the effects of a change in

the supply of T-bills, with no effect on the liquidity premium. That asset supply shocks

are neutralized by elastic money supply is strongly suggested by prior empirical findings

in Bernanke and Mihov (1998). They show that Federal Reserve policy going back to the

1960s—with exception of the early 1980s—can be described well by an interest-rate operating

target, even though this was not an explicitly declared policy until the 1990s.

   Moreover, even if the central bank does not follow an interest-rate operating target, but


                                                     13
instead, say, a money growth target, liquidity demand or T-bill supply shocks should have

no effect on the liquidity premium once the short-term interest rate is controlled for. In this

case, these shocks would not be fully neutralized by the CB’s money supply response, and

hence they would would now change uq (Ct , Qt ; ξt ) and therefore also it via (13). However,

the only modification in (15) would be that it is no longer equal to i∗t . Liquidity demand

and near-money asset supply shocks can now affect it , but liquidity premia are still remain

tied to the opportunity cost of money. Thus, the empirical prediction that the level of it

should explain time-variation in liquidity premia does not depend on the assumption about

the central bank’s operating target. That liquidity demand and T-bill supply shocks do not

affect the liquidity premium once it is controlled for is a key difference of this model to others

in which the substitution relationship with money is not present (e.g., Bansal and Coleman

1996; Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen 2013).

    Crisis effects. The liquidity premium is still, however, potentially subject to random

shocks ξt that change the relative magnitudes `d and `b . As the empirical analysis shows

below, there are big spikes in liquidity premia during times of financial market turmoil.

Within this model, one can think of these spikes as the consequence of a shock that destroys

“trust” in bank deposits as a store of liquidity, which lowers the liquidity multiplier of deposits

`d relative to `b .3 According to (15), this raises the liquidity premium of T-bills. If it

is sufficiently low, or the shock sufficiently big, this could lead to T-bill yields falling into

negative territory.

    Alternative functional form of liquidity aggregator. For T-bills, a constant marginal

liquidity contribution (in absence of shocks ξt ) is a plausible approximation. In contrast, with

a more general constant elasticity of substitution aggregator, the marginal liquidity contribu-

tion would tend to infinity as Bt /Pt approaches zero. This would imply the assumption that

households and corporations are willing to pay a liquidity premium that approaches infinity

if the supply of T-bills shrinks to zero, which does not seem plausible. T-bills do not perform
  3
    As an example for a model in which a crisis shock can impair the liquidity value of bank deposits see
Robatto (2013).


                                                   14
such a special role in liquidity portfolios that they could not be substituted for by demand

deposits.

    On the other hand, it seems plausible that demand deposits do perform a special role

that near-money assets cannot perfectly substitute for at low levels of D/P . An extremely

low level of deposit balances would be a considerable inconvenience for agents and would

inhibit transactions that could otherwise take place. Thus, while the linearity assumption

may work well for deposits as a local approximation, it is less plausible that linearity is a good

approximation for very low levels of D/P . For this reason, I also undertake some robustness

checks in the empirical analysis with a quasi-linear liquidity aggregator where `d (Dt /Pt ; ξt ) is

declining in D/P . Since demand for deposits is inversely related to the level of it , this implies

that `d is higher in times of high it . Following (15), this would predict a concave relation

between the T-bill liquidity premium and it rather than the linear one from the baseline

model (15).

    Interest on reserves. If the CB introduces IOR, im
                                                     t > 0, this could potentially affect

liquidity premia if the introduction of IOR affects the rate that banks pay on deposits. If

banks aggressively compete for deposits and try to earn the spread im    d         d
                                                                    t − it , then it could

potentially rise close to im
                           t . If so, this would push down liquidity premia. For example,

starting from a situation where im          d                                           d
                                 t = 0 and it = 0, if the introduction of IOR leads to i =

im                                                                                                      m
 t > 0, then the liquidity premium in (15) falls from [`b (ξt )/`d (ξt )]it to [`b (ξt )/`d (ξt )](it −it ).

Because central banks that pay IOR typically keep the spread it − im
                                                                   t constant when they

change their target for it , the liquidity premium in this case would also be constant over time

rather than varying with the level of it .

    The extreme case of im    ∗
                         t = it corresponds to the “Friedman rule” (Friedman 1960) ac-

cording to which the payment of IOR equal to market rates (or, alternatively, deflation that

results in nominal interest rates of zero) would eliminate the implicit taxation of reserves

(see, also, Goodfriend 2002; Cúrdia and Woodford 2011). If, in addition, deposit rates rise to

idt = im                                                         m    ∗
       t , then liquidity premia shrink to zero. The payment of it = it would then not only




                                                    15
eliminate the reserves tax, but it would eliminate a liquidity tax more broadly, as T-bills and

other highly liquid government liabilities would no longer trade at a liquidity premium.

    On the other hand, there are a number of reasons why the introduction of IOR might not

have much of an effect on deposit rates. For example, if banks do not compete on deposit

rates in the market for demand deposits, then deposit rates could remain stuck at zero. Or, if

the cost of holding reserves is a negligible part of the overall marginal costs of demand deposit

provision, there is again not much reason to expect demand deposit rates to change.4 Thus,

whether or not idt rises towards im
                                  t and whether the introduction of IOR shrinks liquidity

premia is, in the end, an empirical question.



III     Empirical Dynamics of the Liquidity Premium

I now turn to an empirical evaluation of the opportunity-cost-of-money theory of liquidity

premia. I begin by examining the hypothesis that the liquidity premium should vary over

time with the level of short-term interest rates. Most of the analyses below use T-bills as a

near-money asset, but I also present some evidence with other highly liquid assets. Appendix

A describes the data. All interest rates in the empirical analysis are monthly averages of

daily annualized effective yields.


III.A     Liquidity Premium and Short-term Interest Rates

To measure the liquidity premium in U.S. T-Bills, I compare three-month T-bill yields to a

maturity-matched general collateral (GC) repo rate for repurchase agreements with Treasury

collateral. This repo rate is the interest rate for a three-month term interbank loan that

is collateralized with a portfolio of U.S. Treasury securities. Due to this backing with safe

collateral, there is virtually no compensation for credit risk priced into the repo rate. An

investment into a repo term loan is illiquid, because the investment is locked in during the
   4
     In the model of Ireland (2012), the introduction of IOR close to market rate has only a weak effect on
deposit rates because the bulk of the marginal costs of deposit provision is accounted for by labor costs. While
deposit rates are not zero in his model, they are substantially below market interest rates.


                                                      16
term of the loan. In contrast, a T-bill investment is more liquid, because it can be re-

sold easily. The spread between the repo rate and T-bills reflects this liquidity differential

(Longstaff 2000). Over the sample period from May 1991 to June 2007, this spread averaged

14 basis points (bps = 1/100s of a percent).

       Furthermore, the absence of a credit risk component in the GC repo rate makes the

repo/T-bill spread a more accurate measure of the liquidity premium than other frequently

studied measures such as the Treasury/eurodollar (TED) spread that compare T-bills with

unsecured interbank rates. The credit risk component in unsecured rates can obscure varia-

tion in the liquidity premium.

       Figure 1 shows monthly averages of the repo rate minus T-bill yields since the early 1990s.

As the figure shows, the repo rate typically exceeds the T-Bill yield by a substantial margin,

often between 5 and 25 bps, during the sample period covered in the figure. The focus of this

paper is on understanding why this spread varies over time.

       According to equation (15), the liquidity premium should, in the absence of shocks to

the multipliers `b and `d , be proportional to the level of short-term interest rates. Figure 1

shows that the time-variation in the repo/T-bill spread is—outside of crisis periods such as

2007/08—remarkably consistent with (15). I measure the level of short-term interest rates

with the level of the federal funds rate.5 As the plot demonstrates, the liquidity premium

co-moves strongly positively with the level of the federal funds rate. At the medium-term

frequencies illustrated by the plot in Figure 1, the opportunity-cost of money mechanism

that leads to (15) seems to be the dominant influence on the liquidity premium. The higher-

frequency liquidity demand shocks analyzed by Sunderam (2013) may be responsible for some

of the short-run variation in the repo/T-bill spread around the cyclical interest-rate related
   5
     One might prefer to use the 3-month GC repo rate instead, so that the same proxy is used for it on the
left-hand and right-hand side of (15), but for measuring the level of it (as opposed to yield spreads) this would
make virtually no difference. There is very little difference between monthly averages of these rates, and their
correlation is close to one. The advantage of using the federal funds rate is that it is available for a longer time
period than the GC repo rate. This allows me to use the same type of rate to measure the level of short-term
interest rates in other analyses below that use longer data samples with alternatives to the GC repo rate in
the calculation of the liquidity premium in T-bills.




                                                        17
                 Table I: Liquidity Premia and Fed Funds Rate: Short Sample
The sample period is May 1991 to June 2007. The data consists of monthly averages of daily rates.
The dependent variable is a yield spread expressed in basis points; the explanatory variable (federal
funds rate) is expressed in percent. Newey-West standard errors (12 lags) are shown in parentheses.


                             Repo/T-Bill   CD/T-Bill     2y Off/OnRun     T-Note/T-Bill
                                 (1)         (2)              (3)             (4)
            Intercept           -8.66          2.13           -0.32            0.41
              (s.e.)           (3.62)         (4.14)         (0.24)           (2.38)
            Fed funds rate      5.36           6.69            0.37            1.09
              (s.e.)           (0.99)         (1.21)         (0.07)           (0.79)

            Adj. R2               0.34        0.34            0.08             0.05
            #Obs.                 194         194             194              194



component, but the plot shows that they do not lead to persistent deviations.

    When financial markets are in turmoil, however, this roughly proportional relationship

with the interest-rate level is clearly broken. During the LTCM crisis in September 1998, or

around the height of the financial crisis in 2008, the repo/T-bill spread is unhinged from its

usual relationship with the federal funds rate. Following equation (15), this can be explained

if the liquidity service value of deposits is impaired relative to T-Bills—for example, because

bank customers have doubts about the safety and liquidity of deposits during a financial

crisis. This leads to a fall in the liquidity multiplier of deposits, `d (ξt ), relative to `b (ξt ),

which raises it − ibt .

    Table I, column (1), presents the results of regressions of the repo/T-bill spread on the

federal funds rate. Since the main focus of this paper is on the behavior of liquidity premia

in “normal” times outside of crisis periods, these regressions use data only up to June 2007

so that the financial crisis period is excluded. The results confirm the visual impression from

Figure 1: The spread is strongly positively related to the federal funds rate. An increase

of one percentage point in the federal funds rate is associated with a rise in the repo/T-bill

spread of 5.36 bps (s.e. 0.99).



                                                 18
   While T-bills are the most liquid Treasury security in the U.S., other Treasury securities

with longer maturities can also have some near-money properties. In particular, the most

recently issued “on-the-run” Treasury notes and bonds are traded in a highly liquid market

and there is empirical evidence that they trade at a liquidity premium compared with older

“off-the-run” issues that are less liquid (see, e.g., Warga 1992; Krishnamurthy 2002).

   Column (3) in Table I looks at the spread between two-year off-the-run and on-the-run

notes. I focus on two-year notes because they are issued on a regular monthly auction cycle.

Longer maturity notes and bonds are on a less regular auction schedule. This makes it more

difficult to analyze a monthly series of the on-the-run premium, because the premium follows

seasonal pattern between the auction dates. To construct the spread, I compare the yield

of the most recently issued on-the-run note with the yield of the nearest off-the-run note

issued one auction earlier. Because the two notes are not identical in terms of maturity and

coupon rate, some further adjustment is necessary. I follow the method of Goldreich, Hanke,

and Nath (2005) and use the off-the-run zero-coupon bond yield curve of Gürkaynak, Sack,

and Wright (2007) to value the cash flows of the two notes. This allows me to construct a

synthetic yield difference between the two notes that reflects the shape of the off-the-run yield

curve at each point in time. I adjust the off-the-run/on-the-run spread with this synthetic

yield difference. This adjustment accounts for the differences in maturity and coupon rates

between the two notes.

   As column (3) in Table I shows, there is a statistically significant positive relationship

between the level of the federal funds rate and the off-the-run/on-the-run spread. The mag-

nitude of the liquidity premium, however, is much smaller in this case—on the order of a

few basis points. Correspondingly, the magnitude of the coefficient on the federal funds

rate is much smaller than in column (1). The point estimate implies that a one percentage

point change in the federal funds rate translates into a change of 0.37 bps (s.e. 0.07) in the

off-the-run/on-the-run spread.

   Column (4) looks at the spread between T-bills and less liquid off-the-run two-year Trea-



                                               19
sury notes. Amihud and Mendelson (1991) argue that this spread reflects a liquidity premium.

I construct this spread by looking for two-year Treasury notes with remaining maturity of

around three months. Then I compare the yield of each of these Treasury notes with the

the average yield of two T-bills that straddle the maturity of the Treasury note. As Table I

shows, the regression coefficient of the federal funds rate is positive, but it is not statistically

significant in this sample.

   Figure 2 presents a similar analysis with longer data series starting in 1976. I do not

have repo rate data for time periods before the 1990s, and hence the liquidity premium in

this figure is calculated by comparing T-bill yields with uninsured certificate of deposit (CD)

rates rather than with GC repo rates. The spread to CD rates is an imperfect measure of the

liquidity premium, because a CD rates contain a credit risk component. However, outside

of crisis periods, this credit risk component is small. In the periods since the early 1990s

when both repo rate and CD rate data is available, there is typically only a small difference

between CD rates and GC repo rates. Comparing the spread plotted in Figure 2 with the

spread in Figure 1 one can see that the magnitude of the spread is quite similar in both cases.

The big exception is the financial crisis period starting in 2007. The CD/T-bill spread rose

much more strongly during the financial crisis than the repo/T-bill spread.

   It is also apparent from Figure 2 that the CD/T-bill spread has a similarly strong positive

relationship with the level of the federal funds rate as the repo/T-bill spread in Figure 1. This

strong positive correlation is therefore not specific to the post-1990 period. The similarity of

the CD/T-bill and the repo/T-bill spread can also be seen in column (2) of Table I. Regressing

the CD/T-bill spread on the federal funds rate yields a slope coefficient estimate that is of

similar magnitude as with the repo/T-bill spread in column (1) .

   Column (1) in Table II exploits the advantage of a longer sample for the CD/T-bill spread

and runs the regression with data from 1976 to 2007. The point estimate for the federal funds

rate slope coefficient is quite similar to the estimate in column (2) of Table I. This provides

further confirmation that the strong relationship between the liquidity premium of T-bills



                                                20
                            2                                                                              40

                           1.8                                                                             36

                           1.6                                                                             32

                           1.4                                                                             28
        CD/T−Bill spread




                                                                                                                Fed Funds Rate
                           1.2                                                                             24

                            1                                                                              20

                           0.8                                                                             16

                           0.6                                                                             12

                           0.4                                                                             8

                           0.2                                                                             4

                            0                                                                              0
                                 Oct1976   Mar1982   Sep1987      Mar1993   Sep1998    Feb2004   Aug2009

                                                 Fed funds rate       3m CD/3m T−Bill spread


        Figure 2: Spread between 3-month Treasury Bill yield and 3-month CD Rate


and the level of short-term interest rates is not specific to the post-1990 period.

   Columns (2) and (3) further show that the off-the-run/on-the-run and the T-note/T-bill

spread are positively related to the level of the federal funds rate in this longer sample, too.

Moreover, the point estimate of the slope coefficient in the T-note/T-bill spread regression

in column (3) is now more than three standard errors away from zero, indicating statistical

significance at conventional levels.


III.B           (Absence of ) Supply Effects

One of the few existing alternative explanations for time-variation in the liquidity premium

is the idea that changes in the supply of near-money assets cause this time-variation. Kr-

ishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2012) show that the spread between commercial paper

and T-bill yields is strongly negatively correlated with the supply of Treasuries, measured


                                                                    21
                Table II: Liquidity Premia and Fed Funds Rate: Long Sample
The sample period is January 1976 to June 2007. The data consists of monthly averages of daily rates.
The dependent variable is a yield spread expressed in basis points; the explanatory variable (federal
funds rate) is expressed in percent. Newey-West standard errors (12 lags) are shown in parentheses.


                                    CD/T-Bill     2y Off/OnRun     T-Note/T-Bill
                                      (1)              (2)             (3)
                   Intercept           -6.31            0.52           2.89
                     (s.e.)           (4.53)           (0.72)         (2.17)
                   Fed funds rate      8.14             0.25           1.01
                     (s.e.)           (0.70)           (0.13)         (0.28)

                   Adj. R2             0.51             0.03            0.06
                   #Obs.               378              378             378



as the stock of outstanding U.S. government debt to U.S. GDP. Greenwood, Hanson, and

Stein (2014) find that the liquidity premium of T-bills is negatively related to the ratio of

oustanding T-bills to GDP. The authors of both papers interpret these findings as evidence

that the liquidity premium is declining in the supply of near-money assets.

   The models that Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2013) and Greenwood, Hanson,

and Stein (2014) provide to explain such supply effects is similar to my model with: (i)

M s = 0 and deposits constrained by banks’ stock of T-bill holdings rather than central bank

money; (ii) the price level fixed so that the nominal rate it equals the real rate (which is

pinned down by exogenous variation in the endowment process). In this case, (7) becomes

                                        uq (Qt )      it − ibt
                                                 `b =          ,                                (16)
                                        uc (Ct )      1 + it

where Qt is now a function of the T-bill supply only. A change in T-bill supply affects

uq (Qt ), which results in a change in ibt because it is, by assumption, fixed at the real rate.

For example, higher supply of T-bills reduces uq (Qt ), which shrinks it − ibt . Thus, in this

alternative theory, changes in the T-bill supply induce changes in the liquidity premium that

are unrelated to movements in it . In contrast, the key prediction in my framework is that


                                                  22
the liquidity premium should be highly correlated with it , but not related to supply variables

once it is controlled for.

   To test this alternative supply story, I construct a measure of the liquidity premium of T-

bills going back to 1920. The government debt/GDP ratio—the key explanatory variable in

Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2012)—is highly persistent and moves up and down

only a few times during the 20th century. Therefore, I follow Krishnamurthy and Vissing-

Jorgensen (2012) in using a long sample to test the supply hypothesis. For the period 1920

to April 1991, I use a three-month bankers’ acceptance rate as an illiquid, but relatively

safe three-month rate. Bankers’ acceptances (BA) are of relatively low risk because they

are guaranteed by a commercial bank and hence represent an obligation of the (corporate)

borrower and the commercial bank. BA can be traded in a secondary market, but the market

is less liquid than the market for T-bills. From May 1991 onwards, I use three-month GC

repo rates, as before. To measure it , I use the federal funds rate from July 1954 onwards and

the Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s discount rate before that date. During this early

part of the sample, and unlike in later periods, banks regularly borrowed from the Federal

Reserve at the discount rate, which implies that the discount rate is an appropriate proxy

for the level of money market rates.

   Figure 3 shows the BA/T-bill spread along with the level of the short-term interest rate.

The strong correlation between the liquidity premium and the level of short-term rates is

clearly apparent in this very long sample, too. Column (1) in Table III confirms this impres-

sion. A regression of the BA/T-bill spread on the level of the short-term rate produces a

slope coefficient of 10.12 (s.e. 1.14), which is quite close to the magnitudes of the coefficient

in the much shorter samples in Tables II and II.

   Column (2) replicates the Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2012) finding for the

BA/T-bill spread: Regressing the BA/T-bill spread on the log of the debt/GDP ratio yields

a strongly negative and statistically significant coefficient of -44.37 (s.e. 9.13). Column (3)

adds the slope of the Treasury yield curve as an explanatory variable, as in Krishnamurthy



                                               23
                                 2                                                                      30

                                1.8                                                                     27

                                1.6                                                                     24

                                1.4                                                                     21




                                                                                                             Discount or Fed Funds Rate
        BankAcc/T−Bill spread




                                1.2                                                                     18

                                 1                                                                      15

                                0.8                                                                     12

                                0.6                                                                     9

                                0.4                                                                     6

                                0.2                                                                     3

                                 0                                                                      0
                                      Mar1930   Nov1943     Aug1957     Apr1971    Dec1984    Sep1998

                                                Fed funds rate        3m BankAcc/3m T−Bill spread


Figure 3: Spread between 3-month Treasury Bill yield and 3-month Bankers’ Acceptance
Rate

and Vissing-Jorgensen (2012). While this reduces the magnitude a little bit, it still leaves

the coefficient on the log debt/GDP ratio strongly negative.

   However, it is possible that this negative coefficient arises because the debt/GDP ratio

happens to be high in times when interest rates are low. Column (4) confirms this. Adding the

short-term interest rate level as an explanatory variable dramatically shrinks the coefficient

on log debt/GDP towards zero. At -5.31 (s.e. 5.38) it is now almost an order of magnitude

smaller than in column (2) and no longer statistically significant. In contrast, the coefficient

on the federal funds rate is almost unchanged from column (1) and still about nine times

bigger than its standard error. Adding the slope of the yield curve in column (5) does not

have a material effect.

   Columns (6) to (8) in Table III introduce the T-bill supply as an explanatory variable.



                                                                       24
     Table III: Liquidity Premia and Fed Funds Rate: Controlling for Treasury Supply
The sample period is January 1920 to June 2007 in columns (1) to (5) and January 1947 to June
2007 in columns (6) to (8). The interest-rate data consists of monthly averages of daily or weekly
rates. The dependent variable is the spread between the three-month prime bankers acceptance rate
and the three-month T-Bill yield until April 1991 and the spread between three-month GC repo and
three-month T-bill from May 1991 to June 2007. The explanatory variables are the federal funds rate
(discount rate before 1953) and the spread between 10-year Treasuries and T-bills, both expressed
in percent, the log government debt/GDP ratio, and the log of the ratio of outstanding amounts of
T-bills (available from 1947 onwards) and GDP. Newey-West standard errors (12 lags) are shown in
parentheses.

                                      1920 - 2007                              1947 - 2007
                        (1)       (2)     (3)     (4)        (5)       (6)         (7)         (8)
   Intercept            -7.84    -3.44    21.64    -11.61   -11.61   -192.45      -38.55      -32.89
     (s.e.)            (4.42)   (8.03)    (9.09)   (6.18)   (6.18)   (65.08)     (30.13)     (29.22)
   Fed funds rate      10.21                        9.92     9.92                  11.01       10.61
     (s.e.)            (1.14)                      (1.14)   (1.14)                (1.25)      (1.16)
   log(Debt/GDP)                 -44.17   -32.95    -5.35    -5.35                             -9.25
     (s.e.)                     (10.73)   (9.07)   (5.34)   (5.34)                           (12.04)
   log(T-Bill/GDP)                                                    -95.35      -9.51        -4.69
     (s.e.)                                                          (27.83)     (12.00)     (12.50)
   Yield curve slope                      -11.69             0.07
     (s.e.)                               (4.04)            (2.63)

   Adj. R2             0.51     0.13      0.21      0.51    0.51      0.12        0.55        0.55
   #Obs.               1,050    1,050     1,050     1,050   1,050     726         726         726



The T-bill supply variable becomes available in 1947, which is why the sample period in

columns (6) to (8) starts in 1947. The regression in column (6) replicates the finding of

Greenwood, Hanson, and Stein (2014) that T-bill supply is strongly negatively related to the

T-bill liquidity premium. However, as column (7) shows, the supply effect largely disappears

when the federal funds rate is included in the regression: The coefficient on the T-bill supply

variable drops by an order of magnitude from −95.35 (s.e. 27.83) to −9.51 (s.e. 12.00). The

coefficient on the federal funds rate (11.01; s.e. 1.25) is similar in magnitude to the estimate

in previous regressions. Including the debt/GDP variable along with the T-bill supply in

column (8) does not change this result. The federal funds rate retains its strong explanatory

power.


                                                   25
       Thus, once we take into account that the liquidity premium of near-money assets should

be related to the opportunity cost of money, there is little evidence that Treasury supply

has any effect on the level of the T-bill liquidity premium. This finding underscores that it

is important to consider the substitution relationship between money and near-money when

analyzing the the role of near-money asset supply. A reduction in the supply of near-money

assets leads to a rise in demand for the substitute, i.e., money. This rise in money demand

results either in a rise in short-term interest rates, or, if the CB follows an interest-rate

operating target, in an elastic money supply response from the central bank. In either case,

there is no effect of near-money asset supply on liquidity premia once the short-term interest

rate is controlled for.

       The elastic money supply response of the CB may be precisely what gives rise to the

negative correlation between T-bill supply and private-sector near-money asset supply that

Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2012) and Greenwood, Hanson, and Stein (2014)

document. In my model, an expansion in money supply facilitates demand deposit creation.

But one could extend this model to have banks create less liquid forms of near monies, too.

In practice, many types of private sector short-term debt such as commercial paper come

with some form of liquidity support from commercial banks.6 Provision of such liquidity

support raises the liquidity needs of commercial banks. An expansion in the CB’s supply of

liquidity (in the form of reserves) to the banking system may therefore not only allow more

deposit creation, but also an expansion in the supply of other private-sector near-money

assets. Conceptually, there is therefore no contradiction between the quantity correlations

reported in Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2012) and Greenwood, Hanson, and Stein

(2014) and my evidence that supply-related variables are unrelated to the liquidity premium

once short-term interest rates are controlled for.
   6
   See, e.g., Acharya, Schnabl, and Suarez (2013) for the case of asset-backed commercial paper. Corporate
commercial paper issuers typically arrange for a back-up credit line from commercial banks.




                                                   26
Table IV: Decomposition of Liquidity Premia: Relation to Financial Market Stress Indicators
The sample period is May 1991 to October 2011 in columns (1) to (4), where the dependent variable is
CBOE VIX index expressed in percentage points and averaged within each month, and from January
1976 to December 2009 in columns (5) to (7), where the dependent variable is the financial market
dislocation index of Pasquariello (2014) (multiplied by a factor of 1000). The explanatory variables
are spreads of monthly averages of daily yields, decomposed into their projection on the federal funds
rate and a residual. Newey-West standard errors (12 lags) are shown in parentheses.

                                            VIX                             Dislocation Index
                                         1991 - 2011                           1976 - 2009
                             Repo/    CD/      2y Off/   T-Note/       CD/       2y Off/   T-Note/
                             T-Bill   T-Bill   OnRun      T-Bill       T-Bill    OnRun      T-Bill
                              (1)      (2)       (3)       (4)          (5)        (6)       (7)
 Intercept                   21.23    21.61    23.59      23.30         -61.90    -27.25    -30.14
   (s.e.)                    (1.75)   (2.21)   (2.63)     (2.52)       (23.32)   (51.77)   (51.99)
 proj(spread|it )             -0.16    -0.10    -3.24      -0.77         0.42      -0.99     0.03
   (s.e.)                    (0.10)   (0.07)   (1.87)     (0.44)        (0.38)   (18.77)    (4.31)
 spread − proj(spread|it )     0.26    0.11      0.24       0.52         1.76      2.16      2.68
   (s.e.)                    (0.05)   (0.02)   (0.49)     (0.12)        (0.69)    (1.72)    (0.84)

 Adj. R2                      0.29     0.39     0.09       0.33         0.24      0.00       0.05
 #Obs.                        246      246      246        246          408       408        408



III.C      Isolating the Crisis Component in Liquidity Premia

Figure 1 suggests that the liquidity premium consists of two components with very different

cyclical properties. The first is the component related to the opportunity cost of money

that I focus on for the most part in this paper. The second component is one that appears

predominantly in times of financial market stress like the LTCM crisis in September 1998 or

the financial crisis in 2007-09. To properly interpret the magnitude of the liquidity premium

at a given point in time, or to use it as predictors of other variables—e.g., as forecasters

of real activity as in Stock and Watson (1989), Bernanke (1990), Friedman and Kuttner

(1992) and Bernanke and Blinder (1992)—it is important to take into account that these two

components carry different information about the state of the economy.

   Table IV illustrates the different cyclical properties of the two components. The regres-

sions reported columns (1) to (4) in this table show how the two components relate to the


                                                 27
Chicago Board Options Exchange VIX index of implied volatilities of S&P500 index options.

The VIX index is a widely used indicator of financial market stress. Periods of financial

market turmoil and market illiquidity tend to coincide with high levels of the VIX index

(Adrian and Shin 2010; Bao, Pan, and Wang 2011; Brunnermeier, Nagel, and Pedersen 2008;

Longstaff, Pan, Pedersen, and Singleton 2010; Nagel 2012).

      The dependent variable in columns (1) to (4) is the VIX index expressed in percentage

points. The explanatory variables are the yield spreads from Table I decomposed into their

projection on the federal funds rate, i.e., the fitted value from Table I, denoted proj(spread|it )

and the residual, denoted spread − proj(spread|it ). While the regressions in Table I use only

data excluding the financial crisis period after June 2007, the calculation of the fitted values

for proj(spread|it ) applies the coefficients from Table I to the full sample period from May

1991 to October 2011.

      As Table IV shows, the two components correlate very differently with the VIX. The

opportunity-cost-of-money component proj(spread|it ) has a negative coefficient, albeit with

weak statistical significance. The federal funds rate is high during booms when the VIX

index tends to be low. In contrast, the residual component spread − proj(spread|it ) has a

strongly positive association with the VIX index. For example, focusing on column (1), if

the repo/T-bill spread widens by 10bp without a corresponding change in the federal funds

rate, this is associated with a 2.6 percentage point rise in the VIX index (for comparison,

the average level of the VIX is close to 20 percent). For all yield spreads except the off-the-

run/on-the-run spread in column (3), the coefficient on this residual component is at least

four standard errors greater than zero.

      Columns (5) to (7) Table IV use the Market Dislocation Index (MDI) of Pasquariello

(2014) as dependent variable instead of the VIX.7 The MDI measures law of one price vio-

lations in financial markets (covered interest parity, foreign exchange cross rates, and cross-

listed stocks) and hence is a more direct indicator of abnormal levels of stress in financial
  7
      I thank Paolo Pasquariello for providing the data.




                                                       28
markets than the VIX. This index is also available for a longer time period than the VIX,

allowing me to use the long sample (as in Table II) from 1976 until the end of 2009 (when the

MDI ceases to be available). As the results in Table IV show, the relationship between the

MDI and the decomposed liquidity premia is broadly the same as in the case of the VIX: The

coefficients of the opportunity cost of money component proj(spread|it ) are not statistically

significant, whereas the coefficients of the residual spread − proj(spread|it ) are positive and,

for the Repo/T-bill and T-note/T-bill spread, also more than two standard errors away from

zero.

      These results are consistent with the view that the residual spread−proj(spread|it ) carries

information about stress levels in the financial system. Seen through the lens of the model,

eq. (15), the liquidity multiplier of deposits, `d (ξt ), falls in times of turmoil relative to the

liquidity multiplier of T-bills, `b (ξt ), which leads to an abnormally high level of the liquidity

premium. While the liquidity premium can be high in good times when short-term interest

rates are high, it can also be high in bad times when the liquidity service value of deposits is

impaired relative to T-bills.


III.D       Robustness Checks

Taxes. One potential concern with these analyses is that differences in taxation could drive

a wedge between yields of T-Bills and private-sector money market rates. Earlier research,

e.g. Cook and Lawler (1983), has argued that differences in state tax treatments explain

the CD/T-bill rate spread. However, it is not clear whether these state-tax treatments could

affect prices in a world in which some big investors are tax-exempt and taxable global financial

institutions undertake elaborate efforts to minimize their tax bill. Fortunately, there is a way

to directly address this issue empirically. For a number of years, the Federal Home Loan Bank

(FHLB) has issued short-term discount notes with maturities in similar ranges as T-bills.8

These discount notes receive the same tax treatment as Treasury Bills and FHLB debt is also
  8
      I am grateful to Allan Mendelowitz for providing the discount note yield data




                                                      29
                    1.1



                    0.9



                    0.7
          Spread




                    0.5



                    0.3



                    0.1



                   −0.1
                    Jun1990 Mar1993 Dec1995 Sep1998 May2001 Feb2004 Nov2006 Aug2009 May2012

                                   GC Repo/T−Bill spread    FHLB DN/T−Bill spread


Figure 4: Spread between Repo/T-bill spread compared with T-bill/FHLB discount note
spread


explicitly guaranteed by the Federal government (Cowan and Petrine 2002). Thus, a spread

between FHLB discount note yields and T-bill yields cannot be driven by taxation differences

nor by credit risk. As Figure 4 shows, the FHLB note/T-bill spread is quantitatively similar

to the repo/T-bill spread. The correlation between the two series is 0.91. This suggests that

a the repo/T-bill spread cannot be explained by differential tax treatment. Instead, both the

FHLB note/T-bill spread and the repo/T-bill spread reflect the superior liquidity of T-bills.

   In addition, the off-the-run/on-the-run and T-note/T-bill spreads analyzed in Tables I and

II also compare instruments with similar tax treatment. The existence of a spread between

their yields and the time-variation of this spread therefore cannot be explained by a tax story

either.

   Non-linear liquidity aggregator. As discussed in Section II.D, a quasi-linear liquidity



                                                       30
aggregator may be more plausible than a linear aggregator. This would imply a concave

relationship between it and the liquidity premium. To check this, I have experimented with a

quadratic specification for the regression of the T-bill liquidity premium on the federal funds

rate, but I did not find evidence for significant non-linearity.



IV     The Effect of Reserve Remuneration Policies

As the evidence in the previous section shows, the assumption that id = 0, which leads to

                                                    `b (ξt )
                                       it − ibt =            it                             (17)
                                                    `d (ξt )

provides a good description of the behavior of liquidity premia in the U.S. until the financial

crisis. Throughout its history until 2008, the Federal Reserve did not pay IOR, i.e., im
                                                                                       t = 0.

In October 2008 the Federal Reserve changed its reserve remuneration policy and started

paying IOR. Due to the extremely low level of short-term interest rates since 2008, the IOR

so far remained very close to zero and is hence unlikely to have a detectable effect on liquidity

premia. A number of other countries introduced IOR at earlier points during the past two

decades when short-term interest rates were higher. In those cases, effects on liquidity premia

could potentially be big enough to be detectable.

   Whether the assumption of id = 0 still provides a good prediction of liquidity premia

after the introduction of IOR is an open question. Payment of IOR renders one type of

money interest-bearing, but since reserve deposits are available only to commercial banks,

it is not clear to what extent IOR raises the rates of return on monies available to other

market participants. It is possible that the introduction of IOR lowers banks’ marginal

cost of maintaining precautionary liquidity sufficiently so that competition among banks

drives demand deposit rates up to a level significantly above zero, perhaps close to im
                                                                                      t . If

so, one would expect liquidity premia to shrink substantially and not vary much anymore

with the level of short term interest rates following the introduction of IOR. On the other


                                               31
hand, it is possible that the opportunity cost of reserve holdings is not a major factor in the

determination of equilibrium deposit rates. In this case, demand deposit rates may remain

at zero, and liquidity premia still conform to (17).

   To investigate this question empirically, I examine the UK (which introduced IOR in

2001) and Canada (which introduced IOR in 1999). For both countries, I do not have a

sufficiently long series for 3-month term GC repo rates, and so I use the CD rate (UK) or the

prime CP rate (Canada) as a proxy for the market rate for (illiquid) 3-month term loans.


IV.A     United Kingdom

Figure 5 plots monthly averages of the CD rate/T-bill spread at 3-month maturity for the

UK since 1978. The short-term interest rate shown in the figure is SONIA, an unsecured

overnight interbank rate, from 1997, and the Bank of England’s repo rate before 1997. As in

the U.S., the liquidity premium of UK T-bills is positive on average, positively correlated with

the level of short-term interest rates, and it exhibits positive spikes unrelated to short-term

interest rate movements during the East Asian and LTCM crises in 1997 and 1998 as well as

the financial crisis starting in 2007.

   In June 2001, the Bank of England (BoE) introduced an overnight deposit facility. Excess

reserves placed into the deposit facility earned an interest rate of 100bps below the BoE’s

main policy rate. Starting in March 2005, the spread to the main policy rate was changed a

number of times to 25bps and 50bps (Bowman, Gagnon, and Leahy 2010). Figure 5 does not

suggest that this change in reserve remuneration policy in 2001 had a substantial effect on

the liquidity premium of UK T-Bills. Until the onset of the financial crisis in 2007, the CD

rate/T-bill spread continued to be substantially positive, and it correlated positively with the

level of short-term interest rates.

   Among the three countries examined in this study, the UK shows the most pronounced

rise in the CD rate/T-bill spread towards the end of 2011 in Figure 5. A potential explanation

for this rise is that it reflects a rise in the perception of bank credit risk in the wake of the


                                               32
                                   1                                                                             35




                                 0.8                                                    IOR intro                28
        3m CD/3m T−Bill spread




                                 0.6                                                                             21




                                                                                                                      ON Rate
                                 0.4                                                                             14




                                 0.2                                                                             7




                                   0                                                                              0
                                 Oct1976   Mar1982    Sep1987      Mar1993    Sep1998   Feb2004     Aug2009   Feb2015

                                                         ON Rate         3m CD/3m T−Bill spread


                                                     Figure 5: CD/T-Bill Spread in the UK


European debt crisis that was building up around that time and that UK banks may have

exposure to.

   Table V presents regressions of the UK’s CD rate/T-Bill spread on the level of the short-

term interest rate using data up to June 2007. Column (1) shows that there is a strong

positive relationship between the level of the overnight rate and the CD rate/T-Bill spread.

The magnitude of the coefficient is quite similar to the estimate in U.S. data in Table I: a

one percentage point rise in the overnight rate is associated with a 6.01 bps (s.e. 1.00) rise

in the liquidity premium. Column (2) interacts the overnight rate with a dummy that equals

one in the periods after the introduction of IOR. If the IOR introduction reduced liquidity

premia and dampened their co-movement with short-term interest rates, one would expect

a negative coefficient on this interaction term. The estimated coefficient on the interaction

term is indeed negative. However, the combined effect with the ON rate variable evaluated


                                                                             33
                           Table V: Liquidity Premium and IOR: UK
The sample period is January 1978 to June 2007. The data consists of monthly averages of daily rates.
The dependent variable is a yield spread expressed in basis points; the explanatory variable (SONIA,
an unsecured overnight interbank rate) is expressed in percent. Newey-West standard errors (12 lags)
are shown in parentheses.

                                                   CD/T-Bill    CD/T-Bill
                                                     (1)          (2)
                        Intercept                     -16.89       -15.19
                          (s.e.)                      (7.16)      (11.11)
                        ON Rate                        6.01          5.87
                          (s.e.)                      (1.00)       (1.29)
                        IOR dummy                                   6.91
                          (s.e.)                                  (12.05)
                        IOR dummy × ON rate                         -2.11
                          (s.e.)                                   (1.71)

                        Adj. R2                       0.60          0.60
                        #Obs.                         354           354



at the point estimates (5.87 − 2.11 = 3.76) is still a strong positive effect. Moreover, at

conventional significance levels, one cannot reject the hypothesis that the coefficient on the

interaction is zero. Thus, the T-bill liquidity premium still has a strong positive relationship

with the short-term interest rate level, despite the IOR.

   The behavior of interest rates on deposits and aggregate balances in different types of

deposit accounts may offer additional insights into the (absent) effects of IOR. Appendix B

shows that balances in non-interest bearing deposits in the UK did not change noticeably with

the introduction of IOR. Average interest rates paid on transaction deposit accounts (current

accounts) remained close to zero. This suggest that the IOR introduction had little effect on

the way banks’ conduct their deposit business, and hence little effect on the opportunity cost

of money for non-banks.




                                                 34
IV.B       Canada

Figure 6 shows the history of the liquidity premium, measured as the spread between prime

commercial paper (CP) rates and Candadian T-bills at 3-month maturity. The overnight

interest rate shown by the dotted line in Figure 6 is the CORRA overnight GC repo rate

since December 1997, and prior to that date, the overnight Canada dollar LIBOR rate. As the

figure shows, the liquidity premium of Canadian T-bills exhibits similar time-series behavior

to the liquidity premia in the U.S. and UK: It is positive on average, positively correlated

with the level of short-term interest rates, and there are upward spikes during times of market

turmoil.

   The Bank of Canada introduced IOR in February 1999, with im
                                                             t set to 25bps below the

target interbank lending rate (Bowman, Gagnon, and Leahy 2010), as shown by the vertical

line in Figure 6. If deposit rates changed one-for-one with im
                                                             t , this would have a dramatic

effect on the magnitude of liquidity premia according to (17): In 1999, short-term rates were

at it ≈ 6% and so with the introduction of IOR it − im
                                                     t shrank from about 6% to 0.25%.

   Figure 6 indicates, however, that the introduction of IOR had little effect on the magnitude

of the liquidity premium of Canadian T-bills. While the introduction of IOR is preceded by

some positive spikes in the liquidity premium in 1997 and 1998—presumably a consequence of

the East Asian and LTCM crises occurring at the time—there is little evidence of a persistent

change in the way the liquidity premium relates to the level of short-term interest rates.

The time-series behavior of the liquidity premium is quite similar before and after the IOR

introduction.

   Table VI confirms the visual impression from Figure 6. The results in this table are based

on data from January 1976 to June 2007, i.e., excluding the recent financial crisis period.

The regression of the prime CP/T-bill spread on the short-term interest rate in column (1)

yields a positive coefficient on the overnight rate. The point estimate suggests that a one

percentage point rise in the overnight rate is associated with a 2.15 bps (s.e. 0.59) rise in the

liquidity premium. In column (2), the overnight rate is interacted with a dummy that equals


                                               35
                                 0.7                                                                            28



                                 0.6                                                  IOR intro                 24



                                 0.5                                                                            20
        Prime CP/T−Bill spread




                                 0.4                                                                            16




                                                                                                                     ON Rate
                                 0.3                                                                            12



                                 0.2                                                                            8



                                 0.1                                                                            4



                                  0                                                                             0
                                       Oct1976   Mar1982   Sep1987    Mar1993    Sep1998    Feb2004   Aug2009

                                                       ON rate       3m Prime CP/3m T−Bill spread


                                             Figure 6: Commercial paper/T-Bill Spread in Canada


one in the periods after the introduction of IOR. If the IOR introduction reduced liquidity

premia, one would expect a negative coefficient on this interaction term. In contrast, the

estimated coefficient is positive, albeit not significantly different from zero at conventional

significance levels.

   One somewhat puzzling feature of the data is the elevated prime CP/T-bill spread in

Figure 6 towards the very end of the sample. Possibly, this reflects a higher perceived riskiness

of prime commercial paper following the financial crisis. If so, this would suggest that the

prime CP/T-bill spread is not a good proxy for the liquidity premium during the last two

years of the sample. Consistent with this explanation, the US CD rate/T-bill spread in Figure

2 shares this feature, but not the GC repo/T-bill spread (which is virtually free of credit risk)

in Figure 1.




                                                                         36
                        Table VI: Liquidity Premium and IOR: Canada
The sample period is January 1976 to June 2007. The data consists of monthly averages of daily
rates. The dependent variable is a yield spread expressed in basis points; the explanatory variable
(CORRA, a general collateral overnight rate since December 1997; overnight LIBOR in earlier periods)
is expressed in percent. The IOR dummy is set to one in the time periods following the introduction
of IOR in February 1999. Newey-West standard errors (12 lags) are shown in parentheses.

                                            Prime CP/T-Bill     Prime CP/T-Bill
                                                  (1)                 (2)
                  Intercept                        6.38                4.93
                    (s.e.)                        (4.27)             (8.30)
                  ON rate                          2.15                2.25
                    (s.e.)                        (0.59)             (0.86)
                  IOR dummy                                           -5.40
                    (s.e.)                                           (8.51)
                  IOR dummy × ON rate                                 2.11
                    (s.e.)                                           (1.08)

                  Adj. R2                          0.26               0.26
                  #Obs.                            378                378



IV.C     Summary

The combined evidence from the UK and Canada offers little support for the conjecture that

the introduction of IOR uncoupled liquidity premia from their close relationship with the

short-term interest rate. Even though IOR lowers the opportunity cost of holding one form

of money (central bank reserves) for banks with access to the central bank deposit facility, this

does not seem to carry over into a substantial reduction in the opportunity costs of holding

other types of money (deposits) faced by non-bank market participants without access to

central bank deposits. As a caveat, though, the statistical power to estimate the effect of the

introduction of IOR is somewhat limited.

   Recent experience with IOR in the US also points towards frictions that prevent market

participants from arbitraging discrepancies between IOR and open-market rates. After the

Federal Reserve introduced IOR in October 2008, the federal funds rate has persistently

traded below IOR. As Bech and Klee (2011) argue, this reflects the fact that some large


                                                37
participants in the federal funds market are not eligible to receive IOR. Instead, they have to

lend their funds in the federal funds market to banks who are eligible to receive IOR. These

banks are not bidding for these funds aggressively enough to push the federal funds rate to

the level of IOR. This illustrates that payment of IOR does not automatically establish the

level of IOR as the floor for money market rates.



V     Conclusion

The evidence in this paper suggests that liquidity premia of near-money assets reflect the

opportunity cost of holding money. When interest rates are high, the opportunity costs of

holding money are high, and market participants are willing to pay a big premium for highly

liquid money substitutes such as T-bills. As a consequence, liquidity premia are positively

correlated with the level of short-term interest rates. This interest-rate related variation

is a dominant driver of liquidity premia at business-cycle frequencies, except in periods of

financial market turmoil when liquidity premia are elevated relative to their normal level.

The liquidity premium is unrelated to Treasury securities supply once short-term interest

rates are controlled for.

    Payment of IOR could potentially reduce and stabilize liquidity premia because IOR

reduces the opportunity cost of holding money for at least some market participants (banks

with reserve accounts at the central bank). However, the evidence from UK and Canada

shows that liquidity premia remained strongly tied to the level of short-term interest rates

after the introduction of IOR. Evidently, payment of IOR did not substantially affect the

opportunity cost of holding money for non-bank market participants. One might conjecture

that liquidity premia would indeed shrink and uncouple from the short-term interest rate if

a much broader group of market participants—perhaps even including households and non-

financial corporations—had direct access to interest-bearing electronic central bank money.




                                              38
References

 Acharya, Viral, Philipp Schnabl, and Gustavo Suarez, 2013, Securitization without risk

    transfer, Journal of Financial Economics 515–536, 515–536.

 Adrian, Tobias, and Hyun Song Shin, 2010, Liquidity and leverage, Journal of Financial

    Intermediation 19, 418–437.

 Amihud, Yakov, and Haim Mendelson, 1991, Liquidity, maturity, and the yields on us

    treasury securities, Journal of Finance 46, 1411–1425.

 Ashcraft, Adam, James McAndrews, and David Skeie, 2011, Precautionary reserves and

    the interbank market, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 43, 311–348.

 Azar, José, Jean-François Kagy, and Martin C Schmalz, 2014, Can changes in the cost of

    cash explain the corporate cash puzzle?, Working paper, University of Michigan.

 Bansal, Ravi, and Wilbur John Coleman, 1996, A monetary explanation of the equity

    premium, term premium, and risk-free rate puzzles, Journal of Political Economy,

    1135–1171.

 Bansal, Ravi, Wilbur John II Coleman, and Christian T. Lundblad, 2010, Endogenous

    liquidity supply, Working paper, Duke University.

 Bao, Jack, Jun Pan, and Jiang Wang, 2011, The illiquidity of corporate bonds, Journal of

    Finance 66, 911–946.

 Barnett, William A, 1980, Economic monetary aggregates: An application of index number

    and aggregation theory, Journal of Econometrics 14, 11–48.

 Barnett, William A., and Marcelle Chauvet, 2011, How better monetary statistics could

    have signaled the financial crisis, Journal of Econometrics 161, 6–23.

 Bech, Morten L., and Elizabeth Klee, 2011, The mechanics of a graceful exit: Interest

    on reserves and segmentation in the federal funds market, Journal of Monetary Eco-

    nomics 58, 415–431.

                                           39
Bernanke, B., 1990, On the predictive power of interest rates and interest rate spreads,

   New England Economic Review Nov/Dec, 51–68.

Bernanke, Ben S., and Alan S. Blinder, 1992, The federal funds rate and the channels of

   monetary transmission, American Economic Review 82, 901–921.

Bernanke, Ben S., and Mark Gertler, 1995, Inside the black box: The credit channel of

   monetary policy, Journal of Economic Perspectives 9, 27–48.

Bernanke, Ben S., and Ilian Mihov, 1998, Measuring monetary policy, Quarterly Journal

   of Economics 113, 869–902.

Bianchi, Javier, and Saki Bigio, 2013, Liquidity management and monetary policy, Working

   paper, University of Winsconsin and Columbia University.

Bohn, Henning, 2008, The sustainability of fiscal policy in the United States, in R. Neck

   and J. Sturm, eds.: Sustainability of Public Debt, pp. 15–49).

Bowman, David, Etienne Gagnon, and Mike Leahy, 2010, Interest on excess reserves as a

   monetary policy instrument: The experience of foreign central banks, Working paper,

   Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.

Brunnermeier, Markus K., 2009, Deciphering the liquidity and credit crunch 2007–2008,

   Journal of Economic Perspectives 23, 77–100.

Brunnermeier, Markus K., Stefan Nagel, and Lasse H. Pedersen, 2008, Carry trades and

   currency crashes, in Daron Acemoglu, Kenneth Rogoff, and Michael Woodford, eds.:

   NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2008, pp. 313–347, Chicago, IL (University of Chicago

   Press, Chicago, IL).

Committee on the Global Financial System, 2013, Asset encumbrance, financial reform

   and the demand for collateral assets, Working paper, CGFS Papers, no 49.

Cook, Timothy Q., and Thomas A. Lawler, 1983, The behavior of the spread between

   treasury bill rates and private money market rates since 1978, Federal Reserve Bank of

   Richmond Economic Review 4, 3–15.

                                          40
Cowan, Adrian M., and Robert T. Petrine, 2002, Taxes and the pricing of government

   sponsored entity bonds, Working paper, Federal Home Loan Banks Office of Finance.

Cúrdia, Vasco, and Michael Woodford, 2011, The central-bank balance sheet as an instru-

   ment of monetary policy, Journal of Monetary Economics 58, 54–79.

Drechsler, Itamar, Alexi Savov, and Philipp Schnabl, 2014, A model of monetary policy

   and risk premia, Working paper, New York University.

Driscoll, John C., and Ruth A. Judson, 2013, Sticky deposit rates, Working paper, Federal

   Reserve Board.

Friedman, Benjamin M., and Kenneth N. Kuttner, 1992, Money, income, prices, and in-

   terest rates, American Economic Review , 472–492.

Friedman, Milton, 1960. A Program for Monetary Stability (Fordham University Press,

   New York, NY).

Gatev, Evan, Til Schuermann, and Philip Strahan, 2007, How do banks manage liquidity

   risk? evidence from the equity and deposit markets in the fall of 1998, in The Risks of

   Financial Institutions, pp. 105–132).

Goldreich, David, Bernd Hanke, and Purnendu Nath, 2005, The price of future liquidity:

   Time-varying liquidity in the u.s. treasury market, Review of Finance 9, 1–32.

Goodfriend, Marvin, 2002, Interest on reserves and monetary policy, Federal Reserve Bank

   of New York Economic Policy Review 8, 13–29.

Greenwood, Robin, Samuel G. Hanson, and Jeremy C. Stein, 2014, A comparative-

   advantage approach to government debt maturity, Working paper, Harvard University.

Gürkaynak, Refet S., Brian Sack, and Jonathan H. Wright, 2007, The U.S. treasury yield

   curve: 1961 to the present, Journal of Monetary Economics 54, 2291 – 2304.

Ireland, Peter N., 2012, The macroeconomic effects of interest on reserves, Working paper,

   NBER.


                                           41
Krishnamurthy, Arvind, 2002, The bond/old-bond spread, Journal of Financial Eco-

   nomics 66, 463 – 506.

Krishnamurthy, Arvind, 2010, How debt markets have malfunctioned in the crisis, Journal

   of Economic Perspectives 24, 3–28.

Krishnamurthy, Arvind, and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, 2012, The aggregate demand for

   treasury debt, Journal of Political Economy 120, 233–267.

Krishnamurthy, Arvind, and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, 2013, Short-term debt and finan-

   cial crises: What we can learn from US treasury supply, Working paper, UC Berkeley.

Longstaff, Francis A., 2000, The term structure of very short-term rates: New evidence for

   the expectations hypothesis, Journal of Financial Economics 58.

Longstaff, Francis A, 2004, The flight-to-liquidity premium in US treasury bond prices,

   Journal of Business 77.

Longstaff, Francis A., Jun Pan, Lasse H. Pedersen, and Kenneth J. Singleton, 2010, How

   sovereign is sovereign credit risk?, American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 3,

   75–103.

Musto, David, Greg Nini, and Krista Schwarz, 2014, Notes on bonds: Liquidity at all costs

   in the great recession, Working paper, Wharton.

Nagel, Stefan, 2012, Evaporating liquidity, Review of Financial Studies 25, 2005–2039.

Pasquariello, Paolo, 2014, Financial market dislocations, Review of Financial Studies 27,

   1868–1914.

Poterba, James M., and Julio J. Rotemberg, 1987, Money in the utility function: An em-

   pirical implementation, in William A. Barnett and Kenneth J. Singleton, eds.: New

   Approaches to Monetary Economics: Proceedings of the Second International Sym-

   posium in Economic Theory and Econometrics, pp. 219–240, New York (Cambridge

   University Press, New York).


                                          42
Robatto, Roberto, 2013, Financial crises and systemic bank runs in a dynamic model of

   banking, Working paper, University of Chicago.

Stock, James H., and Mark W. Watson, 1989, New indexes of coincident and leading

   economic indicators, in NBER Macroeconomics Annual, pp. 351–409).

Sunderam, Adi, 2013, Money creation and the shadow banking system, Working paper,

   Harvard Business School.

Vayanos, Dimitri, 2004, Flight to quality, flight to liquidity, and the pricing of risk, Working

   paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Warga, Arthur, 1992, Bond returns, liquidity, and missing data, Journal of Financial and

   Quantitative Analysis 27, 605–617.

Woodford, Michael, 2003. Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy

   (Princeton University Press, Princeton).




                                             43
                                        Appendix
    Appendix A describes the sources of the data used in this paper. Appendix B provides
information on deposit quantities and deposit interest rates in the US and UK.


A     Data
All yields are expressed as effective annual yields.

A.1    United States
Treasury bill and Treasury note yields. Data for T-bills and T-notes is from the daily
CRSP database. Every day I choose the T-bill closest to 91-day maturity and calculate its
yield from the midpoint of the bid and ask quotes provided in the CRSP database. To match
T-notes with similar maturity T-bills, I look, each day, for the two-year note with remaining
maturity closest to 91 days maturity and two T-bills whose maturity straddle the T-note’s
maturity. To construct the T-note/T-bill spread I subtract the linear interpolation of the
two T-bill yields from the T-note yield as in Amihud and Mendelson (1991). For the sample
starting in 1920, the T-bill series includes, from 1920 to 1920 to 1933 U.S. Treasury three to
six month notes and certificates taken from NBER Macro History database, obtained through
the FRED database at the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, from 1934 to April 1991 T-bill
yields are from the FRED database, and from May 1991 onwards from CRSP, as described
above.
    On-the-run and off-the-run Treasury notes. To construct the spread between two-
year on-the-run and off-the-run notes, I compare the yield of the most recently issued on-
the-run note with the yield of the nearest off-the-run note issued one auction earlier. I follow
Goldreich, Hanke, and Nath (2005) and use an off-the-run zero-coupon bond yield curve to
value the cash flows of the on-the-run note and the nearest off-the-run note. I adjust the
off-the-run/on-the-run spread with this synthetic yield difference. This adjustment accounts
for the differences in maturity and coupon rates between the two notes. The off-the-run
zero-coupon yield curves used in this method are obtained from the Federal Reserve Board,
and they are based on the method of Gürkaynak, Sack, and Wright (2007).
    Interbank rates. Daily GC repo rates are from Bloomberg, available from May 1991.
The rates represent the rates at which dealers pay interest (the rates at which dealers receive
interest are a few basis points higher). CD rates are obtained from the FRED database at
the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. The source of these data is the H.15 Release of
the Federal Reserve Board. The reported CD rates refer to average of dealer bid rates for
large-denomination ($1,000,000 or greater) certificates of deposit. These large denomination
CDs are not insured by the FDIC. Daily data for the effective federal funds rate based on
the H.15 release is also obtained from the FRED database.
    Other yields. The Federal Reserve Bank of New York discount rate and the New York
three-month bankers’ acceptance rate from 1920 until 1940 are from the NBER Macro History
Database, obtained through the FRED database. The Banker’s acceptance rate from 1941
onwards is from FRED, too.


                                               44
    Debt/GDP. Data on the outstanding U.S. government debt to GDP ratio is from Hen-
ning Bohn’s website. The data are an updated version of the series used in Bohn (2008).
Data on outstanding T-bills is from the Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP)
monthly Treasury files, starting in January 1947. The series reports the outstanding face
values of Treasury Bills, Certificates of Indebtedness, Tax Anticipation Bills, and Tax Antic-
ipation Certificates of Indebtedness. Data on quarterly nominal GDP is from the the FRED
database.

A.2    United Kingdom
.
    Data on UK T-bill yields is from Datastream. Before 1996, use secondary market T-
bill yields (LDNTB3M). From 1996 onwards, this series is often stale. For this reason, I
use average yields from the weekly three-month T-bill tenders (UKTBTND) from 1996 until
2011. Monthly averages of CD rates and of the SONIA overnight interbank rate are from the
Bank of England.

A.3    Canada
Data on three-month T-bill yields are from Global Financial Data. The data comprises daily
secondary market yields from 1990 and auction yields prior to 1990. Yields on three-month
prime commercial paper and Canada dollar overnight LIBOR are also from Global Financial
Data. The data is weekly until 1990 and daily subsequently. When the CORRA general
collateral overnight repo rate becomes available on Datastream from 12/8/1997 onwards, I
use CORRA as the short-term interest rate instead of LIBOR.


B     Deposit balances and deposit rates
A.1    United States
Figure A.1 sheds light on the role of non-interest bearing demand deposits in the US. The data
is from the FRED database at the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. These non-interest
bearing demand deposits are a component of the monetary aggregate M1. This category
of deposits excludes interest-bearing NOW accounts and funds swept into interest-bearing
transaction deposits. Figure A.1 plots the series as a proportion of GDP. As the figure shows,
the share of non-interest bearing demand deposits has been quite stable at around 5 percent
of GDP. Thus, throughout the sample period that I study, households and businesses in the
US have keep substantial amounts of deposits in non-interest bearing form.
    Figure A.1 also shows the share of currency plus non-interest bearing demand deposits over
time. Holdings of currency have dropped strongly during the post-WWII period. Together,
these non-interest bearing forms of money amount to about 10 percent of GDP.
    Regarding the interest rates paid on interest-bearing deposit accounts, Driscoll and Jud-
son (2013) report that the average rate on an aggregate of liquid interest-bearing deposits
that includes interest-bearing checking accounts, savings deposits, and money-market deposit


                                             45
         0.35



          0.3



         0.25



          0.2



         0.15



          0.1



         0.05



           0
         Aug1957           Apr1971          Dec1984          Sep1998             May2012

                     Demand deposits/GDP      (Demand deposits + currency)/GDP


        Figure A.1: US non-interest bearing demand deposits as proportion of GDP


accounts, is substantially below the federal funds rate, at roughly half of its level. Since this
aggregate also includes less liquid savings and money-market deposit accounts, and it ex-
cludes non-interest-bearing accounts accounts, the average rate on the most liquid forms of
deposits must be even closer to zero.

A.2    United Kingdom
.
    Figure A.2 plots the quantity of non-interest bearing demand deposits in the UK, ex-
pressed as a proportion of GDP, around the time of the introduction of IOR in 2001. The
data are from the Bank of England (non-interest bearing sight deposits in the Bank of Eng-
land’s terminology). Before the financial crisis, the share of non-interest bearing demand
deposits is quite stable between 15 and 20 percent of GDP. There is no apparent break or
other substantial change in the series with the introduction of IOR in 2001.
    Figure A.3 shows UK deposit rates based on data from the Bank of England. The solid
line shows the average rate on current accounts (i.e., checking accounts). As the figure shows,
the average interest rate for this type of account is close to zero, it does not vary with the
level of the short-term interest rate (which is shown in the figure as the dotted line), and it
stayed close to zero following the introduction of IOR in 2001. There is a slight up-tick in


                                               46
           0.5




           0.4                  IOR intro




           0.3




           0.2




           0.1




            0
                 Sep1998   May2001          Feb2004   Nov2006   Aug2009



       Figure A.2: UK non-interest bearing demand deposits as proportion of GDP


the rate a few months after the IOR introduction, but it is not clear whether this rise was
connected to the change in the Bank of England’s reserve remuneration policy. In any case,
even with this slight rise, the average rate remained below one percent.




                                                47
                8


                7


                6                                    IOR intro


                5
Interest rate




                4


                3


                2


                1


                0
                    Dec1995       Sep1998     May2001            Feb2004       Nov2006

                          Current account    Instant access deposit        ON Rate


                              Figure A.3: UK deposit interest rates




                                               48
