                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                    THE RUNNER-UP EFFECT

                                            Santosh Anagol
                                           Thomas Fujiwara

                                         Working Paper 20261
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w20261


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2014




We thank Emmerich Davies, Sue Jia, Minkwang Jang, Cinthia Konichi, Maria Gao, Michelle Han,
Susannah Scanlan, Mengshu Shen, Jason Tian, and Iris Yao for research assistance. This paper benefitted
from suggestions by Daron Acemoglu, Eduardo Azevedo, Laurent Bouton, Robin Burgess, Micael
Castanheira, David Lee, Marc Meredith, Joana Naritomi, Sri Navagarapu, Francesco Trebbi, Shing-Yi
Wang, and seminar participants at Princeton, Wharton, Yale, Columbia, ISB, NYU, UCLA, CIFAR,
PECO, and Warwick. We acknowledge funding from Wharton Global Initiatives, the Wharton Dean’s
Research Fund, the Center for the Advanced Study of India (U Penn), the Canadian Institute for Advanced
Research, and the Program in Latin American Studies (Princeton). The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Santosh Anagol and Thomas Fujiwara. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
The Runner-Up Effect
Santosh Anagol and Thomas Fujiwara
NBER Working Paper No. 20261
June 2014
JEL No. D03,D72,O10

                                              ABSTRACT

Exploiting regression discontinuity designs in Brazilian, Indian, and Canadian first-past-the-post elections,
we document that second-place candidates are substantially more likely than close third-place candidates
to run in, and win, subsequent elections. Since both candidates lost the election and had similar electoral
performance, this is the effect of being labeled the runner-up. We explore the potential mechanisms
for this runner-up effect, including selection into candidacy, heuristic behavior by political actors,
and the runner-up obtaining an advantage from strategic coordination (being more likely to become
a focal point). Selection into candidacy is unlikely to explain the effect on winning subsequent elections,
and the weight of evidence suggests the effect is driven by strategic coordination. We find no effect
of finishing in third-place versus fourth-place.


Santosh Anagol
University of Pennsylvania
3620 Locust Walk
1458 SH-DH
Philadelphia, PA 19104
anagol@wharton.upenn.edu

Thomas Fujiwara
Department of Economics
Princeton University
357 Wallace Hall
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
fujiwara@princeton.edu
1       Introduction

Social scientists have a longstanding interest in the factors that determine electoral success. A
large part of political economy studies how voters and other agents use information on candidates
such as personal traits, policy platforms, and past performance, to select leaders. Understanding
how this information is processed is key to understanding how a democracy chooses its elected
officials and, consequently, the policies those elected officials enact.

While previous research has focused mostly on how incumbents are evaluated, this paper analyzes
the use of information on non-incumbents. In particular, we study how the electoral performances
of losing candidates impact their future success. Our first contribution is to document a new
empirical result regarding simple plurality (first-past-the-post) elections: coming in second-place,
instead of third, has a substantial causal effect on the probability that a candidate will run in,
and win, the next election in her constituency. We use a regression discontinuity design (RDD)
to estimate this “runner-up effect”, comparing barely second- to barely third-place candidates in
samples covering four distinct sets of elections: Brazilian municipal mayors, Canadian House of
Commons, Indian state assemblies, and the Indian Lok Sabha (federal lower chamber). 1 These
contexts cover multiple continents, as well as local, state, and federal elections for executive and
legislative positions.

At first pass, it is perhaps surprising that simply being labeled the runner-up would matter in a
future election. On average, close second- and third-place candidates are similar and neither gets
to hold office or enjoy any institutional advantage in future elections. 2 Moreover, the difference
in ranking provides no additional information about the candidates beyond their votes. In other
words, ranks coarsen the information available in vote shares, and agents should prefer to base
decisions on finer information, which is publicly available.

Despite these factors, we find that being labeled second-place has large implications for whether
a candidate runs in, and wins, the next election. For example, our preferred estimates indicate
that being the runner-up increases a Brazilian mayoral candidate’s probability of running in
the next election by 9.4 percentage points (p.p.), and her chances of winning by 8.3 p.p., a
large effect given that close third-place finishers run again in, and win, the next election only
30.3% and 9.5% of the time, respectively. Similarly, being the runner-up (instead of third-place)
increases the probability of running again from 31.9% to 36.3% in Indian state elections, and
the probability of winning from 7.8% to 11.2%. This implies that variation in past electoral
performance that is essentially noise can increase the probability a candidate will be elected in
    1
      We also study elections for the British House of Commons in Appendix A.3. Section 2 discusses our focus on
these particular contexts.
    2
      To the best of our knowledge, none of the contexts we study involve electoral rules that treat second- and
third-place candidates differently (e.g., the runner-up does not participate in a runoff election, is not listed more
saliently in future ballots, and does not receive more public resources or funding in subsequent elections).



                                                         1
the future by magnitudes of 43% in India to 87% in Brazil. 3 Interestingly, the analogous analysis
using RDDs from elections where third- and fourth-place are close finds effects that are close to
zero in magnitude and statistical significance.

The finding of significant runner-up effects has possible implications for two widely studied
electoral phenomena. The first is the incumbency effect. 4 While it is natural to believe that a
large part of the effect of being an incumbent on future electoral outcomes is due to holding office,
our results suggest that simply being labeled first-place might play a role. A compelling theory
involving incumbency effects should incorporate the idea that previous electoral rank by itself
can have impacts.5 Second, the runner-up effect demonstrates that the electoral performance of
losing candidates has sizable impacts on their future performance. This sheds light on candidates’
decisions to enter races where they have low (or no) chances of winning, as they might be
attempting to improve their odds in future elections. 6

We also assess whether the effect on winning the next election simply comes from the runner-up
being more likely to run in it. While the RDD makes it straightforward to estimate the effect of
winning unconditional on running, estimating the conditional effect requires addressing selection
into future candidacy. We adapt Lee’s (2009) procedure to obtain bounds on such conditional
effects.7 Lower bounds are well above zero (except in the Canadian case), indicating that what
drives the runner-up effect not only makes a candidate more likely to run in the next election,
but also makes her more likely to win conditional on running.

The second contribution of this paper is to provide evidence on the mechanisms behind the
runner-up effect. One possibility is that being the runner-up creates a future advantage when
some agents (voters, donors, parties, or candidates) engage in strategic coordination. Under
this hypothesis, the second-place label makes a candidate more likely to become a focal point
for coordination. For example, perhaps some agents prefer either the second- or third-place
candidate over the winner, and in the next election would like to coordinate their support on
    3
      Our results on Indian and Canadian federal parliamentary elections are also consistent with the presence of
runner-up effects, although the smaller sample sizes make the statistical significance of these results more sensitive
to the specific regression discontinuity specification.
    4
      Lee (2008) uses close election RDDs to estimate the incumbency advantage in the US House of Representatives.
A similar approach is applied to the contexts we study by Uppal (2009), Linden (2004), and Kendall and Rekkas
(2012). Section 3 compares the magnitude of runner-up effects with incumbency effects.
    5
      In a similar vein, Folke et al. (2014) finds an effect of being the (close) first ranked candidate within a party
list under preferential voting on future party leadership.
    6
      Canonical models of candidate entry, either under the assumption of policy commitment (Feddersen et al.,
1990) or not (Osborne and Slivinski, 1996; Besley and Coate, 1997) usually involve candidates entering elections
only when they have a positive probability of winning (or affecting the outcome of) the election.
    7
      Lee (2009) provides an approach to bound effects in a randomized trial where there may be selection into
the state that makes the outcome observable (e.g., employment is a state where wage outcomes can be observed).
The key assumption is that there are no subjects who would choose into the state if they were in the control
group, but would not choose in to the state if treated (the “no defiers” or “monotonicity” condition). In our
context, this implies there are no candidates who would choose to run again after a close third-place, but not to
run if they came in close second-place.



                                                          2
one of them; it would be natural in this case to coordinate on the better ranked candidate as a
focal point. This type of behavior is found in laboratory experiments. 8

A large theoretical literature studies strategic coordination across voters (Myerson and Weber,
1993; Cox, 1997; Myerson, 2002). Under simple plurality, these models yield two types of equi-
libria, the Duvergerian type where coordination leads to two candidates attracting all of the
votes, and a non-Duvergerian type with a tie between second- and third-place. The latter is
“knife-edge” or “expectationally unstable” (Palfrey, 1988; Fey, 1997). In light of such models,
our results provide insight into how constituencies move from the latter type (when second- and
third-place candidates are close) to more stable Duvergerian equilbria. 9

A second, and non-exclusive, possible mechanism is that at least one political player (e.g., voters,
candidates, parties, the media) evaluates candidates based on their rankings, even though rank-
ings provide no additional information beyond the underlying vote-shares. In other words, they
engage in a “rank heuristic.” 10 For example, parties might use a heuristic where, at least in some
cases, they provide more support for candidates that come in second-place. 11 Another possibility
is that candidates perceive that, even holding electoral performance constant, they were closer
to winning after coming in second- instead of third-place and are therefore more motivated to
invest in future campaigns.

This paper provides a host of tests to explore these possible mechanisms, and our interpretation
is that the weight of the evidence suggests that strategic coordination plays a primary role.
First, the coordination mechanism predicts that voters who supported the third-place candidate
should switch to voting for the runner-up in the next election. We test this prediction using data
from over 8,000 polling stations (i.e., sub-constituency) in 144 elections where second- and third-
place Brazilian mayoral candidates were close. We find that polling stations that tended to vote
for the third-place candidate present larger vote shares for the runner-up in the next election,
compared to polling stations that tended to vote for the winner or fourth- and lower-placed
candidates, confirming the prediction. This finding is difficult to reconcile with an explanation
based entirely on heuristics, since it would require third-place supporters to be disprop ortionately
   8
     In an experiment where voters coordinate on one out of two majority candidates in order to beat a minority
candidate under plurality rule, Forsythe et al. (1993) find that “a majority candidate who was ahead of the other
in early elections tended to win the later elections, while the other majority candidate was driven out of subsequent
races” (p. 235). Bouton et al. (2012) find very similar results.
   9
     Section 5 discusses the links between models of strategic coordination and our empirical results.
  10
     An individual who observes ranks, but not vote shares, should (rationally) infer that any runner-up received
substantially more votes than a third-place candidate. However, and more relevantly for our purposes, an agent
only observing ranks implies that some other agent (e.g., the media) acted following (or imposing) a rank heuristic
by deciding to supply only the coarser information. For examples of rank heuristics in other contexts, see Pope
(2009) and Barankay (2012).
  11
     We have not encountered any anecdotal evidence that parties use such rules. Estimated effects for Indian
independent candidates are similar to those with party affiliations, making a party-level explanation unlikely.




                                                         3
using, or being affected by, such heuristic. 12

Second, the heterogeneity of runner-up effects across different types of elections is consistent
with strategic coordination. The runner-up effects are stronger in cases where the second- and
third-place candidates received a large number of votes, compared to the winner, and also when
the second- and third-place candidates are from parties with similar platforms. This indicates
that the advantage of being labeled the runner-up is larger in the cases where it is more likely
that the second- and third-place candidates form a “divided majority.” We also find larger effects
on winning future elections immediately after an event in India (the 1975-1977 “Emergency”)
that can be seen as a disruption of the political equilibrium which would raise the need for
coordination to sort between entrants. It is not clear why an explanation based on heuristics
would generate these patterns. 13

We also present tests of a heuristic-based explanation in relation to the media. One possibility is
that the media gives more coverage to runners-up than to third-place candidates, which translates
into an electoral advantage. We test for this in our Canadian context, where comprehensive
newspaper archive searches for candidate names are possible. We find that the number of articles
mentioning close second- and third-place candidates are statistically indistinguishable prior to,
and after, the election, as well as in the run-up to the next election. 14 To further probe the
role of media, we test whether the runner-up effect is larger in Brazilian and Indian regions with
greater media presence, and find no evidence supporting this. This suggests that a media-based
heuristic is unlikely to drive the runner-up effect. 15

Two other factors also shift the weight of evidence toward the coordination-based explanation.
First, the finding of zero effects for third (versus fourth) place provides an additional complication
to an explanation based on heuristics, as one would expect that a rank-based heuristic that
applies to second-place would also apply to lower ranks. Second, explanations based on runners-
up receiving more campaign inputs must address the sizeable magnitudes of effects. 16 On the
other hand, strategic coordination can account for these large effects, especially if a large share
  12
     These estimates control for constituency-time (election) fixed effects, as well as the vote shares received by
the runner-up and the winning candidate.
  13
     We focus the heterogeneity tests on Brazilian and Indian (state) elections, where the sample sizes are large
enough to meaningfully test whether runner-up effects differ across different sub-samples. The “Emergency”
was a 21 month period where democratic governance was revoked and the prime minister assumed control of all
branches of government. The dominant party in Indian politics (Congress) lost substantial support after this
event, facilitating the entry of new players.
  14
     Both candidates receive very little media attention in the period between the elections, perhaps unsurprisingly
given that neither gained a seat in the Canadian parliament.
  15
     Our measure of media presence is the existence of an AM radio in Brazil and greater newspaper circulation
per capita in India. Both measures are motivated by previous studies that found these media outlets to have
important effects in elections (Ferraz and Finan, 2008; Besley and Burgess, 2002).
  16
     For example, if the effect is driven by candidate motivation, the effects on the probability of winning the
next election imply that motivation has enormous consequences. An explanation based on donors differentially
supporting runners-up also implies either strong responsiveness to rank by donors or large effects of campaign
spending on votes.


                                                         4
of those supporting the third-place candidate switch to voting for the runner-up in the next
election.

We reiterate that heuristic behavior and strategic coordination are not mutually exclusive expla-
nations. They are likely mutually reinforcing (e.g., if runners-up are more likely to become focal
points, they—and parties, donors, etc—should be motivated by rank labels). We also emphasize
that while our results are consistent with voters themselves using the runner-up label as a focal
point, it is possible that the strategic coordination (that ultimately shifts vote shares) occurs at
a different level. Candidates, parties, and/or other “elites” may coordinate their support and
rely on election rankings to do so. Data limitations do not allow us to differentiate across these
possibilities.

Given the evidence that strategic coordination plays an important role in causing runner-up
effects, we also see this paper as contributing to the empirical literature on strategic voting. 17
While previous studies are primarily focused on whether (or how frequently) voters act “strate-
gically” or “sincerely”, our results highlight the empirical relevance of strategic coordination in
determining election winners. Sizable magnitudes for the runner-up effect imply that coordina-
tion frequently “matters.” The size of the literature studying strategic coordination in elections
underscores the importance of documenting its empirical relevance. 18

The next section describes the elections and data analyzed. Section 3 provides the main esti-
mates and documents the runner-up effects. Section 4 provides bounds on the effect on winning
conditional on running. Section 5 addresses the mechanisms driving the runner-up effect. Section
6 concludes.



2      Data and Background

2.1     Data Selection and Construction

This paper compares the subsequent performance of second- and third-place candidates in four
separate sets of elections: Brazilian municipal mayors, Canadian House of Commons, Indian state
assemblies, and the Indian Lok Sabha. These contexts were chosen for two reasons. First, they
use a simple plurality (first-past-the-post) electoral rule in single member constituencies, where
  17
    Cox (1997). Fujiwara (2011), Kawai and Watanabe (2013), Spenkuch (2014a), Spenkuch (2014b).
  18
    More formally, assuming voters’ preferences are stable over time and strategic voting drives the entirety of
results, a runner-up effect on winning the next election of x p.p. implies that x% of elections with close second-
and third-place candidates are cases where coordination failed and the winner would have lost a two-candidate
race race against the runner-up. Moreover, these x% of cases will be “corrected” in the next election, once voters
coordinate. In reality, voters’ preferences over candidates change over time, and other factors beyond coordination
may play a role in creating the runner-up effect, but the general association between the size of our effects and
the role of coordination remains. Section 5 discusses this issue further.



                                                        5
there is no differential treatment of second- and third-place candidates. For example, a similar
analysis using elections from runoff systems would be confounded by runners-up having longer
campaigns. Cases with a mixed-system (e.g., the German Bundestag) would also be problematic
if the rank of losing candidates plays a role in assigning candidates to “party seats.” Additionally,
the focus on simple plurality allows us to interpret our results in light of strategic coordination
models, and test further predictions.

The second reason concerns statistical power. The RDD analysis requires a large number of
elections to obtain precise estimates. Indeed, in Section 3, we discuss how even the Canadian
and Indian federal election samples do not yield enough power to detect relatively large effects
for some outcomes. We searched the Constituency Level Elections Archive - CLEA (Kollman
et al., 2013), as well as the references in Eggers et al. (forthcoming), which analyzes RDDs
from close first- and second- place candidates in multiple contexts, for cases where at least
five thousand single-member plurality rule elections would be available. The only cases that
satisfied such requirements and are not included in our main analysis are American elections
and British House of Commons elections. We do not analyze American contexts given the U.S.
political system has two clearly dominant parties with few meaningful third candidates. Given its
multiparty nature, Appendix A.3 analyzes the British case. However, results indicate it suffers
from a similar issue, with close second- and third-place candidates having negligible chances of
winning the next election. 19

The main outcomes studied in this paper are whether a candidate runs in, and wins, a subsequent
election. We use candidates, not the parties, as the unit of analysis because candidates are
politically more salient in our contexts with the largest number of observations (Brazil and Indian
states). Party mergers, splits, and change in names also complicate measuring party outcomes
across time, making the use of candidates more appealing. Moreover, in Indian state elections,
21% of second- and third-place candidates are independents who would need to be discarded in
a party-level analysis. While there are no officially independent candidates in Brazil, municipal
elections are typically non-partisan in nature (Ames, 2009), with candidate identity being more
salient than party. This is especially true in smaller municipalities which constitute the bulk of
our sample. Moreover, 37% of second- or third-place candidates that ran again do so under a
different party. Appendix A.2 presents results using parties as the unit of analysis; our main
  19
     British local elections involve multi-member constituencies (with most constituencies alternating between
single- and multi-member cases) and is further complicated by a two-tiered government structure. Most elections
in the CLEA involve proportional representation systems, and many of the elections analysed in Eggers (2014)
involve either multi-member districts, mixed-system (e.g., Germany), or variations of runoffs (e.g., Australia,
Bavaria, France). Examples of cases that are not analysed due to small sample size are elections from the
Philippines, New Zealand, several African countries, and Mexico (for which candidate level results are not available
in some years). Finally, the majority of local elections in Spain and Italy occur under proportional representation
and runoff systems, respectively.




                                                         6
qualitative conclusions remain. 20

Our outcomes capture only the cases where a candidate ran again and/or won a race for the
same office in the same constituency. This decision is mostly driven by data considerations: in
India and Canada, the only individual identifier for each candidate is her name, and matching
across constituencies and offices would likely lead to a large number of false matches. There
are relatively few elected offices in the Indian and Canadian parliamentary system, and Indian
state politics is in particular based on local connections, making it unlikely that candidates
would switch districts (except for in the case of a small number of high-profile candidates). In
the Brazilian data it is possible to analyse how often candidates run in different constituencies,
which occurs with negligible frequency.

Finally, it should be noted that in all the contexts we study, there is no institutional advantage
of being the runner-up instead of third-place. For example, the order that candidates appear
on the ballot, and allocation of public campaign resources, do not depend on previous electoral
performance.


2.2     Brazil: Municipal Mayors

Brazil comprises over 5,000 municipalities, each with its own elected mayor ( Prefeito), who is the
dominant figure in municipal politics, with substantial control over public spending. Federal law
mandates that all municipalities hold elections every four years at the same date. Mayors are
elected by plurality rule at-large (i.e., the entire municipality is a single electoral district). Our
data covers the universe of mayoral elections in the 1996-2012 period (five rounds of elections).
It was obtained from the Brazilian electoral authority website. 21

Municipal borders are mostly stable during the period. 22 For all years, the Electoral Authority
provides the candidate’s name, voter identification number (Tı́tulo Eleitoral ), party, and votes
received. Voter identification numbers are official documents issued by the federal government
and unique to each person. We match candidates across elections using their voter identification
  20
      Results for Brazil are attenuated by an amount that can be explained by the amount of party switching by
candidates across elections.
   21
      http://www.tse.jus.br. There are also elections for municipal councils. Since these use proportional
representation, they are not analyzed in this paper. Municipalities with more than 200,000 registered voters
elect their mayors under a runoff system, and are excluded from our sample. Bye (or supplemental) elections
held outside the official dates in Brazil are extremely uncommon. Data for pre-1996 municipal elections is not
available.
   22
      There are a small number of municipal secessions in this period. We matched municipalities over time using
the electoral authority official identifiers.




                                                       7
number and, when this is missing, their name. 23

We define a candidate as running in the subsequent election if we are able to match her to
a candidate who appears in the candidate list in the subsequent election in that municipality.
Only a negligible number of candidates run for office in different municipalities in the period.
While the full data set consists of 73,113 candidates in 27,317 elections across 5,521 unique
municipalities, only 10,304 races have three or more candidates and occurred before the last
election in the sample (2012), allowing us to observe future outcomes. 24


2.3     India: State Assembly Elections

Each Indian state elects a State Assembly (Vidhan Sabha), a legislative body operating under
a parliamentary system by selecting the executive (Chief Minister). Members are elected by
plurality rule from single-member geographic units known as assembly constituencies. Each
Assembly is formed for a five-year term after which all seats are up for election, but it can be
dissolved earlier by a motion of no confidence or the executive’s request. In the case where a
sitting member dies, a bye-election for only her seat is held.

We collected data from the Election Commission of India website 25 on all assembly constituency
elections, including bye-elections, held in India over the 1951-2013 period. 26 We first match
constituencies over time using constituency name and state. Major redistricting occurred in
1972 and 2008 which created new constituencies as well as the re-definition of old constituencies
in some cases. When a new assembly constituency is created we do not attempt to match it to
the assembly constituencies it was created out of, but instead treat it as a new separate assembly
constituency.

The Election Commission website provides the candidate’s name, party, and votes received.
The data does not provide unique identification numbers for candidates, so we match them
over time using their names. For each candidate we search for whether the candidate’s name
appears among the candidates in the next election held in the same assembly constituency. The
majority of matches are made either exactly, by substituting initials for first and middle names,
changing the order of names, or other simple permutations of the candidate’s given name. When a
candidate is matched across two elections, we define her as having ran in two subsequent elections.
  23
     Voter identification numbers are missing for the 1996 election data. We cross-checked the quality of name-
only and voter-identification-based matches using data for later years, and found that a negligible number of
candidates could not be matched by name. Voter identification numbers use a system of verifying digits (where
the last digits are a complex function of previous ones) that minimize issues of miscoding in the administrative
data.
  24
     Two elections resulted in the second- and third-candidates receiving exactly the same number of votes. We
drop these observations as it is not possible to assign these candidates to second- or third-place.
  25
     http://eci.nic.in/eci_main1/index.aspx
  26
     Prior to 1962 some assembly constituencies had multiple representatives in the state government; we remove
these constituencies from our analysis.


                                                       8
To judge the quality of our matching process we manually checked the matching algorithm for
the top three candidates in 20 randomly selected elections. Our algorithm correctly identified
whether the candidate ran in the next election for 88% of these sampled candidates. The full data
set consists of 374,472 candidates in 47,931 elections across 5,968 unique assembly constituencies.
The vast majority of elections had three or more candidates, and we observe 39,214 elections
with three or more candidates and a subsequent election in the same constituency. 27


2.4     India: Federal Lower Chamber

We use data on Indian federal parliamentary (Lok Sabha) elections over the time period 1951
through 2009. Like its state counterparts, the Indian federal government operates under a par-
liamentary form of government with elections at least every five years. Members are elected
from single-member districts. For the period after 1974 we use data from the CLEA. For 1951
through 1974 we use data from the Election Commission of India website. 28 Since names are
the only individual information available on candidates, we match Indian federal parliamentary
candidates over time using the same matching procedure that was developed for the Indian state
legislature elections. 29 Our Indian federal election data consists of 73,687 candidates in 7,536
elections occurring in a total of 1,227 unique constituencies. 5,959 elections have three or more
candidates and a subsequent election occurring in the same constituency.


2.5     Canada: House of Commons

The House of Commons is the lower chamber of Canada’s Westminster style federal parliamentary
system. Members of Parliament (MPs) are elected at least every five years by plurality rule in
single member constituencies (ridings). The data covers the universe of elections between 1867
and 2011, and is from the CLEA. Since names are the only individual information available on
candidates, we construct the dataset using a similar procedure to the Indian datasets. 30 We
also match constituencies by name and province, considering constituencies with the same name
over years as the same constituency. We have a total of 40,397 candidates in the Canadian
data contesting in 10,485 elections across 1,146 constituencies. 5,948 elections had three or more
candidates and at least one subsequent election.
  27
      Eight elections resulted in the second- and third-candidates receiving exactly the same number of votes. We
drop these observations as it is not possible to assign these candidates to second or third-place.
   28
      In the election years between 1951 and 1962 there were a small number of federal constituencies that were
multi-member (i.e. more than one representative was elected from one constituency); we drop these constituencies
from our analysis.
   29
      Our manual check procedure finds that our algorithm correctly identified whether a candidate ran again or
not in the next election 89% for Indian federal candidates.
   30
      Our manual check procedure finds that our algorithm correctly identified whether a candidate ran again or
not in the next election for 100% of sampled Canadian candidates. We also exclude a small number of cases of
multi-member ridings.

                                                       9
3      Results

3.1     Graphical Analysis

Figures 1a - 1d depict the runner-up effect for our four contexts. The sample in each figure
includes any candidate that came in either second- or third-place in an election three or more
candidates contested. We define a variable “vote share difference between second and third,”
which for second-place candidates is equal to the candidate’s vote share minus the third-place
candidate’s vote share, and for third-place candidates is equal to their vote share minus the
second-place candidate’s vote share. This variable is always negative for third-place candidates
and always positive for second-place candidates. The x-axis in these figures corresponds to this
vote share difference variable. The vertical line represents a zero vote share difference between the
second and third candidate, and indicates the transition from candidates who came in third-place
to those who came in second-place.

The y-axis shows the probability that a candidate with a given vote share difference variable
ran again in the next election (triangles) or won the next election (circles). The triangles and
circles in these figures correspond to a local average of the outcome variable calculated within two
percent bins of the vote share difference; for example, the triangle immediately to the right of the
vertical line is the fraction of second-place candidates who beat a third-place candidate by less
than two percent that ran in the next election. The circle just to the right of the vertical line is
the fraction of second-place candidates who beat a third-place candidate by less than two percent
that won the next election. Note that the fraction of candidates who win the next election is
calculated including both candidates who did and did not run in it (i.e. it is unconditional on
running).31 The curves to the right and left of the vertical line represent the predicted values
of a quadratic polynomial of the outcome variable on the candidate’s vote share difference. The
polynomial is fit to the original un-binned data separately for each side of the cutoff.

To provide some context for these results, Appendix Figure A.1 presents the number of observa-
tions (candidates) in each of Figures’ 1a - 1d bins. 32 Appendix Figure A.2 repeats the analysis
using the candidate vote share (at time t). In all of our election samples, the second- and third-
place candidates around the cutoff receive, on average, substantial vote shares each, between
21% in Canada and up to 27% in Brazil. This suggests that the runner-up effects we estimate
are not based primarily on second- and third-place candidates who received very few votes.

Figure 1a shows the main results for Brazilian mayors. While barely third-place candidates (just
left of the cutoff) ran again roughly 30% of the time, close runners-up ran again about 40% of
  31
    We discuss the issue of selection in to running in Section 4.
  32
    These figures are symmetric because our sample only includes elections where there were at least three
candidates. For every second-place candidate with a vote share margin of +x there is one third-place candidate
with a vote share margin of −x from the same election.


                                                     10
the time, implying a substantial “jump” at the cutoff. There is a jump of similar magnitude in
the probability of the candidate winning the next election. In the Indian state case (Figure 1b),
close second-place candidates are approximately 5 p.p. more likely to run and 3.5 p.p. more
likely to win the next election relative to close third-place candidates. The size of the jumps
in both Brazilian municipalities and Indian states are large relative to the bin by bin variation
away from the cutoffs, suggesting that these differences are not due to noise.

For the Indian federal sample (Figure 1c), there also appears to be a discrete jump around the
cutoff, although the results are noisier. This difference is likely due to differences in sample sizes:
there are more elections within each bin of the previous cases than in the Indian federal data.
For example, there are approximately 3,000 second-place candidates who came in second-place
by less than 2 percent in the Indian state data, but only approximately 340 in the Indian federal
data (Figure A.1). Interestingly, the magnitude of the runner-up effect effects in the Indian state
and India federal elections appear quite similar.

Figure 1d shows that for the Canadian sample, there appears to be a sizeable increase in the
probability that runner-up candidates run in the next election, but little change in the probability
that the runner-up candidate will win the next election. The effect size on running is about 5
p.p. which is approximately similar to the effect sizes in the Indian state and federal data. In
interpreting our Canadian results, it is useful to keep in mind that, unlike our other samples,
Canadian parliamentary elections have a very large incumbency advantage (most candidates
finishing first will win the next election). This makes it difficult for second- and third-place
candidates to win future elections; the circles in Figure 1d are well below the level observed in
the other figures. The effect size found in the Indian and Brazilian cases would be proportionally
enormous (and unexpected) in the Canadian context.

Aside from the discrete changes in running and winning probabilities around the cutoff in these
figures, there are also interesting similarities in the slopes to the left and right of the cutoffs. While
not the main focus of our analysis, it is useful to discuss two of these patterns. One expected
pattern is the upward slope to the left of the cutoff: more successful third-place candidates are
more likely to run/win the next election.

The less obvious pattern is that the probability of running/winning in the next election tends to
have a “U” shape to the right of the cutoff. Runners-up that beat their third-place competitor
either by a small or large margin fare better in future elections, while candidates who beat their
third-place competitor by an intermediate margin fare slightly worse. Such a pattern is expected
if the runner-up effects are driven by strategic coordination: close to the cutoff there are a larger
number of supporters for the third-place candidate that can strategically switch towards voting
for the runner-up, while away from the cutoff that is not the case (perhaps because in those
elections there is coordination on the runner-up at time t). However, another explanation is that
the first-place candidate is strongest in the intermediate case, and weaker in the extremes. In

                                                   11
unreported results, we plot the winner’s vote share (at t+1 ) against the same x-axis variable and
find that it follows a inverted-U pattern: elections close to the cutoff have relatively strong second-
/third-place candidates, and weak first-place candidates; and, elections with large second versus
third margins also have relatively strong second-/third-place candidates. However, elections with
intermediate differences between the second- and third-place candidates have stronger first-place
candidates.33

As additional results, Appendix Figure A.3 provides plots of the candidate’s vote share in the
next election. The fact that vote shares are not observed for candidates who do not run again
complicates the interpretation of these figures; we assign candidates who did not run in the next
election a vote share of zero. Consistent with the results on running and winning again, we see
discrete jumps in vote shares as the cutoff is crossed.

Finally, to assess whether the previously discussed effects might be due to other differences
between second- and third-place finishers besides their rank, Figures 2a - 2d plot a candidate’s
running (and winning) status in the previous election against his vote share in the current election.
In other words, we repeat the analysis using past instead of future outcomes. There is no visible
jump at the cutoff, indicating that barely second- and third-place candidates have comparable
past performance in elections. This also suggests that it is unlikely that other differences besides
the second- versus third-place distinction can explain the effects in subsequent elections. If, for
some unexpected reason, close runners-up were ex-ante superior candidates than close third-
places, that would also lead to an “effect” in past elections, under the natural assumption that
such quality differences are persistent over time.


3.2     Estimation Framework

Let vict be the vote share of candidate i in the election at time t in constituency c. Constituencies
are defined as the relevant electoral district (e.g., municipalities in Brazil, ridings in Canada). As
the running variable for the RDD, we also define a variable vote share difference xict which for
second-place candidates is equal to the candidate’s vote share minus the third-place candidate’s
vote share, and for third-place candidates is equal to their vote share minus the second-place
candidate’s vote share. Hence, positive values indicate the candidate is the runner-up, and
negative values that she finished third, with candidates with other ranks excluded from the
analysis.34
  33
     Many observable and unobservable variables may change simultaneously as we move away from the cutoff,
making it difficult to isolate what drives the slopes.
  34
     For example, consider an election in constituency c at time t where second-place candidate A obtains a 22%
vote share and third-place candidate B 18%. In this case the xAct value for the second-place candidate would be
4%, and the xBct value for the third-place candidate would be -4%.




                                                      12
The treatment effect of barely placing second instead of third on outcome yict is given by:

                                 T E = lim E[yict |xict ] − lim E[yict |xict ]                               (1)
                                         xict ↓0              xict ↑0


Under the assumption that the conditional expectation of yict on xict is continuous, the first term
on the right side converges to the expected outcome for a second-place candidate who has as
many votes as the third-place candidate. Similarly, the second term converges to the expected
outcome of a third-place candidate with as many votes as the runner-up.

The limits on the right side are estimated non-parametrically using local polynomial regressions.
This consists of estimating a regression of yict on (a polynomial of) xict using only data satisfying
xict ∈ [0 − h; 0]. The predicted value at xict = 0 is thus an estimate of the limit of yict as xict ↑ 0.
Similarly, a regression using only data satisfying xict ∈ [0; 0 + h] is used to estimate the limit
of yict as xict ↓ 0. The difference between these two estimated limits is the treatment effect. It
is important to note the non-parametric nature of the estimation: although linear or quadratic
regressions are used, the consistency of the results holds for any arbitrary and unknown shape
of the relationship between yict and xict . The limit approaching one side of the threshold is
estimated using only data on that particular side. The local polynomial regression estimate is
equivalent to the OLS estimation of the following equation using only observations that satisfy
x ∈ (0 − h; 0 + h):
                             yict = β1{xict > 0} + f (xict ) + ict                         (2)

where f (∙) is a polynomial fully interacted with 1{xict >0}. The estimate of β is the treatment
effect. In the case of a linear specification: f = α + γxict + δ1{xict >0}xict .

The two key decisions in estimation are the bandwidth h and the polynomial order. Our preferred
specification uses a linear polynomial with the Imbens and Kalyanaraman (2012) (IK, henceforth)
optimal bandwidth, which is itself a function of the data. To inspect robustness, we also present
results based on smaller and larger bandwidths and different polynomial orders. We cluster the
standard errors at the constituency level. 35


3.3     Estimation Results

Table 1 presents our main estimates of the impact of coming in second place on whether the
candidate runs in the next election (Candidacy, t+1), and whether the candidate wins the next
election (Winner, t+1). The “3rd-pl. mean” column is the estimated value of the dependent
variable for a third-place candidate who “ties” with the second-place candidate. Formally, it
is an estimate of lim xict ↑0 E[yict |xict ], using a linear specification and the IK bandwidth, which
   35
      The use of linear local regressions is suggested in the guidelines by Lee and Lemieux (2010), which we also
follow in not weighing observations.



                                                       13
is provided in the “Optimal BW Value” column. The sample size of this optimal bandwidth
specification is provided in brackets in the same column.

Column (1) provides the estimated effects based on our preferred specification, which uses a
linear polynomial and the IK bandwidth. To probe robustness of the results to specification
and bandwidth choices, columns (2) and (3) repeat the exercise using a bandwidth equal to half
and double the IK bandwidth, respectively. Column (4) compares the mean outcome between
second- and third-place candidates who are within a two percent difference between each other
(i.e., it matches the difference between the markers on each side of the cutoff on Figures’ 1a-1d). 36
Column (5) uses the entire sample and fits a quadratic polynomial.

Consistent with the previous graphical analysis, the econometric estimation finds evidence of large
runner-up effects, regardless of specification/bandwidth. Our preferred specification indicates
that barely second-placed Brazilian candidates are 9.4 p.p. more likely than barely third-place
candidates to run again. This is a large effect given that 30.3% of barely third-place candidates
run again. Moreover, they are also 8.3 p.p. more likely to win the next election (while only 9.5%
of close third-place candidates do so). The effects on future candidacy and future winning are
both significant at the 1% level under the IK bandwidth. The magnitude and significance of the
effects is comparable in other specifications. Appendix Figure A.4 provides estimates for a wide
choice of bandwidths.

In the case of Indian state legislators, close second-place candidates are 4.4 p.p. more likely to run
in the next election and 3.4 p.p. more likely to win the next election. These are sizable increases,
since close third-place candidates run again, and win, 31.9% and 7.8% of the time respectively.
These effects are all significant at the 1% level, and robust to different specifications/bandwidths.
Appendix Figure A.5 provides estimates for a wide choice of bandwidths. We find similar-sized
effects for federal Indian elections (although third-place means are slightly lower). These effects
are significant in four out of our five specifications for the candidacy variable and three out of
the five for our winning variable. The fact that the effects are not as robust in the Indian federal
context (compared to Brazilian and Indian state elections) can be attributed to the smaller
sample size, and highlights the need to use a sample with many (perhaps tens of thousands)
elections, as discussed in Section 2.

The Canadian data also show a sizable (and statistically significant) effect of running again that
is similar to the Indian case: a 4.6 p.p. increase over a 17% third-place mean. The effects on
winning the next election are close to zero and statistically insignificant. However, it is difficult
to conclude there is no effect for two reasons. As mentioned before, the overall chance of a third
or second-place candidate winning is smaller in the Canadian context, with barely third-place
 36
      We refer to this as the “zero order” polynomial specification.




                                                         14
candidates winning the next election only 2.4% of the time. 37 Hence any potential effect will
necessarily be small and difficult to detect. For example, the standard error in Column (1) is 0.9
p.p., implying that an effect of 1.7 p.p. (increasing the probability of winning the next election
by more than 70%) would not be significant at the 5% level.

To test for covariate smoothness (or balance), Table 2 checks whether close second- and third-
place candidates differ on pre-existing characteristics. The results confirm the graphical evidence
in Figure 2 that close runners-up are not more likely to have ran in or won the previous election.
The table also tests whether close second-place candidates are more likely to have received greater
vote share in the previous election, or whether they are more likely to be from the major party
in the country.38 We assign a vote share of zero for candidates that did not run in the previous
election. Note that any variable that does not vary across second- and third-placed candidates
within an election (e.g., turnout, the vote share of the winner, constituency demographics) is by
construction balanced.

The only instance when we find an imbalance at the cut-off in Table 2 is that Congress party
candidates appear less likely to have come in second-place than third-place in Indian state elec-
tions when we use the full sample and a quadratic model. This result is not apparent when we
estimate it in the more relevant region (under the optimal bandwidth); also, visual inspection
suggests that the quadratic model using the full sample finds a difference because it fits the curve
better away from the cutoff and poorly around it, generating a case of mistaking a nonlinearity
for a discontinuity (Appendix Figure A.10a).

In addition to showing balance on the fraction of candidates from the major parties in each of our
samples, we also conducted a general test for imbalance based on parties as follows. We regress
a dummy for whether the candidate came in second on indicators for every party in the sample.
We then take the predicted values from this regression and test whether these predicted values
jump discretely at the cutoff (i.e., we treat it as another variable in Table 2). If certain parties
were more likely to come in second or third-place around the cutoff, we expect these predicted
values to increase discretely around the cutoff. In all four of our contexts we find no evidence
that party can predict candidate rank. These results are available upon request. 39
  37
     As previously discussed, this is likely due to incumbents being more likely to be re-elected in Canada, compared
to other contexts.
  38
     We define the major party as the party with the most candidates overall in each dataset. Congress is the
major party in India, Liberal is the major party in Canada, and the Brazilian Democratic Movement (PMDB) is
the major party in Brazil.
  39
     A similar test is discussed in Fujiwara (2013), which builds on a procedure from Card et al. (2009).




                                                         15
3.4     Comparison of Runner-Up and Incumbency Effects

Appendix Table A.1 provides results on the size of the incumbency effect (close first- versus
second-place candidates) for each each of our samples; these results provide some baseline against
which to ascertain the economic significance of the runner-up effects estimated above. Figure
A.6 shows the size of the impact of coming in first-place versus second-place on probability of
running again and winning again in the next election respectively in our four samples. 40 In all
four of our contexts being the incumbent increases the probability of running again. 41 In Brazil,
the runner-up effect on running again is actually larger than the incumbency effect in our optimal
bandwidth specifications, 9.4 p.p. versus 8.3 p.p. In the Indian state sample, the runner-up effect
on running again of 4.4 p.p. is also reasonably large relative to an incumbency effect on running
again of 9.5 p.p. The comparison between Indian federal runner-up effects on running again is
similar to the comparison for Indian state elections. Given that runners-up do not hold office,
it is striking that the magnitude of the runner-up effects on running again is sizeable relative
to the incumbency effects. This suggests the possibility that a large portion of the incumbency
effect on candidacy may come from factors unrelated to holding office (we return to this issue in
our conclusion). The exception is Canada, where the runner-up effect is much smaller relative
to the large incumbency effect.

Regarding the effect on winning again, we find, consistent with Uppal (2009) and Linden (2004),
that incumbents are slightly disadvantaged in future elections in Brazil and India. The point
estimates are close to zero (and statistically indistinct from it) in the case of Indian federal
elections and Brazilian mayors. Interestingly, this implies that we find the runner-up effect on
both running again and winning in contexts where the incumbency effect is varied. In particular,
the results from Indian states indicating positive effects of coming in second-place, but a negative
effect of coming in first-place, make us less concerned that there is some mechanical reason for
candidates with higher ranks to perform better in future elections. We find large incumbency
advantages in Canada, consistent with Kendall and Rekkas (2012).


3.5     Comparison to Third- Versus Fourth-Place Effect

It is possible that the same mechanism that causes runners-up to run in and win more future
elections is also a general effect of rank, which would cause third-place candidates to outperform
close fourth-place candidates. Using the same approach applied to visualize the runner-up effect,
Figure 3 plots our main outcomes against the vote share difference in samples of third- and
fourth-place candidates. We find no evidence of a jump around the cutoff. These figures do sho w
  40
     We also examined figures regarding the covariate smoothness for these effects (omitted due to space consid-
erations), and found no evidence of “effects” on pre-determined variables.
  41
     In Brazil mayors are subject to a two-term limit, we hence limit the estimation to candidates who are not
incumbents at t, and hence, in the case they win, would be able to run for re-election at t+1.


                                                      16
what appears to be a discrete increase in slope around the cutoff between third and fourth place.
However, this increase in slope was also apparent in the corresponding figures where the outcome
variable is running or winning a previous election (not reported due to space considerations).
This change in slope therefore most likely reflects increasing unobservable quality of third-place
candidates as the vote share difference between third- and fourth-place candidates increases.

Table 3 presents our regression discontinuity estimates of the effect of coming in third versus
fourth. There are a few specifications that show economically small but statistically significant
effects, but, overall, there is no robust result of third-place candidates running or winning the
next election relative to fourth-place candidates. It seems unlikely that coming in third-place,
instead of fourth, has a causal impact on candidates’ future outcomes. 42



4       Bounds on Effects Conditional on Candidacy

Assuming a candidate will choose to run, how much does being labeled the runner-up increase
the probability that she will win? While the RDD ensures that barely second- and third-place
candidates are, on average, similar, it does not imply that those who run again after barely
coming in second are similar to those who run again after barely coming in third. For example,
higher ability candidates might be more aware that voters, the media, or parties, provide an
advantage to runners-up. In this case, candidates that choose to run again after coming in
third-place might be lower quality than candidates that choose to run again after coming in
second-place. To estimate the runner-up effect on the probability of winning, conditional on
running, we must account for the fact that barely coming in second-place may cause selection in
to running.

We adapt a method by Lee (2009) to estimate bounds on the runner-up effect of the probability
of a candidate winning a subsequent election conditional on running. Let S, R0 , R1 , W0 , and
W1 be binary indicators. S denotes if a candidate finished second (as opposed to third) in a race
at time t. R0 and R1 are “potential outcome” indicators for the candidate running at the next
(t + 1) election when S = 0 or S = 1, respectively. We only observe a given candidate’s decision
to run as either the second- or third-place candidate; for example we do not observe whether
a second-place candidate would have chosen to run again if he had come in third-place, hence
only R = SR1 + (1 − S)R0 is observed. Similarly, let W0 and W1 be the potential indicators of
winning the election at t + 1. These potential outcomes equal one if a candidate wins the next
election, had she chosen to run. Note that this definition allows for a given candidate to have
R0 = 0 and W0 = 1; in this case, a candidate chooses not to run if she comes in third, but would
 42
      Similarly, we do not find evidence of effects of even lower ranks, as well as an effect of last place.




                                                           17
win the election if he chose to run. 43 Only W = R[SW1 + (1 − S)W0 ] is observed, capturing both
the fact that a candidate is only observed after one specific rank, and that we only observe if she
can win if she runs.44

Without loss of generality, there are four types of candidates in our sample. The first type are
those who would choose to run again regardless of whether they came in second-place or third-
place (i.e. R1 = R0 = 1). To emphasize the similarity of our approach and Lee (2009), we refer to
these as the “always-takers.” The second type are “never-takers”, who choose not to run again,
regardless of their rank (R1 = R0 = 0). The third type of candidates are the “compliers”; those
who would choose to run again if they came in second-place, but would not do so if they came in
third-place (R1 > R0 ). Lastly, there are those candidates who would choose to run again if they
came in third-place, but would not choose to run again if they came in second-place ( R1 < R0 ):
the “defiers.”

The key assumption is that there are no candidates in the “defiers” group; all candidates who
come in third and choose to run again would also have chosen to run again if they had come
in second-place. While it is not possible to test this assumption directly, this is plausible given
that we find that coming in second-place is a positive signal of a candidate’s future electoral
success; a candidate who chooses to run again when coming in third-place but not run again
when coming in second-place would be turning down the opportunity to run only when there is
likely a greater chance of winning. Note also that this “monotonicity” condition is a standard
assumption (sometimes implicitly) in virtually all procedures that correct for sample-selection,
as discussed in Lee (2009).

S, R0 , R1 , W0 , and W1 can be thought of as functions of the candidate and the RDD running
variable (x), and under the assumption these variables are continuous, their limits at the cutoff
(x = 0) can be approximated with the previously discussed methods. Under the assumption of
no defiers, and omitting the ict subscripts, we have:45

  Effect on win, cond. on being always-taker/complier
          z             }|            {
          E[W1 − W0 |x = 0, R1 = 1]         =
             1                                                                                  (3)
                    [( E(W1 R1 − W0 R0 |x = 0) − Prob(R1 > R0 |x = 0) ∙ E(W0 |x = 0, R1 > R0 )]
       E(R1 |x = 0) |             {z         } |          {z        } |           {z        }
       |    {z    }         RD effect on W           RD effect on R           Unobservable
        limx↓0 E[R|x]

  43
     The definition also allows R1 = 0 and W1 = 1 (a candidate who would win the next election if she came in
second in the current election, but chooses not to run).
  44
     This implies that, for example, E[W |x > 0] = E[W1 ∩ R1 |x > 0] 6= E[W1 |x > 0], since the last term is
the expected probability of winning of all second-place candidates, had they chosen to run, and we only observe
whether candidates that run can win or not.
  45
     Following the previous section, for second-place candidates let x be her vote share minus the third-place
candidate’s vote share in the same race; for third-place candidates, x is her vote share minus the runner-up’s.
Note we now omit the ict subscripts to simplify notation.




                                                        18
Derivations are in Appendix A.1. The left side of this equation is the effect to be estimated: the
difference in probability of winning for a candidate at the cutoff conditional on the candidate
being the type who runs again after finishing second (always-takers and compliers). The terms
on the right side of this equation are as follows. E(R1 |x = 0) is the share of compliers or always
takers around the cutoff, or the share of barely second-place candidates who run again. It can
be estimated as the limit as E[R|x] approaches the cutoff from the right. E[W1 R1 − W0 R0 |x = 0]
is the runner-up effect on winning, unconditional on whether the candidate runs again (as we
have reported so far). Prob(R1 > R0 |x = 0) is the share of compliers around the cutoff, which
is also the estimated runner-up effect on running again. 46 The terms on the right-hand side
described so far can all be obtained as estimates from Table 1. The only unobservable term is
E[W0 |x = 0, R1 > R0 ], the probability of winning after a close third-place finish for a complier
(who, by definition, does not run after a third-place finish). Given an assumption of the largest
and smallest possible number for this probability, a lower and upper bound on the effect can be
calculated.

Since probabilities are not negative, the upper bound can be obtained by plugging E[ W0 |x =
0, R1 > R0 ] = 0 in to equation (3). Intuitively, the largest possible effect occurs under the
assumption that close third-placed compliers would never win the next election had they chosen
to run in it. Similarly, the most conservative possible choice for a lower bound would be to assume
that all compliers would win for sure after finishing third (E[W0 |x = 0, R1 > R0 ] = 1). However,
this number is unreasonably high. First, this would imply that a large number of candidates who
would win for sure decide not to run. Second, the probability that a close third-place candidate
who runs again wins the next election is 31% in Brazil, around 25% in both Indian contexts, and
below 15% in Canada. It is unlikely that the chances of winning for third-place candidates who
decided not to run would be more than three or four times larger than for those who chose to
run again.

A more reasonable assumption is that third-place compliers would have at most the same prob-
ability of winning as second-place finishers who did choose to run. This is arguably a very
conservative approach, since one would expect compliers (who decided not to run after a third-
place) to have even lower odds of winning than the always-takers, and especially since we are
inputting the probability of the more successful (at t+1 ) second-place candidates. Finally, our
discussion below will show that the lower bound is above zero even under more conservative
assumptions.

To illustrate the procedure, take the estimated magnitudes in Column (1) of Table 1 for the
Brazilian case: E(R1 |x = 0) = 30.3% + 9.4% = 39.7%; E[W1 R1 − W0 R0 |x = 0] = 8.3%; and
Prob(R1 > R0 |x = 0) = 9.4%. Our assumption for the upper bound implies plugging E(W0 |x =
  46
     Note that Prob(R1 > R0 |x = 0) does not depend on which side of the cutoff the candidate is on, since the
underlying fraction of compliers is not affected by the “treatment.”



                                                     19
0, R1 > R0 ) = 17.8%/39.7% = 44.8%, to obtain a lower bound of 10.3 p.p. Analogously, the
most conservative upper bound would be 20.9 p.p. Effects in this range are substantial, given
that close third-place candidates win less than a third of the time they ran again.

In Indian state elections the lower and upper bound under the same procedure are 5.9 p.p. and
9.6 p.p., and for Indian federal elections the respective estimates are 4.2 p.p. and 9.5 p.p.. These
are sizable increases, since close third-place candidates who run again have approximately a
25% chance of winning an election in these contexts. Overall, the results in our Brazilian and
Indian samples suggest that barely coming in second-place has a sizeable impact on a candidate’s
probability of winning beyond just the effect on running. The only case where the bounds include
zero is Canada, where the unconditional effect on winning is a small negative number. In this
case, the conditional effect is bounded between -1.7 p.p. and 0.9 p.p..

Another related approach would be to use equation 3 to see how large the unobservable proba-
bility of a close third-placed complier would have to be in order for all the effect on winning to be
explained by selection into candidacy. In other words, we can solve for the E( W0 |x = 0, R1 > R0 )
that sets the left hand side of equation 3 to zero. In the Brazilian case, a close third-place com-
plier would have to win 88.3% to imply that there is no runner-up effect on winning conditional
on running. In the Indian state and federal case, the respective values are 79.5% and 56.3%.
These numbers are too large to be plausible. For the effects on winning to be explained entirely
by selection into running, the probability of “compliers” winning would have to be extremely
large: multiple times the probability of the third-placed candidates we observe that run (the
“always takers”), and in the case of Brazil and Indian states, well above that observed for very
safe incumbents.



5     Mechanisms

5.1    Strategic Coordination

Under the strategic coordination mechanism, some agents would have preferred either the second
or third-place candidate over the winner, and in the next election wish to coordinate their sup-
port on one of them. The runner-up label serves as a focal point for potential coordination. Such
coordination might occur both within and across voters, donors, parties, candidates, or other
“elites” that influence votes. A key part of this argument is that the second-place “label” is a
more likely focal than a third-place label. While this cannot be tested directly, it is consistent
with behavior of voting experiments discussed in the introduction (Forsythe et al., 1993; Bouton
et al., 2012). Moreover, a general tendency to coordinate on candidates with better previous
performance is reasonable, and perhaps this norm is extended to the cases where the past dif-
ferences in performance become very small (“at the cutoff”). Of course, the argument is not

                                                 20
that all runners-up are focal, but that they have a higher chance of being focal than third-place
candidates - other characteristics may be used as focal points as well.

Strategic coordination also provides insights into why the runner-up effect on winning subsequent
elections is larger in Brazil than in India, and close to zero in Canada. In the latter two contexts,
elections are for members of a larger (state or federal) legislature, and perhaps the expected
legislature-wide results (e.g., which parties may form a majority or opposition) can also serve
as focal points. In Brazil, mayoral elections are for an individual executive office, largely non-
partisan (Ames, 2009), and held at different times from state and federal elections, making past
electoral performance a more likely focal point. Moreover, the smallest effects are found in the
context (Canada) with the strongest parties, which perhaps serve also serve as the focal point
for coordination. However, there are many other differences across these contexts which could
also account for these differences.

Analysing our empirical results in light of the theory of strategic voting under simple plurality
(Myerson and Weber, 1993; Cox, 1997; Myerson, 2002) yields some interesting insights. These
models suggest two possible types of equilibria, the Duvergerian type where coordination leads
to two candidates attracting most (or all) of the votes, and the non-Duvergerian type where
coordination fails and there is a tie between second- and third-place. The elections around
the cutoff in our RDD (which determine our main results) fit the non-Duvergerian description.
Hence, the runner-up effect can be seen as part of the process in which constituencies move from
one type of equilibria to another, with rank being the focal point that allows coordination failure
to be solved. Since the non-Duvergerian equilibria are “knife-edge” or “expectationally unstable”
(Palfrey, 1988; Fey, 1997), it is perhaps expected that constituencies would move away from it
within the time span of one election.

There are two other aspects of our data that further matches this interpretation. First, Appendix
Figure A.1 shows that the distribution of the running variable (the vote share difference between
second- and third-place candidates) in India and Brazil has two modes: one where the candidates
tie and one where the second-place has a large margin over the third. This implies that the modal
cases match the description of both types of equilibria. 47 Second, while the cases around the
cutoff are, by construction, characterised by time t elections where the difference between second
and third is small, by time t+1 they experience elections where the second-place (defined in t+1)
has a sizable margin over the third-place, and where the top two candidates concentrate most
of the votes.48 This is consistent with cases around the cutoff being unstable non-Duvergerian
equilibria, which become Duvergerian at time t+1.

This interpretation also suggests a link between the magnitudes of the runner-up effect and
  47
     Cox (1997) labels this pattern as the “bimodality hypothesis” and documents it in other contexts. He also
interprets this finding as evidence of strategic coordination.
  48
     These results, omitted due to space considerations, are available upon request.



                                                     21
the relevance of coordination failures (and its subsequent correction) in elections. If indeed
the entirety of the result is driven by the move between the two types of equilibria, then a x
p.p. runner-up effect on winning the next election implies that x% of close elections are cases
of divided majorities that failed to coordinate, but that switch into coordinated (Duvergerian)
equilibrium by the next election. Hence, the finding of sizeable magnitudes implies that divided
majorities failing to elect their preferred (Condorcet-winning) candidate is not only a theoretical
curiosity, but a relatively frequent real-world phenomenon. This interpretation, however, requires
assumptions on the stability of voters’ preferences (e.g., that divided majorities exist in both
time t and t+1 ), as well as the entirety of the runner-up effect being driven by the theoretical
mechanism described above. While the evidence suggests its importance, it is unlikely that no
other factor also plays a role.

Finally, we reiterate that, while the discussion above is based on models where voters act strate-
gically, it is possible that the strategic coordination (that ultimately shifts vote shares) occurs at
a different level. Candidates, parties, and/or other elites are perhaps coordinating their support
and relying on election rankings to do so. The limitations in our data do not allow to differentiate
across these possibilities. The next subsection provide further tests of the predictions of strategic
voting.


5.1.1      Strategic Switching from Third- to Second-Place

The most direct prediction of the strategic coordination mechanism is that the runner-up effect
should be driven by voters who supported the third-place candidate at t switching towards voting
for the runner-up at time t+1. Ideally, we would use data on individual vote choices over time
to measure this directly. However, data on individual votes is typically not available given ballot
secrecy, so we approximate using data from Brazilian sub-constituency level results. 49

Brazilian municipalities are divided into “electoral sections” which are the specific ballot boxes
where a voter must cast his vote. Sections have between 50 and 500 voters (averaging 256 votes
per election in our sample), with the average municipality having approximately 60 sections.
Since a voter can only cast her vote in her registered section, and voters are unlikely to change
sections between elections, this allows us to track small groups of voters over time to a first-order
 49
      Similar data is not available for the Indian and Canadian cases.




                                                        22
approximation.50 We are interested in the descriptive pattern of whether electoral sections that
tended to vote for third-place at time t are more likely to be voting for the runner-up at time
t + 1, relative to electoral sections that tended to vote for other candidates. We estimate the
following regression model to test this hypothesis:

                                2            1          2          3
                               vij,t+1 = α1 vij,t + α2 vij,t + α3 vij,t + γj,t + ij,t                          (4)

        k
where vij,t is the vote share of the kth place candidate in electoral section i, in constituency
(municipality) j, in the time t election. Note that the kth place candidate is defined at the
constituency level at time t.51 γj,t is a constituency-time (election) level fixed effect, i.e., we
focus on comparisons within a specific election across different electoral sections. The inclusion
of these fixed effects captures the effect of any factor that does not vary across sections within
an election, such as which candidates from time t decided to run again, as well as the overall
strength of particular candidates.

For the interpretation of the coefficients, it is important to note that vote shares must add to
unity. Hence, α3 > α1 implies that sections that tended to vote for the third-place, as opposed to
voting for the first-place, are more likely to be voting for the runner-up at time t. An increase in
a section’s vote share of the third-place of 1 p.p. (at the expense of a 1 p.p. decrease in the vote
share of the first-place) is associated with α3 − α1 p.p. higher vote share for the runner-up at
time t+1. Since the category omitted to avoid collinearity between regressors is the vote share of
fourth and lower candidates, α3 > 0 indicates that sections that tended to vote for third-place at
t (as opposed to voting for fourth and lower candidates) are more likely to vote for the runner-up
at t+1.

We estimate the equation above only for “close” elections where the vote share difference between
second and third are below 2 p.p. (defined at the overall, constituency-wide result, and not at
the electoral section level). The RD estimates reported in the previous section provides the effect
of rank for these elections, and hence we are interested in the within-constituency patterns for
these cases. Finally, the dependent variable in equation (4) is only observable when the runner-
up runs at t+1. Since the estimation exploits only within constituency-time variation, and the
  50
      A voter can only change her section if she moves to an address sufficiently far from the original one (either
within or outside the municipality). Moreover, the voter has to request the change of the voting section herself, so
citizens who find it more convenient to continue to vote in their original section (as opposed to going through the
re-registration process) will do so. There is no “redistricting” of electoral sections, and new sections are usually
created to accommodate newly registered voters. There is no available data allowing us to identify voters in an
electoral section across years, and assess the magnitude of migration across sections. Turnout is mandatory in
Brazil, reducing concerns that the sets of voters that turn out in a particular section differ from previous years.
Corroborating the notion that electoral sections mostly involve the same group of voters across years, we find a
strong correlation between the vote share of specific candidates in a section across years, even when controlling
for municipality-year (election) fixed effects.
   51
      For example vij,t+1
                    2
                          is the vote share at time t + 1 of the runner-up of the election that happened at time t
(not t+1 ) in municipality j (she may not be the second most voted candidate in electoral section i ).



                                                         23
decision to run cannot vary at this dimension, usual sample selection bias is not an issue. We also
reiterate the descriptive nature of equation (4). The objective is not to uncover causal effects of
increasing vote shares at t on vote shares at t+1, but whether or not, in the elections when the
runner-up runs again, it is the case that (groups of) voters that voted for the third-place tend
to switch to the runner-up. Our main sample is formed by 8,738 sections from 144 elections. 52

Table 4 presents the results. Columns (1) - (4) present specifications where the dependent
variable is runner-up vote share at time t + 1. As a robustness check, columns (2) and (3) reduce
the sample to elections where the vote share difference between second and third was less than
1% and 0.5%, respectively. Column (4) returns to column (1)’s sample, but now drops elections
where there were exactly three candidates at time t, to make sure the effects are not driven
by elections where voting for a fourth candidate was not an option. Columns (1) - (4) show
very similar results: conditional on the vote share the runner-up received at time t, switching
1 p.p. vote share from first to third is correlated with approximately 0.15 p.p. increase in the
runner-up’s vote share at time t+1. The difference α3 − α1 is significant at the one percent level
in all of these specifications. The coefficient α3 is large and significant on its own, indicating
that sections where the third-place candidate received a large vote share at time t are more likely
to vote for the runner-up at time t, relative to electoral sections that voted more for candidates
that came in fourth or below at time t. We also consistently find a large and positive coefficient
α2 , suggesting strong serial correlation in voting behavior at the electoral section level.

Columns (5) and (6) present results from the same regression as in column (1), however now the
dependent variable is the vote share of the third- and first-place candidate, respectively. It is
interesting to note that in Column (5) we find greater votes for the runner-up is also correlated
with greater votes for the third-place candidate at time t + 1. One explanation for this result
is that in some of these close second/third elections voters choose to coordinate on the third-
place candidate (for example if the third-place candidate has some “focal” characteristic.) It
is important to note that we do not observe a correlation between third-place’s vote share at t
and the first-place vote share at t+1 in Column (6); this suggests that our main result of voters
switching from third to the runner-up is not driven by some general tendency of supporters of
third-place candidates to switch more often than other voters. Instead, it appears that they tend
to specifically switch to voting for the runner-up.

The findings in Table 4 are difficult to reconcile with an explanation entirely based on agents
acting heuristically, and without strategic coordination, since such an explanation would have to
disproportionately affect the supporters of third-place candidates. For example, suppose parties
use a heuristic where they choose candidates based on rankings instead of underlying vote share,
  52
    Inputting a t+1 vote share of zero for the cases where the runner-up does not run again does not change
the qualitative results. The number of elections is smaller than in the overall municipal-level dataset not only
because elections where the runner-up did not run are not included, but also because electoral section data is not
available for all municipalities in all elections, particularly in the first year of data (1996).


                                                       24
and also provide more campaign inputs to higher ranked candidates. For this to explain the
results in Table 4, it would also have to be the case that, at t+1, the parties/candidates use
these additional inputs to specifically target those who voted for third-place at t. While it might
be plausible parties would prefer not to target those that voted for time t’s winner, the results
(α3 > 0) would also imply they are more likely to target supporters of the third- than the fourth-
(and lower) place candidate.


5.1.2    Effect Heterogeneity by Strength of Second- and Third-Place Candidates

If the runner-up effect is driven by strategic coordination, one would expect the effect to be
stronger in cases where the second- and third-place candidate together received a large number
of votes. For example, if the election winner received 40% of the votes, and second- and third-
place each obtained 25%, the incentive to coordinate is likely larger than if they both obtained
5% of the votes, since only in the former scenario could the combined second- and third-place
vote share be plausibly larger than the winner’s.

Table 5 presents estimates of the runner-up effect separately for elections where the second- and
third-place candidates jointly received more votes than the first-place candidate, and elections
where second- and third-place jointly received less than the leading candidate. We focus this
heterogeneity test on the Brazilian and Indian samples as these offer the most power for detecting
differences in subsamples. This definition of the subsamples leverages the notion of a possible
“divided majority” splitting their votes. However, similar results are obtained by splitting the
sample according to strength of specific ranks of candidates. 53

In the Brazilian sample, the runner-up effect on running again is 10.8 p.p. when the combined
vote share of second- and third-place is greater than the winner’s vote share, but only 3.5 p.p.
when it is not. The analogous effects for winning the next election are 9.3 p.p. and 3.6 p.p. These
large (threefold) differences are consistent with the returns to coordinating being larger when
the second- and third-candidates jointly have greater potential to defeat the first candidate. In
our Indian state sample we again find a similar pattern, however, the differences are smaller (and
not statistically distinct). However, the magnitudes are still sizable, with the effect on running
being 50% larger in the strong second/third-place subsample, and the effects on winning being
almost twice the size. 54
  53
      For example, breaking the sample according to strength of second-place yields similar results. This is also
the case for using the third-place vote share (which close to the cutoff is similar to the runner-up’s share), or the
first-place vote share (which has a strong negative correlation with the second- and third-place’s vote shares).
   54
      To facilitate comparisons between results based on different subsamples, and also on the full sample, we use
the optimal (IK) bandwidth estimated at the full sample (i.e., the same from Column 1 of Table 1) in all cases.
The qualitative results are robust to several other choices of bandwidth.




                                                         25
5.1.3    Effect Heterogeneity by “Platform Distance” Between Second- and Third-
         Place Candidates

Ideally, the strategic coordination mechanism could be tested by identifying elections where the
second- and third-place candidates are closer to forming a unified group that would gain from
coordination, and checking if the results are driven by those elections. In reality, it is impossible
to identify those cases, given the paucity of data and that politicians’ and voters’ preferences
are unobservable. However, as an approximation, it is possible to test whether the runner-up
effect differs in cases where the second- and third-place candidates are from parties with closer
platforms. Hence, we classified the parties in the Brazilian and Indian state elections into three
different groups each, based on multiple sources described in Appendix A.4. In Brazil, the three
categories are “right”, “center”, and “left”. The first category includes the Worker’s Party (PT)
as well as other parties with left-wing (communist/socialist) orientation. The “center” includes
the centrist parties such as the PMDB and the social democrats (PSDB).The last group includes
the right-wing parties with connections to the (extinct) ARENA party supported by the military
regime. In the Indian case, the first group includes parties with communist/socialist orientation,
the second group includes the Congress party, its off-shoots, and associates, and the last group
includes the BJP, its off-shoots and associates, as well as other Hindu-nationalist parties.

This allows us to split each sample into two cases: one with the elections where the second- and
third-place party are from the same group, and another where they are from distinct groups; we
estimate runner-up effects in each of these sub-samples. It should be noted that any imprecision
in the (admittedly rough) classification of party groups, as well as the instability and non-partisan
nature of both Brazilian and Indian politics, make it less likely that we will find the expected
heterogeneity in effect. 55

Since we can only classify parties, and not candidates, we report results with dummies for whether
or not the party ran, and won, the t+1 election as the outcomes. 56 Table 6, Panel A, presents
our results for the Brazilian case. The runner-up effect on both outcomes is approximately 7 p.p.
when both parties are in the same category, but only 4 p.p. when the parties are from distinct
groups.57 In the Indian case, the runner-up effect on running at t+1 is 6.9 p.p. when parties are
  55
      In other words, we have a noisy measure of “true” party orientations in a given election, which weakens
the distinction between two groups (e.g., if the measure is entirely noise, the same effects are expected in both
subsamples).
   56
      Hence, the results are comparable to the party-level results describe in Appendix A.2. Using party as outcomes
also accommodates the impossibility of classifying independents and the need to drop them from estimations. As
before, to facilitate comparisons between results based on different subsamples, and also on the full sample, we
use the optimal (IK) bandwidth estimated at the full sample (i.e., the same from Column 1 of Table A.2) in all
cases. The qualitative results are robust to several other choices of bandwidth.
   57
      It should be noted that, given the frequency of party switching by Brazilian candidates across elections, the
effects using party outcomes are smaller than those using candidate outcomes (i.e., estimates in Panel A of Table
1 are larger than those in Panel A of Table A.2). Substituting candidate outcomes for party outcomes in the
estimation would yield a runner-up effect on running (winning) of 14.7 p.p. (13 p.p.) when both parties are in
the same category, but only 6.7 p.p. (6 p.p.) when the parties are from distinct groups.


                                                        26
in the same group, but only a statistically insignificant 1.2 p.p. when they are in different groups.
For winning, the respective effects are 4.6 p.p. and 2.5 p.p.. These results corroborate the notion
that effects are larger in the cases the parties are “closer”, and the incentives to coordinate likely
larger.


5.1.4    Restarting the Coordination Game: The Indian State of Emergency

Under the coordination hypothesis, the runner-up effect emerges because of a coordination failure.
Some agents would have preferred to coordinate on either the second- or third-place candidate,
but failed to do so. As they learn more about parties and candidates and accumulate focal points,
coordination should improve over time. And, conversely, a situation where the the “equilibrium”
is disrupted by a major change in the strength of a party and/or the entrance of new parties
should lead to an increased use of ranks as focal points, and hence a larger runner-up effect.
In this section we focus on the Indian “emergency” period as an example where the political
equilibrium was disrupted, and test whether the runner-up effect is larger immediately after it.

The Congress party dominated Indian politics from 1951 until 1975. In 1975-77 Congress Prime
Minister Indira Gandhi imposed a 21 month period of “Emergency” where elections were post-
poned, the prime minister made laws by decree, media was repressed, and civil liberties were
curbed. The stated purpose of the emergency was to improve economic performance by directly
controlling the economy, reducing political protests and strikes, and forcing population control
programs. When elections returned, Congress lost substantial support, to the gain of oppo-
sition and new parties. For our purposes, the Emergency can be seen as a disruption of the
long-standing political equilibrium.

Table 7 presents estimates of runner-up effects in Indian state legislature elections separately for
time periods around the Emergency. We do not find any evidence to suggest that the runner-up
effect on running again was larger in the elections after the emergency. 58 This might not be
too surprising, however, given that parties were also likely unaware of which party voters would
coordinate on, and thus might be willing to take the risk of fielding a candidate. The runner-up
effect on winning is 5.4 p.p. in the elections directly after the Emergency, which is large relative
to the point estimates from other time periods in our sample. This suggests that coming in
second-place was particularly advantageous in a period where the need for coordination focal
points was useful.59
  58
     The runner-up effects after the emergency measure the benefit of being labeled second in the first post-
Emergency elections for outcomes in the next election (the second election after the Emergency).
  59
     To facilitate comparisons between results based on different subsamples, and also on the full sample, we use
the optimal (IK) bandwidth estimated at the full sample (i.e., the same from Column 1 of Table 1) in all cases.
The qualitative results are robust to several other choices of bandwidth.




                                                       27
5.2     Heuristics

5.2.1    Media Driven Heuristic

One possible explanation for our results is runners-up receiving greater media attention after the
election, and this translating into a higher perceived probability of winning in future elections.
This seems plausible, as the media might choose to report on election results by only mentioning
the top two candidates, and prior work has shown that media can have important impacts
on electoral outcomes (DellaVigna and Kaplan, 2007; Enikolopov et al., 2011; Gentzkow, 2006;
Gentzkow et al., 2011; Gerber et al., 2009; Prior, 2006; Strömberg, 2004). Observing media
coverage of second- and third-place candidates also gives us an indirect measure of whether the
runners-up secure other high profile positions in government or the private sector that gets them
greater media coverage. 60

We focus on the Canadian context, as this is the only case where it is feasible to electronically
search for the mention of candidate names in a large set of local newspapers. We begin with
the set of elections after 1979 where the second- and third-place candidates finished within one
percent of each other. 61 We focus on close elections between second- and third-place as this is the
sample where our identification of runner-up effects is based on. For each candidate we searched
Lexis-Nexis for any newspaper article that included their first name, last name, and the name of
their constituency, over the period three months prior to the election where the candidate placed
second or third through to three months after the next election in the same constituency. We
then count the number of articles mentioning the candidate in each month over this period.

Figure 4a plots the mean number of articles for second- and third-place candidates against months
relative to the election at time t. The zero point on the x-axis represents the month of the election.
The figure shows that both second- and third-place candidates have close to zero media mentions
3 months prior to the election. This increases to on average 0.4 articles per candidate two months
before the election, 2 articles per candidate in the month before the election, and 9.5 articles per
candidate in the month of the election. Given the small vote share difference between second-
and third-place candidates, we would not expect any differences across these candidates prior to
the election. In the months after the election both candidates receive close to zero articles per
month on average. The fact that neither candidate receives any significant media attention in
the months after the election suggests that the media may not be an important driver of the
runner-up effects. This figure also suggests that close second-place candidates do not receive
differentially more media attention versus close third-place candidates.
  60
     Previous work has found mixed evidence on the impact of media on the size of the incumbency effect. Snyder
and Strömberg (2010) and Prior (2006) find a positive but modest relationship between television presence and
the incumbency effect, but Ansolabehere et al. (2006) finds no effect. Gentzkow et al. (2011) find no relationship
between newspaper entry and exit on incumbency effects.
  61
     Lexis-Nexis, our newspaper database, only provides coverage of Canadian newspapers after 1979.


                                                       28
Figure 4b plots the mean number of articles mentioning the second- or third-place candidate
around the time period of the subsequent election in the same constituency. Note that in the full
sample of Canadian elections from 1867 to the present we estimated that second-place candidates
are approximately 4.6 p.p. more likely to run in the subsequent election in their constituency;
when we restrict the sample to after 1979 (the years relevant for our newspaper comparison)
we estimate second-place candidates are 2.5 to 3.5 percent (depending on the specification)
more likely to run, significant at the 10 percent level. We would therefore expect second-place
candidates to receive greater media attention prior to the next election. Figure 4b shows that
both second- and third-place candidates from the election at time t receive very little media
attention until just one month before the next election. On average, both second- and third-
place candidates receive about 0.5 articles per candidate in the month before the next election,
and 2 articles in the month of the next election.

Figure 4c again plots the mean number of articles mentioning the second- or third-place candidate
around the time of the t + 1 election, but here we only include candidates who ran again at time
t + 1. Even conditioning on those candidates who choose to run in the next election, both
second- and third-place candidates receive no media mentions until the month right before the
next election. This also suggests that it is unlikely that our runner-up effects are being driven by
second-place candidates receiving substantially more media attention. In the month before the
t + 1 election these candidates receive between 1 and 2 media mentions, and in the month of the
election at t + 1 the candidates receive between 10 and 15 media mentions. A formal statistical
test suggests that prior third-place candidates receive more media mentions than second-place
candidates in time t + 1 elections; however, we are hesitant to interpret this strongly as the
sample here only includes eleven third-place candidates and eleven second-place candidates.

As a second test of the media hypothesis, we compare the size of the runner-up effects in con-
stituencies with greater media presence. If media reporting drives awareness of second-place
candidates versus third-place candidates, one would expect the runner-up effects to increase with
the presence of local media. We focus these tests on the Brazilian and Indian state samples where
we have the sample size to potentially distinguish effects across different media environments.

In Table 8, Panel A, we compare Brazilian municipalities with and without AM radio stations.
Ferraz and Finan (2008) find that voters are more responsive to information from municipal
government audits in municipalities with AM radio stations, so there is a priori evidence that
AM radio coverage can have important political impacts. Contrary to the media coverage hy-
pothesis, the runner-up effect on candidacy is larger in municipalities without AM radio (but
not significantly different). The runner-up effects on winning are similarly sized and statistically
indistinguishable.

In Table 8, Panel B, we test whether constituencies in Indian states with greater newspaper
circulation have larger runner-up effects. To ensure that our measure of media presence is a

                                                29
meaningful signal of media attention we use the same measure of state level newspaper pene-
tration as Besley and Burgess (2002), who show that states high on this measure have greater
political responsiveness. We update this measure to 2013, and match each election in our Indian
state data to the newspaper circulation measure in the closest available year. We then split
the sample of elections into those that happened in state-years with above and below median
newspaper circulation per capita. We find that, if anything, elections in state-years with greater
than median newspaper circulation per capita demonstrate smaller runner-up effects. 62


5.2.2    Party Heuristics: Elimination By Aspects

Thaler and Sunstein (2008) discusses another decision heuristic (first presented in Tversky and
Kahneman (1981)), the “elimination by aspects” model, that might also be relevant to under-
standing runner-up effects. In this model a decision maker attempts to simplify a complicated
choice problem by choosing a set of simple cutoffs and requiring any possible choices to meet all
of those cutoffs. For example, in the case of finding a house, an individual might only consider
houses within 20 miles of her office, less than 250,000 dollars, and with four bedrooms. Cutoff
rules are added until the choice set is small enough to compare options on a broader set of
characteristics.

In our case, it seems plausible that parties might use a candidate’s previous rank as a simplifying
cutoff when choosing which candidates receive tickets. As Thaler and Sunstein (2008) notes, such
simplifying strategies can lead to welfare losses; in our case, high quality third-place candidates
might be left out of the choice set. If the runner-up effect is primarily driven by parties using rank
as an elimination aspect, then the results should be weaker for independent candidates. Figure
A.9a presents graphical evidence on the size of the runner-up effect for independent candidates in
our Indian state elections sample, which is the only sample with a large number of independents.
The effect sizes here are very similar to those found in the full sample. This result makes it
unlikely that a party based heuristic is the primary driver of the runner-up effect. It should also
be noted that parties play a small role in local Brazilian politics (Ames, 2009), and party-level
decision-making is unlikely to drive the results in that context too.


5.2.3    Outcome Bias

An additional psychological explanation is that instead of judging their performance in the
election objectively based on vote share, candidates judge their performance in reference to a
psychologically based counterfactual. Kahneman and Varey (1982) discusses how an agent’s
  62
    To facilitate comparisons between results based on different subsamples, and also on the full sample, we use
the optimal (IK) bandwidth estimated at the full sample (i.e., the same from Column 1 of Table 1) in all cases.
The qualitative results are robust to several other choices of bandwidth.



                                                      30
utility from an outcome is often both affected by the outcome as well as the agent’s perception
of the counterfactual had the outcome not occurred; for example in our context a second-place
candidate might see their counterfactual as winning the race, but a third-place candidate sees
their counterfactual as second-place. If candidates’ perceptions of the counterfactual serve as
motivation for whether to run again, then these differences in counterfactuals across second- and
third-place candidates is a potential explanation for our results. 63

Both of the psychological mechanisms mentioned above, and we suspect most psychological
mechanisms that predict ranking matters beyond vote shares in this context, would also predict
that third-place candidates should perform better than fourth-place candidates. As discussed
earlier, we find little evidence supporting this. The finding of no third-place effect is, however,
consistent with the strategic coordination mechanism; a tie between second- and third-place
candidates fits better the description of a “divided majority” than a tie between third- and
fourth-place. Finally, it is difficult to reconcile an explanation based on psychological mechanisms
with the magnitude of runner-up effects. For example, if the effect is driven entirely by candidate
motivation, the probability of winning the next election being more than 80% larger for close
runners-up than close third-places in the Brazilian context implies candidate motivation has
enormous, and likely implausible, consequences.



6      Conclusion

This paper documents the presence of runner-up effects: barely second-place candidates are
more likely than barely third-place candidates to run in, and win, subsequent elections, even
though both lost the (simple plurality) election. We apply this RDD analysis to four different
contexts covering multiple continents, as well as local, state, and federal elections for executive
and legislative positions.

Two major, non-exclusive, mechanisms that might explain the runner-up effect are strategic
coordination and heuristics. While we believe more research is necessary to understand the
relative roles of these mechanisms in determining the runner-up effect across various electoral
contexts, the weight of our evidence suggests that strategic coordination plays an important
role. In Brazil, we find that the effect is driven by voters switching from the third- candidate
to the second-place candidate, as opposed to the latter gaining at the equal expense of all other
candidates. Additional heterogenous treatment effect tests suggest that runner-up effects are
stronger when the incentives for strategic switching to second-place are greater: when second-
  63
    Medvec et al. (1995) finds that Olympians who come in second-place are not as happy as those who come in
third-place; the authors argue that this difference in happiness occurs because silver medalists compare themselves
to gold medalists, while bronze medalists compare themselves to the fourth place athlete who did not receive a
medal.



                                                        31
and third-place have similar party platforms, when they have reasonable chance of beating the
winner, and after the Indian emergency. In contrast, we find little evidence in favor of the
heuristic based explanations, such as when we compare close third- and fourth-place candidates.

We conclude by highlighting two avenues for future research. The first is to study the implications
of runner-up effects for the interpretation of incumbency effects, which have been documented
in a wide variety of electoral settings. Our findings raise the possibility that the first-place
ranking alone may drive part of it; perhaps winning an election makes a candidate a focal point
for coordination, which in turn drives future electoral success. Consistent with this, Levitt and
Wolfram (1997) find that a large fraction of the increase in the incumbency effect in U.S. House
is explained by incumbents “scaring off” quality competitors.

In the context of Brazil and India, where there are incumbency disadvantages, our findings
raise the possibility that the true anti-incumbency effects may actually be larger than those
estimated in RDDs. If incumbents receive similar benefits of coming in first versus second as
runners-up receive over third, then regression discontinuity designs may under-estimate the true
disadvantage of being an incumbent. Exploring the connection between incumbency and runner-
up effects appears to be an interesting area for future research.

A second avenue is to assess the welfare implications of the runner-up effect. An ideal political
system would choose candidates based on their ability to govern; instead, we show that variation
in previous electoral performance that is essentially noise has sizeable consequences. Such an
arbitrary rule is unlikely to be optimal, as it does not take in to account politicians’ ability
to govern in individual cases. In describing ancient Athens, where politicians were selected at
random from the population, Besley (2005) notes “after all, selection by lot does not favor those
with greater political competence over less.”




                                                32
References
Ames, Barry, The deadlock of democracy in Brazil, University of Michigan Press, 2009.
Ansolabehere, Stephen, Erik C Snowberg, and James M Snyder, “Television and the
  incumbency advantage in US elections,” Legislative Studies Quarterly, 2006, 31 (4), 469–490.
Barankay, Iwan, “Rank Incentives: Evidence from a Randomized Workplace Experiment,”
  2012. Working Paper.
Besley, T., “Political Selection and Corruption: An Experimental Study in the Field,” Journal
  of Economic Perspectives, 2005, 19 (3), 43–60.
Besley, Timothy and Robin Burgess, “The political economy of government responsiveness:
  Theory and evidence from India,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2002, 117 (4), 1415–1451.
   and Stephen Coate, “An economic model of representative democracy,” Quarterly Journal
  of Economics, 1997, 112 (1), 85–114.
Bouton, Laurent, Micael Castanheira, and Aniol Llorente-Saguer, “Divided majority
  and information aggregation: Theory and experiment,” Technical Report, Preprints of the
  Max Planck Institute for Research on Collective Goods 2012.
Card, David, Carlos Dobkin, and Nicole Maestas, “Does Medicare save lives?,” Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 2009.
Cox, G., Making Votes Count, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997.
DellaVigna, Stefano and Ethan Kaplan, “The Fox News effect: Media bias and voting,”
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2007, 122 (3), 1187–1234.
Eggers, Andrew, Olle Folke, Anthony Fowler, Jens Hainmueller, Andrew B Hall, and
  James M Snyder, “On The Validity Of The Regression Discontinuity Design For Estimating
  Electoral Effects: New Evidence From Over 40000 Close Races,” American Journal of Political
  Science, forthcoming.
Enikolopov, Ruben, Maria Petrova, and Ekaterina Zhuravskaya, “Media and political
  persuasion: Evidence from Russia,” The American Economic Review, 2011, 101 (7), 3253–
  3285.
Feddersen, Timothy J, Itai Sened, and Stephen G Wright, “Rational voting and candi-
  date entry under plurality rule,” American Journal of Political Science, 1990, pp. 1005–1016.
Ferraz, Claudio and Frederico Finan, “Exposing corrupt politicians: The effects of Brazil’s
  publicly released audits on electoral outcomes,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2008, 123
  (2), 703–745.
Fey, Mark, “Stability and coordination in Duverger’s law: A formal model of preelection polls
  and strategic voting,” American Political Science Review, 1997, pp. 135–147.
Folke, Olle, Torsten Persson, and Johanna Rickne, “Preferential voting, accountability
  and promotions into political power: Evidence from Sweden,” Technical Report, IFN Working
  Paper 2014.



                                              33
Forsythe, Robert, Roger B Myerson, Thomas A Rietz, and Robert J Weber, “An
  experiment on coordination in multi-candidate elections: The importance of polls and election
  histories,” Social Choice and Welfare, 1993, 10 (3), 223–247.
Fujiwara, Thomas, “A Regression Discontinuity Test of Strategic Voting and Duverger’s Law,”
  Quarterly Journal of Political Science, 2011, 6 (3-4), 197–233.
  , “Voting technology, political responsiveness, and infant health: evidence from Brazil,” Work-
  ing Paper, 2013.
Gentzkow, Matthew, “Television and voter turnout,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2006,
  121 (3), 931–972.
  , Jesse M Shapiro, and Michael Sinkinson, “The Effect of Newspaper Entry and Exit on
  Electoral Politics,” American Economic Review, 2011, 101, 2980–3018.
Gerber, Alan S, Dean Karlan, and Daniel Bergan, “Does the Media Matter? A Field
  Experiment Measuring the Effect of Newspapers on Voting Behavior and Political Opinions,”
  American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2009, 1 (2), 35–52.
Imbens, Guido and Karthik Kalyanaraman, “Optimal bandwidth choice for the regression
  discontinuity estimator,” The Review of Economic Studies, 2012, 79 (3), 933–959.
Kahneman, Daniel and Carol A Varey, “Propensities and counterfactuals: The loser that
  almost won,” Research on judgment and decision making: Currents, connections and contro-
  versies, 1982, pp. 322–341.
Kawai, Kei and Yasutora Watanabe, “Inferring strategic voting,” American Economic Re-
  view, 2013, 103 (2), 624–662.
Kendall, Chad and Marie Rekkas, “Incumbency advantages in the Canadian Parliament,”
  Canadian Journal of Economics, 2012, 45 (4), 1560–1585.
Kollman, Ken, Allen Hicken, Daniele Caramani, and David Backer, “Constituency-
  Level Elections Archive (CLEA),” www. electiondataarchive. org , 2013.
Lee, David, “Training, Wages, and Sample Selection: Estimating Sharp Bounds on Treatment
  Effects,” Review of Economic Studies, 2009, 76 (3), 1071–1102.
Lee, David S, “Randomized experiments from non-random selection in US House elections,”
  Journal of Econometrics, 2008, 142 (2), 675–697.
   and Thomas Lemieux, “Regression Discontinuity Designs in Economics,” Journal of Eco-
  nomic Literature, 2010, 48, 281–355.
Levitt, Steven D and Catherine D Wolfram, “Decomposing the sources of incumbency
  advantage in the US House,” Legislative Studies Quarterly, 1997, 22, 45–60.
Linden, Leigh, “Are Incumbents Really Advantaged? The Preference for Non-Incumbents in
  Indian National Elections,” Technical Report 2004.
Medvec, Victoria Husted, Scott F Madey, Thomas Gilovich et al., “When less is more:
  Counterfactual thinking and satisfaction among Olympic medalists,” Journal of Personality
  and Social Psychology, 1995, 69, 603–603.


                                               34
Myerson, Roger B, “Comparison of scoring rules in Poisson voting games,” Journal of Eco-
  nomic Theory, 2002, 103 (1), 219–251.
   and Robert J Weber, “A Theory of Voting Equilibria,” American Political Science Review,
  1993, 87 (01), 102–114.
Osborne, Martin J and Al Slivinski, “A model of political competition with citizen-
  candidates,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1996, 111 (1), 65–96.
Palfrey, Thomas R, “A Mathematical Proof of Duverger’s Law,” Technical Report, California
  Institute of Technology, Division of the Humanities and Social Sciences 1988.
Pope, Devin, “Reacting to Rankings: Evidence from ’America’s Best Hospitals’,” Journal of
  Health Economics, 2009, 28 (6), 1154–1165.
Power, Timothy J and Cesar Zucco, “Estimating ideology of Brazilian Legislative parties,
  1990–2005: a research communication,” Latin American Research Review, 2009, 44 (1), 218–
  246.
Prior, Markus, “The incumbent in the living room: The rise of television and the incumbency
  advantage in US House elections,” Journal of Politics, 2006, 68 (3), 657–673.
Singh, MP and Rekha Saxena, Indian Politics: Constitutional Foundations and Institutional
  Functioning, PHI Learning Pvt. Ltd., 2011.
Snyder, James M and David Strömberg, “Press Coverage and Political Accountability,”
  Journal of Political Economy, 2010, 118 (2), 355–408.
Spenkuch, Jorg, “On the extent of strategic voting,” Working Paper, 2014.
Spenkuch, Jorg L, “Please Don’t Vote for Me: Voting in a Natural Experiment with Perverse
  Incentives,” The Economic Journal, 2014.
Strömberg, David, “Radio’s impact on public spending,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  2004, 119 (1), 189–221.
Thaler, Richard H and Cass R Sunstein, Nudge: Improving decisions about health, wealth,
  and happiness, Yale University Press, 2008.
Tversky, A. and D. Kahneman, “The framing of decisions and the psychology of choice,”
  Science, 1981, 211, 453–458.
Uppal, Yogesh, “The Disadvantaged Incumbents: Estimating Incumbency Effects in Indian
  State Legislatures,” Public Choice, 2009, 138, 9–27.




                                            35
Figure 1 The Runner-up Effect (2nd vs. 3rd Place)
Triangles (circles) represent the local averages of a dummy indicating whether the candidate
ran in (won) the next (t+1 ) election. Averages are calculated within 2 p.p.-wide bins of vote
share difference (x -axis). Continuous lines are a quadratic fit over the original (unbinned) data.
Sample includes only candidates placed second and third at election t.
            (a) Brazil




            (b) India State




                                                36
Figure 1 (continued) The Runner-up Effect (2nd vs. 3rd Place)
Triangles (circles) represent the local averages of a dummy indicating whether the candidate
ran in (won) the next (t+1 ) election. Averages are calculated within 2 p.p.-wide bins of vote
share difference (x -axis). Continuous lines are a quadratic fit over the original (unbinned) data.
Sample includes only candidates placed second and third at election t.
            (c) India Federal




            (d) Canada




                                                37
Figure 2 Covariate Smoothness (2nd vs 3rd place)
Triangles (circles) represent the local averages of a dummy indicating whether the candidate
ran in (won) the past (t-1 ) election. Averages are calculated within 2 p.p.-wide bins of vote
share difference (x -axis). Continuous lines are a quadratic fit over the original (unbinned) data.
Sample includes only candidates placed second and third at election t.
(a) Brazil                                       (b) India State




(c) India Federal                                 (d) Canada




                                                38
Figure 3 Effect of 3rd vs. 4th Place
Triangles (circles) represent the local averages of a dummy indicating whether the candidate
ran in (won) the next (t+1 ) election. Averages are calculated within 2 p.p.-wide bins of vote
share difference (x -axis). Continuous lines are a quadratic fit over the original (unbinned) data.
Sample includes only candidates placed third and fourth at election t.
(a) Brazil                                       (b) India State




(c) India Federal                                 (d) Canada




                                                39
                                             Table 1: The Runner-up Effect (2nd vs. 3rd Place)

     Polynomial Order                                                One               One               One             Zero           Two
                                                                                 1
     Bandwidth                                                   Optimal BW      2 ×Optimal     BW   2×Optimal BW      2 percent    Full Sample
                              3rd-pl. Mean   Optimal BW Value        (1)               (2)               (3)              (4)            (5)
     Panel A: Brazil
     Candidacy, t+1 (%)          30.27             11.56           9.397***           6.295*           11.90***        11.05***       14.08***
                                                 [N=5556]           (2.589)           (3.596)           (1.868)         (3.040)        (1.912)

     Winner, t+1 (%)             9.448             12.57           8.310***          7.010***          8.844***        9.091***       10.49***
                                                 [N=5946]           (1.809)           (2.541)           (1.290)         (2.265)        (1.395)
     Panel B: India State
     Candidacy, t+1 (%)          31.92            9.139            4.391***          5.743***          5.037***        5.755***       5.490***
                                                [N=22518]           (1.131)           (1.567)           (0.834)         (1.175)        (0.790)

     Winner, t+1 (%)             7.781            7.807            3.351***          3.297***          3.502***        3.453***       4.412***
                                                [N=19868]           (0.812)           (1.149)           (0.594)         (0.775)        (0.528)




40
     Panel C: India Federal
     Candidacy, t+1 (%)          23.57             16.29            4.847**            2.374           5.748***         5.539*        5.817***
                                                 [N=4394]           (2.432)           (3.262)           (1.773)         (3.243)        (2.178)

     Winner, t+1 (%)             6.155             15.93            2.676*             2.811           3.211***          2.915        3.247***
                                                 [N=4294]           (1.393)           (1.903)           (1.022)         (1.881)        (1.229)
     Panel D: Canada
     Candidacy, t+1 (%)          16.79             12.22            4.617**           4.452*           4.591***         4.990**       5.986***
                                                 [N=5190]           (1.841)           (2.548)           (1.471)         (2.250)        (1.606)

     Winner, t+1 (%)             2.373             10.64             -0.195            -0.163            0.424           0.599         0.414
                                                 [N=4612]           (0.863)           (1.220)           (0.576)         (0.999)       (0.662)
     Standard errors clustered at the constituency level in parentheses. The unit of observation is a candidate. Outcomes measured as percent-
     ages. Each figure in columns (1)-(5) reports a separate local polynomial regression estimate with the specified bandwidth and polynomial
     order. Separate polynomials are fitted on each side of the threshold. “3rd-pl. Mean” is the estimated value of the dependent variable for a
     3rd-placed candidate that “ties” with the 2nd-placed candidate, based on the specification in column (1). The optimal bandwidth (BW) is
     based on Imbens and Kalyanaraman’s (2012) procedure, with the associated number of observations reported in brackets.
    Table 2: Placebo Tests and Covariate Smoothness (2nd vs. 3rd Place)

Polynomial Order                                                  One              Two
Bandwidth                                                     Optimal BW       Full Sample
                         3rd-pl. mean   Optimal BW Value          (1)               (2)
Panel A: Brazil
Candidacy, t-1 (%)          31.17              21.69              0.888          0.00437
                                             [N=8790]            (1.858)         (1.845)

Winner, t-1 (%)             13.65              21.89              -0.243          -0.750
                                             [N=8840]            (1.438)         (1.430)

Vote Share, t-1 (%)         23.58              25.43              0.103           0.242
                                             [N=5272]            (1.053)         (1.141)

PMDB Party, t (%)           16.24             26.52               -0.450         -0.998
                                            [N=13398]            (1.283)         (1.395)
Panel B: India State
Candidacy, t-1 (%)          34.93             18.17               0.965           0.285
                                            [N=36722]            (0.869)         (0.823)

Winner, t-1 (%)             13.48             13.80               1.100           0.654
                                            [N=30262]            (0.788)         (0.655)

Vote Share, t-1 (%)         9.740             13.27               0.322           0.269
                                            [N=29449]            (0.365)         (0.307)

Congress Party, t (%)       19.87             12.39              0.0587          -1.391*
                                            [N=32238]            (0.913)         (0.732)
Panel C: India Federal
Candidacy, t-1 (%)          33.85              23.66              -0.940          -0.748
                                             [N=6036]            (2.403)         (2.502)

Winner, t-1 (%)             15.70              15.33              -2.032          0.117
                                             [N=4120]            (2.244)         (1.941)

Vote Share, t-1 (%)         10.86              22.49              -1.029          -0.769
                                             [N=5770]            (1.012)         (1.021)

Congress Party, t (%)       10.74              18.43              1.328           0.582
                                             [N=5850]            (1.695)         (1.648)
Panel D: Canada
Candidacy, t-1 (%)          23.65              12.03              -0.464          -0.811
                                             [N=5322]            (2.365)         (1.833)

Winner, t-1 (%)             6.702              13.77              0.821           0.196
                                             [N=6000]            (1.318)         (1.224)

Vote Share, t-1 (%)         7.062              9.848              -0.826          -0.509
                                             [N=4434]            (0.928)         (0.658)

Liberal Party, t (%)        26.55              11.39              -1.477          0.629
                                             [N=5656]            (2.617)         (2.095)
See Table 1 notes for further description. Outcomes measured as percentages.




                                           41
                                                     Table 3: Effect of 3rd vs. 4th Place

     Polynomial Order                                                One               One               One             Zero           Two
                                                                                 1
     Bandwidth                                                   Optimal BW      2 ×Optimal     BW   2×Optimal BW      2 percent    Full Sample
                              4th-pl. Mean   Optimal BW Value        (1)               (2)               (3)              (4)            (5)
     Panel A: Brazil
     Candidacy, t+1 (%)          8.736             10.64            0.0116             0.740             -0.403          1.513         -0.473
                                                 [N=4768]           (1.358)           (1.697)           (1.141)         (1.383)       (1.375)

     Winner, t+1 (%)             1.473             5.561             -0.340            0.137             -0.140          0.126        -0.0617
                                                 [N=3138]           (0.749)           (0.910)           (0.595)         (0.605)       (0.670)
     Panel B: India State
     Candidacy, t+1 (%)          15.46            3.066              1.106           2.675***            0.610          0.809*        -0.0375
                                                [N=27282]           (0.723)           (0.937)           (0.574)         (0.485)       (0.497)

     Winner, t+1 (%)             1.481            3.743              0.148             0.215             0.128          0.385**       0.0843
                                                [N=30674]           (0.244)           (0.313)           (0.200)         (0.176)       (0.196)




42
     Panel C: India Federal
     Candidacy, t+1 (%)          17.38             3.122             -0.506            -1.518            -0.419         0.0582        -0.0196
                                                 [N=4286]           (1.905)           (2.285)           (1.465)         (1.279)       (1.284)

     Winner, t+1 (%)             0.691             3.523             0.537            1.146*             0.255           0.291         0.488
                                                 [N=4598]           (0.466)           (0.620)           (0.391)         (0.314)       (0.394)
     Panel D: Canada
     Candidacy, t+1 (%)          13.65             10.44             2.148             3.790             1.021           3.327         2.369
                                                 [N=4766]           (1.837)           (2.557)           (1.420)         (2.079)       (1.751)

     Winner, t+1 (%)             0.489             11.74            -0.0458            0.104             -0.197          0.175         0.649
                                                 [N=5240]           (0.308)           (0.350)           (0.268)         (0.304)       (0.420)
     Standard errors clustered at the constituency level in parentheses. The unit of observation is a candidate. Outcomes measured as percent-
     ages. Each figure in columns (1)-(5) reports a separate local polynomial regression estimate with the specified bandwidth and polynomial
     order. Separate polynomials are fitted on each side of the threshold. “4th-pl. Mean” is the estimated value of the dependent variable for a
     4th-placed candidate that “ties” with the 3rd-placed candidate, based on the specification in column (1). The optimal bandwidth (BW) is
     based on Imbens and Kalyanaraman’s (2012) procedure, with the associated number of observations reported in brackets.
                           Table 4: Electoral Section Regressions (Brazil)

                                                                                       3rd Pl. Vote       1st-Pl. Vote
                                         2nd Place Vote Vote Share, t+1                 Share, t+1         Share, t+1
                                      (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)                 (5)                 (6)
1st Place Vote Share, t (α1 )       -0.016       0.188***         0.217      -0.011         0.051           0.408***
                                   (0.038)        (0.052)        (0.154)    (0.038)        (0.054)           (0.032)

2nd Place Vote Share, t (α2 )      0.509***      0.650***    0.542***       0.495***       0.095*              -0.032
                                    (0.038)       (0.056)     (0.163)        (0.040)       (0.055)            (0.033)

3rd Place Vote Share, t (α3 )      0.142***      0.338***        0.346**    0.150***       0.523***            -0.005
                                    (0.039)       (0.055)        (0.163)     (0.040)        (0.052)           (0.032)

α3 − α1                            0.158***      0.150***        0.129**    0.161***       0.472***        -0.413***
                                    (0.024)       (0.034)        (0.056)     (0.029)        (0.027)         (0.019)

Dep. Var. Mean.                      34.6          33.6            35.2       32.4           31.3                46.0
Bandwidth                           2 p.p.        1 p.p.         0.5 p.p.    2 p.p.         2 p.p.              2 p.p.
Excludes 3-candidate elections                                                Yes
Municipality-time effects            Yes           Yes            Yes         Yes           Yes                  Yes
Number of Elections                   144           65             29          83            115                 207
Observations (Sections)              8738          4113           1785        5958          6071                10267
Standard errors clustered at the electoral section level in parentheses. The unit of observation is an electoral
section-year. Each column provides the estimate from a separate regression, with the dependent variable
in the header and explanatory variables in rows. A bandwidth of x indicates that only elections with a
vote share difference between 2nd and 3rd place smaller than x is included in the sample. All specifications
include municipality-time fixed effects.



          Table 5: The Runner-Up Effect by Strength of 2nd and 3rd Place Candidates

                                    Candidacy, t+1 Winner, t+1              Candidacy, t+1 Winner, t+1
          Panel A: Brazil                   v2 + v3 > v 1                           v2 + v3 < v 1

          Runner-Up Effect              10.76***             9.333***             3.468                3.591
                                         (3.026)              (2.243)            (4.669)              (2.501)

          Close 3rd-Place Mean              32.79              10.92              20.62             3.796
          IK Bandwidth(%)                   11.56              12.57              11.56             12.57
          Observations                      4174               4436               1382              1510
          Panel B: India State                  v 2 + v3 > v 1                        v2 + v3 < v 1

          Runner-Up Effect              4.732***             3.828***            3.417*               1.945*
                                         (1.412)              (1.072)            (1.826)              (1.088)

          Close 3rd-Place Mean           35.89                   9.487            22.93               3.847
          IK Bandwidth                   9.139                   7.807            9.139               7.807
          Observations                   14776                   13120            7740                6746
          Standard errors clustered at the constituency level in parentheses. Outcomes measured as
          percentages. Estimates are based on local linear regression estimates. See Table 1 notes
          and main text for further description. v2 + v3 > v1 (v2 + v3 < v1 ) indicates the subsample
          where second and third placed candidates obtain more (less) votes than the winner.



                                                            43
                   Table 6: The Runner-up Effect by Party Platform Distance

                                            Candidacy, t+1 Winner, t+1          Candidacy, t+1 Winner, t+1
Panel A: Brazil (Party Outcomes)                    I 2nd = I 3rd                       I 2nd 6= I 3rd

Runner-Up Effect                                 7.441*            7.531**           3.952              4.157*
                                                 (4.027)           (3.147)          (2.980)             (2.262)

Close 3rd-Place Mean                              37.95              10.88           37.74               12.26
IK Bandwidth(%)                                   13.75              13.24           13.75               13.24
Observations                                      2132               2056            4242                4112
Panel B: India State (Party Outcomes)                  I 2nd = I 3rd                      I 2nd 6= I 3rd

Runner-Up Effect                                6.895***           4.616**           1.198               2.509
                                                 (2.008)           (1.912)          (1.771)             (1.799)

Close 3rd-Place Mean                              54.23             11.87            64.25               15.98
IK Bandwidth                                      11.92             9.190            11.92               9.190
Observations                                      7054              5766             8914                7344
Standard errors clustered at the constituency level in parentheses. Outcomes measured as percentages. Es-
timates are based on local linear regression estimates. See Table 1 notes and main text for further descrip-
tion. I 2nd = I 3rd (I 2nd 6= I 3rd ) indicates the subsample where second and third placed candidates are in the
same (separate) party platform category.




               Table 7: The Runner-Up Effect by Period (Indian State Elections)

                                                            Elections After
                                                           Emergency State
                                 1951-63     1964-75          1977-1978          1979-91      1992-2012

       Candidacy, t+1              3.300       3.372             2.406            4.231*       6.079***
                                  (3.083)     (2.384)           (3.396)           (2.184)       (2.171)

       Close 3rd-Place Mean        16.68       26.76             24.41             33.74        40.09
       IK Bandwidth                9.139       9.139             9.139             9.139        9.139
       Observations                2286        4596              2248              6202         7186

       Winner, t+1                4.318**      1.191            5.245**           3.512**      3.661**
                                  (1.862)     (1.724)           (2.377)           (1.539)      (1.637)

       Close 3rd-Place Mean        2.928       7.995             3.981             7.951        9.990
       IK Bandwidth                7.807       7.807             7.807             7.807        7.807
       Observations                2010        4064              1956              5488         6350
       Standard errors clustered at the constituency level in parentheses. Outcomes measured as
       percentages. Estimates are based on local linear regression estimates. See Table 1 notes and
       main text for further description.




                                                        44
                        Table 8: The Runner-Up Effect by Media Presence

                         Candidacy, t+1         Winner, t+1          Candidacy, t+1         Winner, t+1

Panel A: Brazil                 Towns Without AM Radio                       Towns With AM Radio

Runner-Up Effect             10.55***             8.364***                6.977               8.197***
                              (3.139)              (2.230)               (4.568)               (3.091)

Close 3rd-Place Mean          28.74                 10.72                 33.48                 6.757
IK Bandwidth(%)               11.56                 12.57                 11.56                 12.57
Observations                  3774                  4046                  1782                  1900

Panel B: India State     < Median State Newspaper Circulation        > Median State Newspaper Circulation

Runner-Up Effect             5.371***             4.111***               3.222**               2.422**
                              (1.570)              (1.158)               (1.624)               (1.136)

Close 3rd-Place Mean          35.12                 8.131                 28.13                 7.340
IK Bandwidth                  9.139                 7.807                 9.139                 7.807
Observations                  11700                 10382                 10818                 9486
Standard errors clustered at the constituency level in parentheses. Outcomes measured as percentages. Esti-
mates are based on local linear regression estimates. See Table 1 notes and main text for further description.




                                                     45
Figure 4 Number of Newspaper Articles for 2nd and 3rd Place Canadian Candidates
Panel (a) plots the average number of newspaper articles for close 2nd and 3rd place Canadian
parliament candidates in the months before and after the election in which they nearly tied for
2nd place. Panel (b) plots the number of articles for those same candidates around the next
election. Panel (c) is the same as Panel (b), except it only includes candidates that chose to
run in the next election.
(a) Articles after election at t                     (b) Articles before election at t + 1




              (c) Articles before election at t + 1, conditional on running in next election




                                                   46
                Online Appendix (Not for Publication)

A.1     Derivation of Equation 3

The object of interest is:

            E[W1 − W0 |x = 0, R1 = 1] = E[W1 |x = 0, R1 = 1] − E[W0 |x = 0, R1 = 1]

The first term on the right side can be expressed as:

                       Prob[(W1 = 1) ∩ (R1 = 1)|x = 0]   E[W1 R1 |x = 0]
                                                       =
                             Prob[R1 = 1|x = 0]           E[R1 |x = 0]

The second term can be expressed similarly and further rearranged:

  Prob[(W0 = 1) ∩ (R1 = 1)|x = 0]
                                  =
        Prob[R1 = 1|x = 0]


       Prob[(W0 = 1) ∩ (R0 = 1; R1 = 1)|x = 0] + Prob[(W0 = 1) ∩ (R0 = 0; R1 = 1)|x = 0]
   =                                                                                     =
                                      Prob[R1 = 1|x = 0]


                                    E[W0 R0 |x = 0] + Prob[(W0 = 1) ∩ (R0 = 0; R1 = 1)|x = 0]
                                                           E[R1 |x = 0]

where the last step uses the assumption of no defiers. Finally, note that:

  Prob[(W0 = 1) ∩ (R0 = 0; R1 = 1)|x = 0] =
               Prob[W0 = 1|R0 = 0; R1 = 1|x = 0] ∙ Prob[R0 = 0; R1 = 1|x = 0] =
                                                    E[W0 |R1 > R0 , x = 0] ∙ Prob[R1 > R0 |x = 0]

Combining these we obtain equation 3:

            1
                   [E(W1 R1 − W0 R0 |x = 0) − Prob(R1 > R0 |x = 0) ∙ E(W0 |x = 0, R1 > R0 )]
      E(R1 |x = 0)


A.2     Party Level Outcomes

Figure A.7 presents a graphical analysis of whether a party that comes in close second-place is
more likely to run in, and win, a subsequent in election. The figures for Brazil, India State, and


                                               47
India Federal show reasonably clear discontinuities at the transition from third to second-place,
suggesting that a party that barely comes in second versus third-place is more likely to field a
candidate in the next election, and that candidate is more likely to win the next election. For
Canada, however, the figure shows little evidence of a difference between close second and third
parties on future outcomes.

Table A.2 presents our regression discontinuity estimates of these effects. For Brazil, the runner-
up effect on a party running in the next election is 4.8 p.p., which is approximately half the
size of the runner-up effect on a candidate running in the next election (9.4 p.p. - Table 1).
Similarly, the runner-up effect on a party winning the next election (5.6 p.p.) is approximately
67 percent the size of the runner-up effect on a candidate winning the next election (8.3 p.p.).
As mentioned in the text, the likely reason for the smaller magnitudes when we use party versus
candidate outcomes in Brazil is that 37% of second- and third-place candidates switch parties.

In the Indian state sample, we find the effect sizes using party outcomes are similar to those
when we use candidate outcomes. Using party outcomes, the runner-up effects on running again
and winning the next election are 3.6 p.p. and 3.8 p.p.; these are quite close the corresponding
effect sizes using candidate outcomes (Table 1).

In the Indian federal sample, the point estimates using party outcomes are smaller than those
using candidate outcomes, but still positive. The statistical significance of these estimates varies
more with the specific bandwidth chosen for estimation. Close second parties are 2.2 p.p. (1.3
p.p.) more likely to run (win) than close third parties, whereas close second candidates are 4.9
p.p. (2.7 p.p.) more likely to run (win). Consistent with Figure A.7, in Table A.2 we find no
evidence that Canadian parties that barely come in second-place are more likely to run in or win
future elections.

Table A.3 presents regression discontinuity tests of balance on pre-existing party characteristics.
For the Brazilian and Indian state elections we find no significant differences in past candidacy,
winning, major party, or vote share. For the India Federal election, the quadratic specification
suggests that close second-place parties were more likely to have won the previous election.
However, visual inspection of Figure A.8c, suggests that this significant effect is being driven by
quadratic functional form fitting curve better away from the cutoff. In particular, the quadratic
functional form takes a linear shape to fit the pattern away from the cutoff, but this causes
it to miss the non-linearity close to the right hand side of the cutoff. In Canada, we find
a 10% significant difference in the optimal bandwidth specification on candidacy in the past
election. However, inspection of Figure A.8d does not suggest an imbalance. Lastly, we find
close second-place parties have lower vote share both in the optimal bandwidth and quadratic
specifications in the Canadian sample. Figure A.10 provides the relevant plot for this outcome.
An imbalance is not clearly visible, and the discontinuity seems to be driven by observations in
the bin immediately to the right of the cutoff; there are other variations across individual bins of

                                                48
similar magnitude. When conducting a large number of balance tests over multiple outcomes and
samples some spurious significant results are expected, and so we do not conclude that electoral
manipulation and/or imbalance is an issue.


A.3      UK House of Commons Results

Elections to the UK House of Commons are scheduled every five years, but can happen more
frequently in the case of failure to form a government. Our UK Parliament data covers the
universe of elections, including bye-elections, for the period 1931 - 2010. 64 We again match
candidates over time using their names, and define a candidate as running again if we find
a match for them in the next election. 65 We also match constituencies by name, considering
constituencies with the same name over years as the same constituency. We have a total of
40,206 candidates in the UK data contesting in 11,609 elections across 1,345 constituencies.
8,384 elections had three or more candidates and at least one subsequent election.

Figure A.11a presents a graphical analysis of the probability that U.K. parliamentary candidates
will run in, and win, the next election in their constituency. The triangle figures and fitted curves
show there is a small increase in the probability that a runner-up candidate runs in the next
election. The estimated effect is 3.2 p.p. in the optimal bandwidth specification and close to
significant at the 10 percent level (p-value = 10.2%). The point estimates using other bandwidths
are generally small and positive, although they are never statistically significant at the 5 percent
level.

The circle figures and fitted curve suggest that close second-place candidates in the UK are not
more likely to win future elections, and this result is also confirmed when we estimate the effect
size in a regression-discontinuity model. It is perhaps unsurprising that we do not find an effect,
given that close second- and third-candidates have such a low probability of winning in general
(less than 2 percent). In this sense the British case is more similar to the American one, in that
in situations where second- and third-candidates get similar amounts of votes, the third-place
candidate is really not a viable candidate in future elections.
  64
     We do not use the CLEA data for U.K. elections because it is missing candidate names for a large fraction
of elections. For election years 2005 and 2010 our data come from the UK electoral commission (http://www.
electoralcommission.org.uk/our-work/our-research/electoral-data). For election years 1931-2001 our
data come from the Politics Resources website (http://www.politicsresources.net/area/uk/). Our U.K.
by-elections data come from (http://web.archive.org/web/20131014014802/http://by-elections.co.uk/
links.html).
  65
     Our manual check procedure finds that our algorithm correctly identified whether a candidate ran again or
not in the next election for 100 percent of sampled UK candidates.




                                                     49
A.4     Categorization of Party Platforms

We categorized all Brazilian parties that fielded a candidate in a mayoral election in our samples
into three categories, which could be labeled as “left”, “center”, “right”. We follow the discussion
in Power and Zucco (2009), supplemented with web searches for (small) parties missing in their
analyses.

We also categorized parties in Indian state elections into three categories. The first group includes
parties with communist/socialist orientation, the second group includes the Congress party, its
off-shoots, and associates, and the last one includes the BJP, its off-shoots and associates, as
well as other Hindu-nationalist parties. This definition, and the coding of several large parties
is from Singh and Saxena (2011). We also coded many remaining parties using a protocol that
sequentially i) assigned parties with mentions to communism and socialism in their name to
the first group, ii) checked if the party’s entry on Wikipedia mentioned an orientation, parties
with socialist/communist/left-wing orientation were assigned to the first group, parties with
center/center-left/center-right/populist/social democracy as orientation to the second group, and
those with right-wing orientation to the last group, and finally iii) if the party’s Wikipedia
page mentioned associations with another categorized party, they were assigned to that group.
Associations are mergers, splits from, or common coalition formation.




                                                 50
Figure A.1 Density of Running Variable
Circles represent the number of candidates within 2 p.p. bins of vote share difference between
2nd and 3rd placed candidate (the running variable in the RDD).

(a) Brazil                                     (b) India State




(c) India Federal                              (d) Canada




                                              51
Figure A.2 Vote Shares of 2nd and 3rd Candidate
Circles represent the local averages of candidate vote shares at the t election. Averages are
calculated within 2 p.p. bins of vote share difference (x -axis). Votes shares are measured as
percentages. Continuous lines are a quadratic fit over the original (unbinned) data.

(a) Brazil                                     (b) India State




(c) India Federal                              (d) Canada




                                             52
Figure A.3 Vote Share of 2nd and 3rd Candidate, t+1
Circles represent the local averages of candidate vote shares at the next ( t+1 ) election. Averages
are calculated within 2 p.p. bins of vote share difference (x -axis). Votes shares are measured as
percentages, candidates not running at t+1 are assigned a vote share of zero. Continuous lines
are a quadratic fit over the original (unbinned) data.

(a) Brazil                                        (b) India State




(c) India Federal                                 (d) Canada




                                                53
Figure A.4 Robustness to Bandwidth Choice - Brazil
Circles represent the estimated treatment effect of being 2nd place using different bandwidth
choices (x -axis). Lines represent the 95% confidence interval (standard errors clustered at the
constituency level). We report all possible cases for in integer bandwidth values (1,2,...50), except
those with small sample sizes (below 300 for the zero order polynomial, below 600 for the first
order polynomial).

(a) Outcome: Candidacy, t+1 ; Poly. Order: 1      (b) Outcome: Candidacy, t+1 ; Poly. Order: 0




(c) Outcome: Winner, t+1 ; Poly. Order: 1          (d) Outcome: Winner, t+1 ; Poly. Order: 0




                                                 54
Figure A.5 Robustness to Bandwidth Choice - India State
Circles represent the estimated treatment effect of being 2nd place using a different bandwidth
choice (x -axis). Lines represent the 95% confidence interval (standard errors clustered at the
constituency level). We report all possible cases for in integer bandwidth values (1,2,...50),
except those with small sample sizes (below 300 for the zero order polynomial, below 600 for the
first order polynomial).

(a) Outcome: Candidacy, t+1 ; Poly. Order: 1    (b) Outcome: Candidacy, t+1 ; Poly. Order: 0




(c) Outcome: Winner, t+1 ; Poly. Order: 1       (d) Outcome: Winner, t+1 ; Poly. Order: 0




                                               55
Figure A.6 Effect of 1st vs 2nd
Triangles (circles) represent the local averages of a dummy indicating whether the candidate
ran in (won) the next (t+1 ) election. Averages are calculated within 2 p.p.-wide bins of vote
share difference (x -axis). Continuous lines are a quadratic fit over the original (unbinned) data.
Sample includes only candidates placed first and second at election t.
(a) Brazil                                       (b) India State




(c) India Federal                                 (d) Canada




                                                56
Figure A.7 Effect of 2nd vs 3rd, Party Outcomes
Triangles (circles) represent the local averages of a dummy indicating whether the party ran
in (won) the next (t+1 ) election. Averages are calculated within 2 p.p.-wide bins of vote share
difference (x -axis). Continuous lines are a quadratic fit over the original (unbinned) data. Sample
includes only parties placed second and third at election t.
(a) Brazil                                        (b) India State




(c) India Federal                                 (d) Canada




                                                57
Figure A.8 Covariate Smoothness, 2nd vs 3rd, Party Outcomes
Triangles (circles) represent the local averages of a dummy indicating whether the party ran
in (won) the past (t-1 ) election. Averages are calculated within 2 p.p.-wide bins of vote share
difference (x -axis). Continuous lines are a quadratic fit over the original (unbinned) data. Sample
includes only parties placed second and third at election t.
(a) Brazil                                        (b) India State




(c) India Federal                                 (d) Canada




                                                58
Figure A.9 Runner-Up Effect for Independent Candidates, India State
Triangles (circles) represent the local averages of a dummy indicating whether the candidate
ran in (won) the next (t+1 ) election. Averages are calculated within 2 p.p. bins of vote share
difference (x -axis). Continuous lines are a quadratic fit over the original (unbinned) data. Sample
includes only independent candidates placed second and third at election t.
(a) Runner-up Effect (t+1 )                       (b) Placebo Test (t-1 )




                                                59
Figure A.10 Additional Covariate Smoothness Figures
In Panel (a) circles represent the local averages of a dummy for whether the candidate was from
the Congress Party in vote shares at the t India state election. In Panel (b) circles represent the
local averages of voteshare of candidates in the past election. Averages are calculated within 2
p.p. bins of vote share difference (x -axis). Continuous lines are a quadratic fit over the original
(unbinned) data.
                         (a) India State: Fraction of Congress Candidates




                         (b) Canada: Party’s Voteshare In Last Election




                                                60
Figure A.11 United Kingdom: Effect of 2nd vs 3rd
In Panel (a), triangles (circles) represent the local averages of a dummy indicating whether
the candidate ran in (won) the next (t+1 ) election. Panel (b) repeats the exercise for past (t-
1) elections. Averages are calculated within 2 p.p.-wide bins of vote share difference ( x -axis).
Continuous lines are a quadratic fit over the original (unbinned) data. Sample includes only
candidates placed second and third at election t.
                        (a) Effect on Running/Winning Next Election




                        (b) Placebo Check




                                               61
                                                    Table A.1: Effect of 1st vs. 2nd Place

     Polynomial Order                                                One               One               One             Zero           Two
                                                                                 1
     Bandwidth                                                   Optimal BW      2 ×Optimal     BW   2×Optimal BW      2 percent    Full Sample
                              3rd-pl. Mean   Optimal BW Value        (1)               (2)               (3)              (4)            (5)
     Panel A: Brazil
     Candidacy, t+1 (%)          52.36             5.028           8.573***            3.918           12.15***         12.67***      17.56***
                                                 [N=7382]           (2.414)           (3.447)           (1.697)          (1.892)       (1.070)

     Winner, t+1 (%)             32.38             6.002             -1.525            -4.809            0.823           1.849        6.111***
                                                 [N=8660]           (2.357)           (3.381)           (1.674)         (2.059)        (1.124)
     Panel B: India State
     Candidacy, t+1 (%)          48.81            4.802            9.565***          7.317***          10.53***         10.30***      13.04***
                                                [N=19324]           (1.368)           (1.880)           (0.984)          (1.051)       (0.640)

     Winner, t+1 (%)             24.84            6.760            -4.554***        -5.763***          -3.944***       -3.456***      -1.571**
                                                [N=26406]           (1.147)          (1.596)            (0.836)         (1.037)        (0.628)




62
     Panel C: India Federal
     Candidacy, t+1 (%)          43.43             4.969           10.05***           8.897*           15.21***         13.79***      21.41***
                                                 [N=2774]           (3.449)           (5.096)           (2.449)          (2.685)       (1.699)

     Winner, t+1 (%)             19.51             6.083             -1.712            -2.516            3.404           1.396        7.647***
                                                 [N=3278]           (2.887)           (4.002)           (2.096)         (2.444)        (1.606)
     Panel D: Canada
     Candidacy, t+1 (%)          37.37             6.903           36.21***          34.02***          36.75***         37.30***      42.41***
                                                 [N=5378]           (2.421)           (3.568)           (1.666)          (2.205)       (1.217)

     Winner, t+1 (%)             16.43             7.871           26.54***          26.19***          27.20***         27.71***      30.73***
                                                 [N=6028]           (2.398)           (3.445)           (1.704)          (2.335)       (1.329)
     Standard errors clustered at the constituency level in parentheses. The unit of observation is a candidate. Outcomes measured as percent-
     ages. Each figure in columns (1)-(5) reports a separate local polynomial regression estimate with the specified bandwidth and polynomial
     order. Separate polynomials are fitted on each side of the threshold. “2nd-pl. Mean” is the estimated value of the dependent variable for a
     2nd-placed candidate that “ties” with the 1st-placed candidate, based on the specification on column (1). The optimal bandwidth (BW) is
     based on Imbens and Kalyanaraman’s (2012) procedure, with the associated number of observations reported in brackets.
                                         Table A.2: Effect of 2nd vs. 3rd Place with Party Outcomes

     Polynomial Order                                               One               One              One              Zero          Two
                                                                                1
     Bandwidth                                                  Optimal BW      2 ×Optimal    BW   2×Optimal BW       2 percent   Full Sample
                              3rd-pl. Mean   Optimal BW Value       (1)               (2)              (3)               (4)           (5)
     Panel A: Brazil
     Candidacy, t+1 (%)          37.91             13.60           4.777**           1.322            7.769***         5.526*       7.255***
                                                 [N=6298]          (2.412)          (3.310)            (1.738)         (3.041)       (1.935)

     Winner, t+1 (%)             11.68             13.02          5.605***           3.788            5.913***         4.278*       6.660***
                                                 [N=6096]          (1.831)          (2.561)            (1.300)         (2.274)       (1.428)
     Panel B: India State
     Candidacy, t+1 (%)          58.60            11.92           3.586***          3.485**           3.465***        4.321***      3.822***
                                                [N=21872]          (1.170)          (1.603)            (0.883)         (1.360)       (0.954)

     Winner, t+1 (%)             14.53            9.190           3.780***           2.342            5.011***        3.601***      5.810***
                                                [N=17903]          (1.121)          (1.550)            (0.832)         (1.175)       (0.795)




63
     Panel C: India Federal
     Candidacy, t+1 (%)          53.04             16.06            1.784            0.858             3.902**          3.269       5.368**
                                                 [N=3827]          (2.486)          (3.375)            (1.862)         (3.299)      (2.306)

     Winner, t+1 (%)             12.08             9.494            1.416            -2.292           6.262***          1.649       9.151***
                                                 [N=2463]          (2.602)          (3.745)            (1.916)         (2.827)       (1.887)
     Panel D: Canada
     Candidacy, t+1 (%)          82.37             16.66           2.884**           2.038             2.357**          2.610       4.744***
                                                 [N=6659]          (1.416)          (1.990)            (1.137)         (1.946)       (1.403)

     Winner, t+1 (%)             8.369             13.10            -1.975           -0.496             0.944           1.004        -0.330
                                                 [N=5469]          (1.469)          (2.068)            (1.062)         (1.740)       (1.291)
     Standard errors clustered at the constituency level in parentheses. The unit of observation is a party. Outcomes measured as percentages.
     Each figure in columns (1)-(5) reports a separate local polynomial regression estimate with the specified bandwidth and polynomial order.
     Separate polynomials are fitted on each side of the threshold. “3rd-pl. Mean” is the estimated value of the dependent variable for a 3rd-
     placed party that “ties” with the 2nd-placed party, based on the specification in column (1). The optimal bandwidth (BW) is based on
     Imbens and Kalyanaraman’s (2012) procedure, with the associated number of observations reported in brackets.
Table A.3: Covariate Smoothness with Party Outcomes (2nd vs. 3rd Place)

Specification                                                  Linear         Quadratic
Bandwidth(%)             3rd-pl. mean   Optimal BW Value     Optimal BW      Full Sample
                              (1)              (2)               (3)              (4)
Panel A: Brazil
Candidacy, t-1 (%)          40.99              17.11             2.705             2.875
                                             [N=7264]           (2.153)           (1.926)

Winner, t-1 (%)             16.97              16.65             0.476             1.057
                                             [N=7116]           (1.806)           (1.602)

Vote Share, t-1 (%)         0.350              16.78             0.0183           0.0180
                                             [N=2936]           (0.0123)         (0.0113)

PMDB Party, t (%)           13.41             23.88              -0.325           -1.088
                                            [N=12208]           (1.223)           (1.268)
Panel B: India State
Candidacy, t-1 (%)          57.98             16.59              0.374             -0.707
                                            [N=28130]           (1.067)           (0.977)

Winner, t-1 (%)             20.51             12.62             0.0598             0.338
                                            [N=23108]           (1.069)           (0.867)

Vote Share, t-1 (%)         13.69             13.26              0.113            0.0457
                                            [N=29463]           (0.400)           (0.336)

Congress Party, t (%)       17.20             10.85             0.0292            -0.761
                                            [N=29172]           (0.917)           (0.688)
Panel C: India Federal
Candidacy, t-1 (%)          54.04              21.50             -0.369            0.313
                                             [N=4997]           (2.461)           (2.427)

Winner, t-1 (%)             16.52              10.86             1.383            4.265*
                                             [N=2772]           (2.887)           (2.272)

Vote Share, t-1 (%)         14.26              16.30            0.0828             0.552
                                             [N=4326]           (1.023)           (0.952)

Congress Party, t (%)       9.312              17.53             0.379             0.455
                                             [N=5604]           (1.619)           (1.544)

Panel D: Canada
Candidacy, t-1 (%)          83.95              16.71            -2.693*            -0.562
                                             [N=6965]           (1.483)           (1.526)

Winner, t-1 (%)             9.385              13.95            0.0931           -0.00543
                                             [N=6005]           (1.512)           (1.394)

Vote Share, t-1 (%)         20.05              11.39            -1.757**         -1.875***
                                             [N=5088]            (0.753)          (0.619)

Liberal Party, t (%)        22.70              10.71             -0.351            2.102
                                             [N=5364]           (2.433)           (1.969)
See Table A.2 notes for further description. Outcomes measured as percentages.



                                           64
