NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

A COMPARISON OF PROGRAMMING LANGUAGES IN ECONOMICS
S. Boraan Aruoba
Jesús Fernández-Villaverde
Working Paper 20263
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20263
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2014

We thank Manuel Amador for his help with making our Python and Mathematica codes more idiomatic,
Matthew MacKay and John Stachurski for their help with Numba, basthtage for moving our code to
Cython, Matt Dziubinski and Santiago González for alternative implementations of our C++ code,
Luigi Bocola, Gustavo Camilo and Pablo Cuba-Borda for research assistance, Thomas Jones, Thibaut
Lamadon, Florian Oswald, Pau Rabanal, Pablo Winant, and the members of the Julia user group for
comments, and the NSF for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by S. Boraan Aruoba and Jesús Fernández-Villaverde. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

A Comparison of Programming Languages in Economics
S. Boraan Aruoba and Jesús Fernández-Villaverde
NBER Working Paper No. 20263
June 2014, Revised July 2014
JEL No. C0,E0
ABSTRACT
We solve the stochastic neoclassical growth model, the workhorse of modern macroeconomics,
using C++11, Fortran 2008, Java, Julia, Python, Matlab, Mathematica, and R. We implement the
same algorithm, value function iteration with grid search, in each of the languages. We report the
execution times of the codes in a Mac and in a Windows computer and briefly comment on the
strengths and weaknesses of each language.

S. Boraan Aruoba
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
3105 Tydings Hall
College Park, MD 20742-7211
aruoba@econ.umd.edu
Jesús Fernández-Villaverde
University of Pennsylvania
160 McNeil Building
3718 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
jesusfv@econ.upenn.edu

1. Introduction
Computation has become a central tool in economics. From the solution of dynamic equilibrium models in macroeconomics or industrial organization, to the characterization of equilibria
in game theory, or in estimation by simulation, economists spend a considerable amount of
their time coding and running fairly sophisticated software.
And while some e¤ort has been focused on the comparison of di¤erent algorithms for the
solution of common problems in economics (see, for instance, Aruoba, Fernández-Villaverde,
and Rubio-Ramírez, 2006), there has been little formal comparison of programming languages.
This is surprising because there is an ever-growing variety of programming languages and
economists are often puzzled about which language is best suited to their needs.1 Instead of a
suite of benchmarks, researchers must rely on personal experimentations or on “folk wisdom.”
For example, it is still commonly believed that Fortran is the fastest available language or
that C++ is too hard to learn.
In this paper, we take a …rst step at correcting this unfortunate situation. The target audience for our results is younger economists (graduate students, junior faculty) or researchers
who have used the computer less often in the past for numerical analysis and who are searching
for guideposts in their …rst incursions into computation.
We solve the stochastic neoclassical growth model, the workhorse of modern macroeconomics, using C++11, Fortran 2008, Java, Julia, Python, Matlab, Mathematica, and R.2 We
implement the same algorithm, value function iteration with grid search for optimal future
capital, in each of the languages and measure the execution time of the codes in a Mac and
in a Windows computer. The advantage of our algorithm, value function iteration with grid
search, is that it is “representative” of many economic computations: expensive loops, large
matrices to store in memory, and so on. Thus, while our investigation does not entail a full
suite of benchmarks, both our model and our solution method are among the best available
choices for our investigation. In addition, our two machines, a Mac and a Windows computer,
are the two most popular environments for software development for economists (in the Mac
we compile and run some of the code from the command line, thus implying results very close
to those that would come from equivalent Unix/Linux machines).
In section 4, we report speed results for each language (including several implementations
of the same language and di¤erent compilers), but here is a brief summary of some of our
main …ndings:
1

This also stands in comparison with work in other …elds, such as Prechelt (2000), Lubin
and Dunning (2013), or web projects, such as The Computer Language Benchmarks Game (see
http://benchmarksgame.alioth.debian.org/).
2
From now on, we drop the year of the standard of the language unless it is needed.

2

1. C++ and Fortran are still considerably faster than any other alternative, although one
needs to be careful with the choice of compiler.
2. C++ compilers have advanced enough that, contrary to the situation in the 1990s and
some folk wisdom, C++ code runs slightly faster (5-7 percent) than Fortran code.
3. Julia delivers outstanding performance. Execution speed is only between 2.64 and 2.70
times slower than the execution speed of the best C++ compiler.
4. Baseline Python was slow. Using the Pypy implementation, it runs around 44 times
slower than in C++. Using the default CPython interpreter, the code runs between 155
and 269 times slower than in C++.
5. Matlab is between 9 to 11 times slower than the best C++ executable.
6. R runs between 475 to 491 times slower than C++. If the code is compiled, the code is
between 243 to 282 times slower.
7. Hybrid programming and special approaches can deliver considerable speed ups. For
example, when combined with Mex …les, Matlab is only 1.24 to 1.64 times slower than
C++ and when combined with Rcpp, R is between 3.66 and 5.41 times slower. Similar
numbers hold for Numba (a just-in-time compiler for Python that uses decorators) and
Cython (a static compiler for writing C extensions for Python) in the Python ecosystem.
8. Mathematica is only about three times slower than C++, but only after a considerable
rewriting of the code to take advantage of the peculiarities of the language. The baseline
version of our algorithm in Mathematica is considerably slower.
Some could argue that our results are not surprising as they coincide with the guesses
of an experienced programmer. But we regard this comment as a point of strength, not of
weakness. It is a validation that our exercise was conducted under reasonably fair conditions.
We do not seek to overturn the experience of knowledgeable programmers, but to formalize
such experience under well-described and explicitly controlled conditions and to report the
information to others.
We do not comment on the di¢ culty of implementation of the algorithm in each language,
for a couple of reasons. First, such di¢ culty is subjective and depends on the familiarity of
a researcher with a particular programming language or perhaps just with his predisposition
toward a programming paradigm. Second, to make the comparison as unbiased as possible,
we coded the same algorithm in each language without adapting it to the peculiarities of each
language (which could re‡ect more about our knowledge of each language than of its objective
3

virtues).3 Therefore, the …nal code looks remarkably similar among languages, with the exception of one version of the code in Mathematica. The codes are posted at our github repository https://github.com/jesusfv/Comparison-Programming-Languages-Economics and
the reader is invited to gauge that di¢ culty for himself. The main point of this paper is
to provide a measure of the “bene…t” in a cost-bene…t calculation for researchers who are
considering learning a new language. The “cost”part will be subjective.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. First, in section 2, we introduce our
application and algorithm. In section 3 we motivate our selection of programming languages.
In section 4, we report our results. Section 5 concludes.

2. The Stochastic Neoclassical Growth Model
We pick, for our exercise, the stochastic neoclassical growth model, the foundation of much
work in macroeconomics. We solve the model with value function iteration and a grid search
for the optimal values of future capital. In that way, we compare programming languages
for their ability to handle a task such as value function iteration that appears everywhere in
economics and within a well-understood economic environment.
In this model, a social planner picks a sequence of consumption ct and capital kt to solve
max E0

fct ;kt+1 g

1
X

(1

)

t

log ct

t=0

where E0 is the conditional expectation operation,

the discount factor, and the resource

constraint is given by
ct + kt+1 = zt kt + (1

)kt

where productivity zt takes values in a set of discrete points fz1 ; :::; zn g that evolve according

to a Markov transition matrix

. The initial conditions, k0 and z0 ; are given. While, in the

interest of space, we have written the model in terms of the problem of a social planner, this
is not required and we could deal, instead, with a competitive equilibrium.
For our calibration, we pick
kt+1 =

zt kt and ct = (1

= 1, which implies that the model has a closed-form solution
) zt kt : This will allow us to assess the accuracy of the solution

we compute. Then, we are only left with the need to choose values for , , and the process
for zt . But since

= 1 is unrealistic, instead of targeting explicit moments of the data, we

3

It also means that proposals to improve the coding should be made for all languages (unless there is an
obvious problem with one of the languages). The game is not to write the best possible C++ code, it is to
write C++ code that is comparable to, for example, Matlab code in computational complexity. We are not
interested in speed itself, but on relative speed.

4

just pick conventional values for these parameters and processes. For

we pick 0:95, 1=3 for

, and for zt we have a 5-point Markov chain:
zt 2 f0:9792; 0:9896; 1:0000; 1:0106; 1:0212g
with transition matrix:
0

0:9727

0:0273

0

0

0

1

B
C
0
0
B 0:0041 0:9806 0:0153
C
B
C
C
=B
0
0:0082
0:9837
0:0082
0
B
C
B
C
0
0
0:0153
0:9806
0:0041
@
A
0
0
0
0:0273 0:9727
The transition matrix is similar to the one that would come from a discretization of an AR(1)
process for (log) productivity following Tauchen’s (1986) procedure, except that we move
mass from the diagonal to the upper and lower bands to induce more movements across states
and to create a more challenging computation. The relative speed comparisons that we report
below are robust to di¤erent calibrated values, including values of

< 1.

The recursive formulation of this problem in terms of a value function V ( ; ) and a Bellman
operator is:
V (k; z) = max
(1
0
k

)

(where we have already imposed that

t

log (zk

k 0 ) + E [V (k 0 ; z 0 )jz]

= 1). We solve this Bellman operator using value
0

function iteration and grid search on k . We take advantage of monotonicity in the policy
function and of an envelope condition to avoid unnecessary computations. We use a grid of
17,820 points for k uniformly distributed

50 percent of the steady-state value of capital. We

choose this grid size so that C++ or Fortran would solve the problem in about one second.
Shorter run times would cause large relative measurement error (due to issues such as the
situation of the cache at any given time). We impose a tolerance of 1.0e-07 for convergence.
The value function took 257 iterations to converge. We checked that all codes achieved
convergence in the same number of iterations and that the computed value and policy functions
were exactly the same.
In Figure 1, we plot the value (top panel) and policy function for capital next period
(middle panel) along the capital dimension, with each color representing a di¤erent value of
zt . The value and policy functions are, as expected, increasing and concave. We also plot
the di¤erence between the exact and approximated policy function for capital in percentage
terms (bottom panel). The maximum error is only -0.0059 percent, which illustrates the high
accuracy achieved with 17,820 points for k.
5

3. Selection of Programming Languages
Since Fortran came around in 1957, hundreds of programming languages have been created.
Even limiting ourselves to languages that have acquired a solid user base circa 2014, we need
to choose among dozens of them.
Fortunately, the task is simpler than it seems. There is little point to picking languages
such as Perl or PHP, neither of which is particularly suited to, nor widely used for scienti…c
computing. Also, many languages are close relatives of each other and one member of the
family will su¢ ce for our comparison. With our choices of languages, we cover a wide range
of possibilities and, with the exception of the functional programming languages discussed
below, we feel we have covered all the obvious choices for numerical computation.
3.1. Compiled Languages
Among compiled languages, we select C++, Fortran, and Java. C++ is, perhaps, the most powerful language among those widely used. Together with C and Objective-C, it constitutes the
backbone of much of the modern computing world. According to the well-cited TIOBE Index
of programming language popularity (May 2014 edition), C is ranked number 1, Objective-C
is ranked number 3, and C++ number 4, with a total rating of 34.70 percent.4 Our C++ code
does not use any speci…c C++ features such as objects. Thus, the C and Objective-C codes
(which can be found on the github page) are nearly equivalent. We checked, also, that the
run time of the C and Objective-C codes was nearly exactly the same. Thus, we will only
report the C++ running time.5
Two other relatives of C++ are C# and D. C# is widely used in the industry (C# is ranked
6th in the TIOBE Index with 3.75 percent). However, design considerations that make C#
attractive for commercial applications also render it slower for numerical computation and,
thus, it is rarely employed for the tasks we are concerned with in this paper. D, which
generates code usually roughly of the same speed as C++, is less popular (ranked 26 with 0.60
percent). Including all …ve languages, the C family accumulates a popularity index of 39.04
percent. Swift, a proposed replacement for Objective-C, is not designed, at this moment,
as a programming language for use outside OS X and iOS.
Fortran, the oldest language of all, still maintains a signi…cant presence in high performance scienti…c computing and among economists. Its latest incarnation, Fortran 2008, is
updated with modern features and innovations such as coarrays. Re‡ecting this niche nature
of Fortran, the TIOBE ranks it 32, with a 0.42 percent popularity.
4

See the de…nition and interpretation of the index at:
http://www.tiobe.com/index.php/content/paperinfo/tpci/tpci_definition.htm.
5
For a comparison of syntaxes, see the Hyperpolyglot at http://hyperpolyglot.org/cpp.

6

Java is a common vehicle for undergraduate education and the availability of the Java
Virtual Machine in practically all computer environments makes it an attractive choice. In
the TIOBE Index, it is ranked 2nd with a popularity of 5.99 percent.
The performance of compiled languages also depends on the compiler used to generate
the executable …les.6 Thus, we select a number of those. For C++, in the Mac machine, we
pick GCC, Intel C++, and Clang (which shares the LLVM –lower level virtual machine –with
XCode and delivers nearly identical speed) and in the Windows machine, GCC, Intel C++, and
Visual C++. For Fortran, in both machines, we select GCC and Intel Fortran.7 For Java,
we select the standard Oracle JDK.
3.2. Scripting Languages
We pick as our scripting languages Matlab, Mathematica, R, Python, and Julia. Matlab,
Mathematica, and R are su¢ ciently known among economists that it is not necessary to
elaborate on our choice.
Python is an elegant open-source language that has become popular in the scienti…c community (see Sargent and Stachurski, 2014), in particular the 2.7 version.8 Since there are
di¤erent implementations of Python, we select CPython, the default Python interpreter that
comes with Mac and Linux machines, and Pypy (http://pypy.org/), a speed-oriented replacement virtual machine that uses a just-in-time compiler. Our Python code for CPython
and Pypy was exactly the same and it uses the Numpy library for matrix operations.
Julia (http://julialang.org/) is a new open-source high-performance programming
language with a syntax very close to Matlab, Lisp-style macros, and many other modern features, and it also uses a just-in-time compiler for speed based on the LLVM. Three particularly
attractive features of Julia are:
1. Julia’s default typing system is dynamic (to facilitate fast coding), but it is possible to
indicate the type of certain values to avoid type-instability problems that often decrease
speed in dynamically typed languages.
2. Julia can call C or Fortran functions without wrappers or APIs.
3. Julia has a library that imports Python modules and provides wrappers for all of the
functions on them.
6

See, for example, the comparison at http://www.polyhedron.com/fortran-compiler-comparisons.
We could not …nd data on compilers’ market share, but our picks include the most popular compilers
in user forums. Our experience with other compilers, such as PGI, has been less satisfactory in terms of the
speed of the generated executables.
8
A key advantage of Python is the existence of libraries such as Numpy, Scipy, SymPy, MatPlotLib, and
pandas and of shells such as IPython. Some of these libraries have only been partially ported to Python 3+.
7

7

We did not check Octave, an open source clone of Matlab, because it is well-known
that it is considerably slower than Matlab. In preliminary testing, we checked that Gauss
(http://www.aptech.com/) was roughly seven times slower than Matlab and, thus, we decided not to include it in our exercise.
3.3. Functional Programming Languages
The big missing items in our list of languages are those that belong to the functional programming family that inherits the insights from Lisp. In a companion paper (Amador, Aruoba,
Fernández-Villaverde, 2014), we elaborate on the advantages of functional programming for
economics and explain how to extend our benchmark investigation to functional languages
such as Ocaml or Haskell. Since this comparison involves a number of issues of its own, we
prefer to avoid them here to keep the paper focused.9
3.4. Hybrid and Special Approaches
Most languages allow for the used of mixed programming. This is particularly useful in
Matlab and R, where one can send computer-intensive parts of the code to C++ and keep the
rest of the code in an easier scripting language format. Thus, in addition to “pure” Matlab
and R, we also use Mex …les, where part of the code is written in C++ and compiled before
the Matlab code runs, and Rcpp, a package in R that facilitates the integration of R and C++
(http://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/Rcpp/index.html). In both cases, we sent to
C++ the Bellman operator that updates the value function and that consumes nearly all the
computing time.
As in the case of Matlab and R, we compile in Python the Bellman operator that updates
the value function. We do so using two di¤erent approaches:
1. Numba (http://numba.pydata.org/), a just-in-time compiler that uses decorators to
compile Python to LLVM.
2. Cython (http://cython.org/), a compiler that converts type-annotated Python into
generated C code that can be imported as a module.10

9

We run, though, an experiment with Scala, a “trendy” language that allows for multi-paradigm programming by integrating imperative, object-orientation, and functional features. Our Scala code built with
imperative features runs, not surprisingly, at roughly the same speed as the Java code (Scala compiled Java
bytecode runs in the Java Virtual Machine) and, thus, we decided not to include it in our results.
10
The Python ecosystem is incredibly rich and continuously expanding. Thus, it is well beyond
our abilities to survey every single possibility. The interested reader can check a list of compilers at
http://compilers.pydata.org/.

8

Finally, we have Mathematica. Although Mathematica allows for multiparadigm programming (including our imperative algorithm), its kernel strongly prefers a more functionally
oriented approach. Thus, we will also use its Compile function plus a rewriting of the code to
take advantage of the peculiarities of the language. While this would make the results from
this last computation hard to interpret, some readers may …nd them of interest.

4. Results
We report our results in Table 1, where we show the average run time and the relative
performance of each code in terms of the best performer in each group (C++ with GCC in the
Mac machine and C++ with Visual C++ in the Windows machine). For those codes that run
in less than 60 seconds, we average 10 runs (after a warm-up) to smooth out small di¤erences
caused by the operating system. In the codes that run in more than 60 seconds, we report
only one run, as any small di¤erence does not have a material e¤ect on relative performance.
Also, we report elapsed time, not watch time, except for R, where we report user time (to
avoid the problems of the overhead of the REPL shell).11 At the bottom of the table, and
separated by a double line, we report the hybrid and special cases: Matlab with Mex …les, R
with Rcpp, Numba, Cython, and the rewrite of Mathematica.
Our …rst result is that C++ and Fortran still maintain a considerable speed advantage with
respect to all other alternatives. For example, Java is between 2.10 and 2.69 times slower
than C++, Matlab around 10 times slower, and the Pypy implementation of Python around 48
times slower.
Second, C++ compilers have advanced enough that, contrary to the situation in the 1990s,
C++ code runs slightly faster (5-7 percent) than Fortran code. The many other strengths
of C++ in terms of capabilities (full object orientation, template meta-programming, lambda
functions, large user base) make it an attractive language for graduate students to learn. On
the other hand, Fortran is simple and compact –and, thus, relatively easy to learn –and it
can take advantage of large amounts of legacy code.
Third, even for our very simple code, there are noticeable di¤erences among compilers.
We …nd speed improvements of more than 100 percent between di¤erent executables of the
same underlying code (and using equivalent compilation ‡ags). While the open-source GCC
compilers are superior in a Mac/Unix/Linux environment (for which they have been explicitly
developed) to the Intel compilers, GCC compilers do less well in a Windows machine. The
deterioration in performance of the Clang compiler was expected given that the goal of the
LLVM behind it is to minimize compilation time and executable …le sizes, both important
11

The details of each machine and the compilation instructions are reported in the appendix.

9

goals when developing general-use applications but often (but not always!) less relevant for
numerical computation.
Fourth, Java is between 2.2 to 2.69 times slower than C++. This di¤erence in speed
plus Java’s issues with ‡oating point arithmetic in high-performance scienti…c computation
suggests that there is no obvious advantage for choosing Java over C++ unless portability
across platforms or the wide availability of Java programmers is an important factor.
Julia, with its just-in-time compiler, delivers an outstanding performance. Execution
speed is only 2.64 to 2.70 times slower than the speed of C++. Julia is slightly faster than
Java and close to 4 times faster than Matlab. Given how close Julia’s syntax is to Matlab’s,
the fact that it is open-source, and that the language has been designed from scratch for
easy parallelization, many researchers may want to learn more about it. However, Julia’s
standard is still evolving (causing potential backward incompatibilities in the future) and
there are only a few libraries for it at the moment.
Matlab runs between 9 to 11 times slower than the best C++ executable. The di¤erence
in performance between compiled languages and this widely used scripting language seems to
have stabilized over the last decade.
In the Pypy implementation, the Python code runs around 44-45 times slower than in C++.
In the “traditional”implementation of Python (often called CPython), the code runs between
155 and 269 times slower than in C++. Other benchmarks have also found similar results. For
example, the Computer Languages Benchmark Game …nds many examples where Python is
over 100 times slower then C++.12
R runs between 475 to 491 times slower than C++, although the performance improves somewhat (to between 243 and 281 times slower) if the R code is compiled using the R compiler
package. This poor performance is well-understood in the R community and it is due, in part,
to some choices in the original design of R back in the 1990s, when nobody could have forecasted its future success. In fact, there are a number of initiatives to increase R’s speed, such
as pqR, Renjin, and Riposte.13 Of course, the strength of R is in statistics and econometrics
where the overwhelming richness of existing packages (over 5,500 at the CRAN repository as
of May 2014) makes it an outstanding alternative. Mathematica, in its imperative version,
runs up to 809 times slower than C++.
We move now to analyzing the hybrid and special cases. When we use a Mex …le written in
C++, Matlab runs 1.29 and 1.64 times slower than C++. When we use Rcpp in R, the resulting
code runs between 3.66 and 5.41 times slower than C++. While Mex …les were faster, we found
12

See also Lubin and Dunning (2013), https://modelingguru.nasa.gov/docs/DOC-1762, or
http://wiki.scipy.org/PerformancePython.
13
See the discussions and speed tests in http://www.pqr-project.org/, http://www.renjin.org/, and
https://github.com/jtalbot/riposte.

10

Rcpp to be elegant and easy to use. These numbers suggest that a researcher can use the
friendly environment of Matlab or R for everyday tasks (data handling, plots, etc.) and rely
on Mex …les or Rcpp for the heavy computations, especially those involving loops.
In the Python world, Numba’s decorated code runs between 1.57 and 1.62 times slower than
the best C++ executable and Cython code runs between 1.41 and 2.49 times slower than C++.
Both approaches demonstrate a great performance.14
Mathematica is a particular case. If we just use the function Compile to compile the Bellman operator, performance improves, but not dramatically. If, instead, we both rewrite
the code to have a more functionally oriented structure and use the function Compile,
Mathematica runs between 1.67 and 2.22 times slower than C++. As we mentioned before,
we do not emphasize this performance, as the code was tuned to Mathematica requirements,
something we did not do for other languages.
We close with three caveats about our exercise. First, our computational task (value function iteration with grid search, monotonicity in the decision rule, and an envelope condition),
is not well-suited to vectorization. The argument is explained in detail in the appendix. In
particular, the nesting of a while loop with three for loops and an if control statement, far
from being a poor programming choice, saves considerable time in execution. We have vectorized versions of our code in Matlab or R (languages that often pro…t from vectorization) that
run slower than the baseline codes. Furthermore, the deterioration in performance becomes
worse as the number of grid points increases.
Second, we did not try to take advantage of the particular features of each programming
language (for example, we do not change the order or the iteration of the loops between rows
and columns to suit the preference of each languages; a choice that degrades, for instance, the
performance of C++). In our personal assessment, that would make the comparison extremely
cumbersome. However, the reader is invited to look at our github page and check how much
her favorite language can improve from being coded by an expert.
Third, and also beyond this paper, we do not compare how easy it is to parallelize the
code written in each language. This may be an important factor, with some languages such
as Julia that are designed from scratch being easy to parallelize and others having more
issues with it (for example, in Python due to its Global Interpreter Lock that synchronizes
the execution of threads).

14

Without compiling the Bellman equation as a separate function, Numba was slower than Pypy.

11

5. Concluding Remarks
In this short paper we have taken a …rst step at a comparison of programming languages
in economics. Our focus on speed should not be taken as the only important metric for
language comparison. Other issues (ease of programming, existence of auxiliary tools, or
vibrant communities of fellow programmers) should be considered as well. Also, di¤erent
programming languages can be used by one researcher to address di¤erent problems (for
example, a complicated value function iteration in C++ and a statistical analysis of some data
in R).
Nevertheless, speed has three inherent advantages. First, it is easier to measure. Second,
speed comparisons give us an indication of the potential bene…ts for researchers from mastering
a new programming language. Third, many real-life applications in macro are considerably
more computationally intensive than our simple exercise. As we increase, for example, the
number of state variables or we nest a value function iteration in an estimation loop, speed
considerations become central for many research projects where the code may take weeks to
run.
Our simple exercise leaves many questions unanswered. For example: How do our results
extend to other problems, such as those in econometrics? Are there improvements in our
algorithm that would bene…t one programming language much more than others? Can we
re-arrange loops in ways that change relative speeds? However, our results in and themselves
should be of interest to a wide audience of researchers. We hope to see more comparisons
of programming languages in economics in the future and a discussion of our coding choices
through our github repository, where readers can fork their own versions of our programs.

12

References
[1] Amador, M., S.B. Aruoba, J. Fernández-Villaverde (2014). “Functional Programming in
Economics.”Mimeo in preparation.
[2] Aruoba, S.B., J. Fernández-Villaverde, and J. Rubio-Ramírez (2006). “Comparing Solution Methods for Dynamic Equilibrium Economies.”Journal of Economic Dynamics and
Control 30, 2477-2508.
[3] Lubin, M. I, Dunning (2013). “Computing in Operations Research using Julia.” Mimeo,
MIT.
[4] Prechelt, L. (2000). “An Empirical Comparison of Seven Programming Languages.”IEEE
Computer 33(10), 23-29.
[5] Sargent,

T.

and

J.

Stachurski

(2014).

Quantitative

Economics.

Mimeo,

http://quant-econ.net/_static/pdfs/quant-econ.pdf.
[6] Tauchen, G. (1986), “Finite State Markov-chain Approximations to Univariate and Vector
Autoregressions.”Economics Letters 20, 177-181.

13

Figure 1: Value function, policy function for capital, and relative di¤erence between exact
and approximated solution

14

Table 1: Average and Relative Run Time (Seconds)
Mac

Windows

Language

Version/Compiler

Time

Rel. Time

Version/Compiler

Time

Rel. Time

C++

GCC-4.9.0

0.73

1.00

Visual C++ 2010

0.76

1.00

Intel C++ 14.0.3

1.00

1.38

Intel C++ 14.0.2

0.90

1.19

Clang 5.1

1.00

1.38

GCC-4.8.2

1.73

2.29

GCC-4.9.0

0.76

1.05

GCC-4.8.1

1.73

2.29

Intel Fortran 14.0.3

0.95

1.30

Intel Fortran 14.0.2

0.81

1.07

Java

JDK8u5

1.95

2.69

JDK8u5

1.59

2.10

Julia

0.2.1

1.92

2.64

0.2.1

2.04

2.70

Matlab

2014a

7.91

10.88

2014a

6.74

8.92

Python

Pypy 2.2.1

31.90

43.86

Pypy 2.2.1

34.14

45.16

CPython 2.7.6

195.87

269.31

CPython 2.7.4

117.40

155.31

3.1.1, compiled

204.34

280.90

3.1.1, compiled

184.16

243.63

3.1.1, script

345.55

475.10

3.1.1, script

371.40

491.33

Mathematica

9.0, base

588.57

809.22

9.0, base

473.34

626.19

Matlab, Mex

2014a

1.19

1.64

2014a

0.98

1.29

Rcpp

3.1.1

2.66

3.66

3.1.1

4.09

5.41

Python

Numba 0.13

1.18

1.62

Numba 0.13

1.19

1.57

Cython

1.03

1.41

Cython

1.88

2.49

9.0, idiomatic

1.67

2.29

9.0, idiomatic

2.22

2.93

Fortran

R

Mathematica

15

6. Appendix
6.1. Compilation Flags
Our Mac machine had an Intel Core i7 @2.3 GHz processor, with 4 physical cores, and 16 GB
of RAM. It ran OSX 10.9.2. Our Windows machine had an Intel Core i7-3770 CPU @3.40GHz
processor, with 4 physical cores, hyperthreading, and 12 GB of RAM. It ran Windows 7,
Ultimate-SP1.
The compilation ‡ags were:
1. GCC compiler (Mac): g++ -o testc -O3 RBC_CPP.cpp
2. GCC compiler (Windows): g++ -Wl,--stack,4000000, -o testc -O3 RBC_CPP.cpp
3. Clang compiler: clang++ -o testclang -O3 RBC_CPP.cpp
4. Intel compiler: icpc -o testc -O3 RBC_CPP.cpp
5. Visual C: cl /F 4000000 /o testvcpp /O2 RBC_CPP.cpp
6. GCC compiler: gfortran -o testf -O3 RBC_F90.f90
7. Intel compiler: ifortran -o testf -O3 RBC_F90.f90
8. javac RBC_Java.java and run as java RBC_Java -XX:+AggressiveOpts.
6.2. Vectorization and the Properties of the Solution
In the main paper, we use value function iteration with grid search over capital as our solution
method. In particular, we take a value function V n
V n (k; z) = max
(1
0
k

)

t

log (zk

1

(k; z), we apply the Bellman operator:

k0) + E V n

1

(k 0 ; z 0 ) jz

and we get a new value function V n (k; z). Using standard arguments, one can show that, for
any initial V 0 (k; z), V n (k; z) ! V (k; z) as n ! 1 in the sup norm.

There are two computational costs in value function iteration. First, we need to evaluate

the operator for any value of the state variables, k and z. In the main paper, we have 17820
points in the grid of capital (ki , for i 2 f1; : : : ; 17820g) and 5 points in the grid of productivity

(z, for i 2 f1; : : : ; 5g), for a total of 89100 points. Second, we need to solve the maxk0 problem

using grid search. That is, for each of the 89100 points, we need to search among the 17820
0
possible choices of km
, for m 2 f1; : : : ; 17820g.15
15

Given our choice of capital grid, all the choices of k 0 are feasible for any point in the state space.

16

To ease the computational burden of the maximization problem, we take advantage of two
key properties of the solution. First, the monotonicity of the decision rule. That is, if we
know that for state variables ki and zj , the optimal choice is
0
km
= g (ki ; zj ) ;

then we also know that kn0 = g (ki+1 ; zj )

0
km
= g (ki ; zj ). The decision rule is also monotone

along the productivity dimension (although we do not exploit monotonicity along the second
dimension in our algorithm: we found in preliminary testing that the improvements in speed
from doing so were minimal).
Second, we know that an envelope condition applies. More concretely, if
(1
< (1

)

t

log zj ki
)

t

log (zj ki

0
kn+1
+ E Vn

kn0 ) + E V n

1
1

0
kn+1
; z 0 jz

(kn0 ; z 0 ) jz

0
.
then we know that the optimal choice of k 0 cannot be higher than kn0 , or kn0 = g (ki ; zj ) < kn+1

In other words, once we have reached the optimal choice of k 0 , higher future capital only
decreases the value function (the increase in continuation utility would be lower than the cost
of a lower current consumption).
These two properties allow us to write a particularly e¢ cient algorithm. We copy the code
here from the Matlab version, but all the other codes are nearly identical:
-----------------------------------------for nCapitalNextPeriod = gridCapitalNextPeriod:nGridCapital
consumption = mOutput(nCapital,nProductivity)-vGridCapital(nCapitalNextPeriod);
valueProvisional = (1-bbeta)*log(consumption)...
+bbeta*expectedValueFunction(nCapitalNextPeriod,nProductivity);
if (valueProvisional>valueHighSoFar)
valueHighSoFar = valueProvisional;
capitalChoice = vGridCapital(nCapitalNextPeriod);
gridCapitalNextPeriod = nCapitalNextPeriod;
else
break; % We break when we have achieved the max
end
end
------------------------------------------

17

What are we doing here? The counter nCapitalNextPeriod will search over optimal values
of k 0 given some values ki and zj . But we do not initialize the counter at 1 (except with the …rst
point of the grid). We initialize the counter at gridCapitalNextPeriod, that is, the optimal
choice of capital in the previous point of the grid ki

1

and zj . Then, we evaluate consumption

and the value function for the choice of k 0 capital given by the counter. If the choice improves the previous evaluation of the value function (valueProvisional>valueHighSoFar),
we move to the next point of the grid. Otherwise, we break the search since we have already
found our optimal choice.
A good way to see the e¢ ciency of this algorithm is to note that we will only need to
check a few points in the vector nCapitalNextPeriod. For example, in the last iteration of
the value function (iteration 257), we search on average 2.65 points of k 0 for each value ki
and zj , instead of 17820 (as a naive search would require). In other words, instead of having
to evaluate the value function 1.5878e+09 times in iteration 257, we only evaluate it 235656
times. The average number of searches is very stable from iteration 1 and already at iteration
9 it has settled down at 2.65 points.
A cursory inspection of our code, where we nest a while loop with three for loops and
an if control statement, could suggest the possibility of improving performance by taking
advantage of vectorization. Unfortunately, our algorithm is unlikely to bene…t from vectorization. The reason is that vectorization cannot easily accommodate monotonicity and the
envelope condition. We could, for example, evaluate the value function for
(1

)

t

log zi kj

k0 + E V n

1

(k 0 ; z 0 ) jz

for all possible values of k 0 using vectorized functions and obtain a vector Vb (k 0 ). But then
we would need to search Vb (k 0 ) for its maximum value, a costly task. Monotonicity and the
envelope condition tell us that we do not need to compute the whole of Vb (k 0 ), just 2.65
points on average. Furthermore, as the number of grid points k 0 increases, the performance
of vectorization deteriorates more and more because we need to search among more values

of k 0 . Note that this is not directly linked to the e¢ ciency with which we store matrices in
memory. Therefore, the inner for loops and the if control statement are the consequence of
understanding the mathematical structure of our problem.
The two outer for loops are just convenient ways to move along the state space without
the need to store large matrices. Similarly, the while loop is unavoidable: the very core of
value function iteration is that it is an iteration.
We can illustrate the drawbacks of vectorization running Matlab and R code with and
without vectorization and for three di¤erent grids for capital: 179, 1782, and 17820 grid

18

points. Table A.1 reports the running time in seconds. We can see that our original code
is substantially faster than a vectorized version and that the deterioration in performance
increases with the number of grid points.
Our vectorization was very simple: we eliminated the inner loop and the conditional
statement and replaced them with vector operations on the whole grid of k 0 . While a more
carefully designed vectorization could reduce the distance with respect to our loop code,
vectorization would always need to beat a very e¢ cient loop search that uses monotonicity
and an envelope condition. Therefore, we are not sanguine about the chances of vectorization
in this particular problem.
Table A.1: Loop vs. Vectorization
k0

179

1782

17820

k0

179

1782

17820

Matlab, loop

0.09

0.80

7.91

R, loop

2.14

22.00

345.55

Matlab, vectorized 1.51 76.04 3408.18 R, vectorized 2.29 108.72 10785.20

19

