                    NBFR WORKTNC PAPFP SFPTFS




                         HOW IMPORTANT IS
                        WELFARE DEPENDENCE?




                         Rebecca M. Blank




                      Working Paper No. 2026




                NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                         Cambridge, MA 02138
                           September 1986




Support for this project has been provided by the Woodrow Wilson
School, Pr-nceton University, and the Institute for Research on
Poverty, University of Wisconsin - Madison. An earlier version of
this paper was presented in seminars at the University of
Rochester, Princton, Stonybrook, the Institute for Research on
Poverty, and the Labor Studies Institute, NBER. I thank par-
ticipants at these seminars for their useful comments. I have par—
t-icularly benefited by comments from Orley Ashenfelter, David Card,
John Ham and Michael White. Ex-istng errors and omissions are
eritirel' my own.  The research reported here is part of the NBER's
research program in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are
those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research,
                                                 NBER Working Paper #2026
                                                 September 1986




                      How Important is Welfare Dependence?




                                    ABSTRACT



      This paper develops a theoretical model of welfare dependence, in which
 current participation in AFDC induces greater future use of the program. One
 prediction is duration dependence in welfare spells. This is tested using 6
 years of monthly data on time spent in the AFDC program among female household
 heads in the control group of the Seattle/Denver Income Maintenance Experiment.
 A variety of duration dependence models are estimated, investigating the effect
 of different functional form assumptions, as well as the impact of accounting
 for time-varying covariates, competing risks, and data heterogeneity in the
 estimates. Monthly AFDC participation does not show strong evidence of duration
dependence. In fact, during the initial months on the program the probability
of leaving the program, conditional on past participation, appears to be flat
or increasing. After about eight months the probability of leaving starts to
decrease, but it becomes virtually flat after 18 to 24 months. There is some
indication that there are two distinct groups that utilize welfare: one group,
which has a very low probability of leaving welfare and whose rate of exit
changes little over time; and a second group, which is more affected by time on
the program.    The propensity of black women to experience longer AFDC spells
appears totally due to their lower probability of leaving AFDC via
                                                                       marriage,
rather than any difference in leaving via earnings or other income increases.
     However, even where duration dependence is present in the data, this is
not adequate evidence for program-induced welfare dependence.    The final part
of the paper presents a model of earnings change and AFDC participation which
contains no welfare dependence effects. Welfare spells simulated from this
model show duration dependence effects which appear quite similar to those
observed in the actual data.




                                                Rebecca M. Blank
                                                Woodrow Wilson School
                                                Princeton University
                                                Princeton, NJ 08544
                                1.   INTRODUCTION

     The Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC) program continues to

generate controversy.   At the heart of the discussion are questions regarding

the effect of this program on the behavior of participants. A well-established

 literature exists, measuring the short-run impact of the program on labor

market behavior and household composition of eligible households1   however, in

recent years it has been suggested that the more serious effect is a long-run

one, typically referred to as "welfare dependence."     In this paper, welfare

dependence will refer to a situation in which current participation in AFDC

increases the probability of future participation.   This paper is a study of

the extent to which such program-induced welfare dependence occurs among AFDC

participants.

     Using six years of monthly information on female-headed household behavior,

the primary result of this study is that current monthly AFDC participation

does not appear to be strongly affected by past AFDC usage. First, the statis-

tical evidence for duration dependence in welfare spells is weak. In fact,

during the initial months of AFDC, the probability of leaving the program,

conditional on past participation, appears constant or increasing. After about

eight months the conditional probability of leaving starts to decrease, but it

becomes virtually flat after 18 to 24 months. At least part of this decrease

is due to a mixing of heterogeneous populations. There is some indication that

there are several distinct groups that utilize welfare: one group, which has a

very low probability of leaving welfare and whose rate of exit increases slowly

over time; and a second group, which is more affected by time on the program.

Second, this paper shows that statistical duration dependence is not sufficient

proof of welfare dependence.   A simple model of income generation, with no


                                      1
program dependence effects, can produce simulated welfare spells which exhibit

similar duration dependence to that observed in the actual data.'

     These results contrast with existing literature on AFDC duration. A number

of previous studies have found significant duration dependence, using annual

data on AFDC spells.       This is interpreted as explicit evidence of welfare

dependence.

     The next section of this paper describes the existing econometric litera-

ture on the dynamics of AFDC participation. The third section presents several

theoretical models of welfare dependence.      The fourth section develops the

empirical tools necessary to estimate a time-dependence model of welfare

spells. The fifth section of the paper presents AFDC duration estimates based

on a variety of different functional form assumptions. Models incorporating

heterogeneity and competing risks are also discussed.        The sixth section

presents a simple model of income generation, uses it to create simulated

welfare spells from the data, and compares the resulting duration effects with

those estimated in the actual data. The last section discusses the relationship

between these results and the existing literature, and indicates some of the

questions that this study leaves unanswered.




                                      2
                     2. PAST RESEARCH ON WELFARE DEPENDENCE

      The bul.k of the literature on AFDC participation focuses on point-ir -time

decisions within cross-sectional data.2   It is only in the past few yais that

a literature on the dynamics of AFDC usage has emerged. Two early papers by

Hutchins [1981] and Plotnick [1983] estimate transition models of movements in

and out of AFDC using relatively simple econometric techniques, and ignoring

many problems of spell censoring.    Bane and Eliwood [1984] provide a more

complete descriptive picture of patterns of welfare use, using the PSID data

set over a 12 year period. They do some simple multivariate analysis on spell

length using discrete logistic models.         Ellwood [1986] has updated these

results with 15 years of PSID data, focusing on recidivism and multiple spells.

O'Neill, Bassi and Hannan [1984] provide an comparable analysis to Bane and

Ellwood, both repeating their analysis on the PSID and using the NLS Young

Women's Survey over an 11 year time period. O'Neill, Bassi and Wolfe [1985]

present discrete duration dependence models of AFDC spell length from the NLS.

     These last four papers all discuss the issue of duration dependence in

welfare spells (although it is not a primary focuss of the papers by Ellwood

and Ellwood and Bane), explicitly assuming that duration dependence implies

welfare dependence. Unfortunately, they reach somewhat conflicting conclusions.

Bane and Ellwood find significant duration dependence in their data, although

Ellwood's more recent work finds somewhat smaller, but still significant,

effects.   In contrast, O'Neill, et. al. finds virtually no evidence of duration

dependence, even when using similar PSID data. Ellwood [1986] criticizes these

results, indicating that they are due to a inappropriate definition of AFDC

spells.3   All of the above studies indicate that demographic characteristics

have an important influence on spell length, younger black women with young


                                      3
children being the least likely to leave welfare quickly. In addition, leaving

welfare via marriage appears quantitatively different from leaving via earnings

 increases.

      This paper extends the analysis of these studies in several ways. First,

the existing literature is entirely empirical and does not attempt to explicitly

define and model welfare dependence.         Second, this literature relies on

relatively simple discrete empirical models to estimate duration effects. The

econometric literature provides a variety of more sophisticated ways of

approaching duration dependence issues, emphasizing the importance of testing

distributional assumptions, using continuous time models, and accounting for

heterogeneity in the population.4

     Third, these studies all rely upon annual data.5 This provides information

only on whether a household received any welfare over the year, with no

information about the timing of AFDC receipt. Thus, a household could receive

welfare in January of one year, be off for 22 months, and receive welfare in

December of the following year, and this would be counted as a continuous spell

of welfare.6 The use of annual data can be expected to produce longer and more

continuous spells on AFDC than occur in reality. A major contribution of this

paper is the use of six years of monthly AFDC data in the investigation of

duration dependence.

     Finally, earlier research makes no attempt to relate the empirical

findings on duration dependence to any causal models of income generation and

welfare participation. This paper will simulate a simple model of income

change, which indicates that duration dependence (declining hazard rates) may

result even in the absence of AFDC dependence effects.




                                      4
                         3. MODELS OF WELFARE DEPENDENCE

     The term "welfare dependence" is frequently used in discussions of the

 AFDC program within the popular media, but it is rarely defined. The existing

 academic literature is largely empirical, and has not provided a theoretical

model of how welfare participation is affected as time on welfare increases.

     The standard model of AFDC participation is based on a utility comparison

between the utility obtainable by participating in AFDC (Us,)         and utility

obtainable by not participating in AFDC (Un). Let          =   - U.   A household

chooses to participate if I >   0.    If household utility is determined by

household income and leisure (or hours of work) of the head, then I will be a

function of the range of variables which affect labor market opportunities and

leisure/labor choice.   This point-in-time model of the welfare participation

decision can become the basis for a dynamic model if it is assumed that a

household regularly reassesses its current AFDC status, entering or leaving

AFDC if the utility comparison has changed.

     There are two ways by which current participation in AFDC can have an

impact on future AFDC participation choices, First, current participation may

change future values of the labor market and household variables that enter the

utility function.   Second, participation in AFDC may enter directly into the

utility function, changing the shape or location of the utility curves.

     To describe the first effect, there are two sets of variables that welfare

usage may affect over time.     First, welfare use may change the labor market

opportunities available to a household head in the future.     The most obvious

channel by which this could occur is through reductions in labor market

experience. It is well known that welfare participation reduces labor supply.

Thus, a woman using AFDC in time period t works H hours, where H*t <      H,   the


                                     5
hours she would work in the absence of the AFDC program.             If a woman is on
                                                      ttn        *
welfare from t to t+n, her experience decreases by (H -         H     )   due to welfare

participation. Experience may enter the utility function in several ways.            It

is typically assumed that experience positively affects wage rates, so workers

with less experience have poorer wage opportunities. (To the extent that

low-skilled women tend to take jobs where past work experience matters little,

this effect may not be very large.)   It is also possible that experience may

influence a woman's knowledge of the labor market and of job availability.

There is evidence that one of the strongest effects of job placement and

training programs for welfare participants occurs by providing information on

where jobs are located (Danziger [1981]).

     Second, the use of AFDC may change household composition in a way which

makes future welfare use more likely. There is an ongoing controversy over the

extent to which welfare usage decreases marriage and divorce rates, and

increases family size.    The best evidence appears to indicate that AFDC has

little impact on number of children, but does have a small positive impact on

divorce rates.9   The effect on marriage rates has not been well-determined,

largely because it is very difficult to separate out AFDC effects from other

social and cultural changes.    Since this issue is not the primary concern of

this paper, let me simply say that jf participation in AFDC creates marriage

disincentives or increases household size, then the program increases the

probability of future welfare use by these women.1°         In most states, married

couples are ineligible for AFDC or face much stricter eligibility requirements.

But even if eligibility were not an issue, single parenthood decreases household

income opportunities and thus makes welfare participation a more attractive

option.   To the extent that AFDC participation encourages the continued


                                      6
 maintenance of single-parent households, then AFDC raises the probability that

 these households will use welfare in the future.

         However, while AFDC participation may change the labor market and household

 circumstances of participants and lead to greater future welfare use, this is

 not the model which many people have in mind when they refer to welfare

 dependence. An alternative story claims that use of AFDC changes household

 tastes over time so that people come to rely on and prefer AFDC income to labor

market income.           This requires a model where AFDC participation changes the

 labor-leisure choice locus.

         There are two ways of conceptualizing this form of welfare dependence.

First, one can consider a shift in the location of utility curves over time,

and second, one can consider an actual change in the curvature or shape of the

utility curves.         In these models welfare dependence may occur even when AFDC

hasno impact on the labor market or demographic variables that enter the

utility function.

        Shifts in the location of utility curves can be thought of as changes in

the magnitude of "stigma effects." Moffitt [19831 has modeled welfare choice

by including an additional term, S, into the utility comparison                    defined

above. S refers to an underlying "distaste" for welfare, which Moffitt calls

stigma.        Thus, the decision to participate in welfare can be written as ' =

U,   -S-Un .   AFDC   is chosen if >O. To put this into a dynamic context, consider

that all terms are time subscripted and assume that St is a function of past
                                                    t
time spent on welfare, W*       ,   where   W*,,, = E   I and I is an index function equal
                                          0
to   1 when     >O and equal to 0 when IO. If dS/dW* < 0, then exposure to the

AFDC program over time decreases an individual's "distaste" for the program,

shifting the utility function upward, and raising net utility with welfare


                                                7
 relative to the utility available without welfare. This situation is depicted

graphically in Figure 1.

       The alternative to conceptualizing welfare dependence as a locational

change in the utility function, is to assume that the curvature of the utility

function changes over time.        Utility is frequently parameterized as U(H,Y,X),

where H is hours of work (negative leisure), Y is income, and X is a set of

household characteristics that are assumed to determine the shape of the

underlying function.    An increasing "reliance on welfare" can be considered

equivalent to shifting the utility function in favor of greater leisure and

flattening the labor/leisure tradeoff. Thus at time period t, the utility

available on welfare is U(H* ,Y ,X ,W ), where              H* ,Y ,   and X are the hours

of work, income, and household characteristics of a household that participates

in welfare in time period t, and W*             is defined above.     Utility of nonpar-

ticipants is U(H ,Y ,X, ,W'   ).   (Past welfare participation affects the shape of
the underlying utility and thus enters all utility functions.) The decision to

participate on welfare is based on the comparison

               =   U(Ht,Y*,X*,W*)       —


If   >O then welfare participation is chosen.              The effect of W can be
characterized as d(dU/dH)/dW* <0, and d(dU/dY)/dW* <0, implying that as time on

welfare increases, hours of work appear more onerous relative to the additional

income that they produce. Figure 2 depicts such a change.

      This paper empirically tests the proposition that time spent on welfare

increases the probability of continued welfare participation, holding constant

all variables which are normally assumed to influence utility choice (including

labor market opportunities and household composition.) If I find that AFDC

usage affects participation probabilities even with these other variables held


                                            8
 constant, I can inLerpret this as evidence supportive of those models in which

 AFDC usage influences the shape or location of the utility function independent

 of its effects on other variables. Of course, to the extent that I am not able

 to control fully for all other variables, I will not be able to distinguish

between the above models.

     Before turning to an econometric representation of this model of welfare

dependence, let me highlight two important issues. First,     the    sum     of

previous periods on welfare may not be an accurate representation of how

previous welfare usage influences current usage.     It may be that only recent

AFDC participation affects future welfare use; or that past spells are important

but have less of an impact than current welfare spells. Because of the economet-

ric difficulties of dealing with multiple spells (and because I have less data

on multiple spells),     I will assume that only the current spell of welfare

influences the length of that spell. This is discussed further below.

     Second, there may be many variables which influence welfare participation

behavior which I cannot measure or observe. In this case, evidence that past

welfare usage influences current welfare usage may be due to these unmeasured

variables, and not due to the impact of AFDC itself.        This is the classic

problem of population heterogeneity versus program impacts. If all individuals

have the same probability of entering welfare initially (perhaps because of

random bad luck in the labor market or the marriage market), but if certain

individuals are less motivated than others, then the more motivated individuals

will be more likely to leave welfare sooner. A measured "duration dependence"

effect of AFDC may simply be due to the fact that over time, the group who are

on the program longer are composed of an increasingly greater percentage of

less-motivated individuals.   In this situation, concluding that welfare depen-


                                     9
    dence occurs and is induced by the AFDC program is inaccurate.     The longer

    welfare usage of less-motivated individuals is due solely to their own innate

    characteristics, which were fixed before they entered AFDC. This is a serious

problem in virtually all models of duration dependence, and I will use the

    existing statistical techniques that are designed to uncover the presence of

unmeasured heterogeneity.         However, at some level, this problem cannot be

conclusively resolved and all my results must be interpreted with this in mind.



                  4. ECONOMETRICALLY MODELLING WELFARE DEPENDENCE

        This section provides the econometric background to the empirical results

of the next section. The analysis of time-dependent data has become increasing-

ly common in economics. Among the best background papers are Flinn and Heckman

[1981] and Heckman and Singer [1984a]. Texts, such as Kalbfleisch and Prentice

[1980], are also available. Therefore, this section will lay out the economet-

rics of state dependence quite briefly, focusing on the issues of importance in

analyzing AFDC participation duration.

        Let F* (t,X) represent the cumulative distribution of time spent on

welfare, where X,,       is a time-dependent vector of household characteristics,

labor market opportunities and parameters of the AFDC program.        F*   is the

result of a set of participation decisions, + through +, characterized in

Section 3 above. f(t,X) is the associated density function. Let F(t,X) = 1
-    F (t,X) be the survival function, the percent surviving (still on welfare)

at time t. Define the instantaneous rate of leaving welfare at T=t, condition-

al upon participating to time t, as the hazard rate h(t), where

(1)         h(t,X)      urn
                         8t40

                 =   f(t,X )/(F(t,X   ))

                                           10
                = -dlog(F(t,X    ))/dt.

Integrating, it is clear that
                           +
(2)        F(t,X) =   exp(-Ih(u,X)du)          and

(3)        f(t,X) =   h(t,X)exp(-çh(u,X)du).
Thus, choosing a hazard function, h, is equivalent to choosing a distribution

for t.

      Note that time-dependence in the exogenous (X) variables makes this

integration more complex. However, if time-varying covariates are present, and

the researcher replaces them with constant covariates (such as beginning-of-

spell values) this can induce significant bias into the results (Flinn and

Heckman [19811.) Children's ages and household size will vary over a welfare

spell, as do area labor market opportunities, the parameters of the AFDC

program, and income sources such as alimony or unemployment compensation.

      The models of welfare dependence developed in the previous section imply

that the hazard rate - -   the   conditional probability of leaving welfare as time

on welfare increases --    should decrease over time, ceteris paribus.         The

absence of such an effect will provide evidence against the existence of

program-induced welfare dependence. Given a data set containing information on

the length of AFDC spells, the likelihood that any individual is observed to

use welfare from time 0 to time t is simply f(t,X ).         If the data is right
censored, i.e., if the individual starts a spell of welfare at time 0 and at

time T when data collection ends the individual is still participating in

welfare, the probability of that censored event is simply the value of the

survival function at T, F(T,XT). (Left censored observations are omitted from

the sample, as discussed below.) Thus, the estimated likelihood function for

the entire population is


                                          11
                         4.
 (4)        r f (t,X )   ' F (t,X )
 where there are n1 completed spells of welfare observed and n2 right censored

 spells.

       The choice of the appropriate functional form for the hazard function is a

 much-debated topic. Most commonly, people choose hazards which integrate into

 tractable functional forms for the distribution, F(t,X). Since the results

may vary with functional assumptions, I will compare a variety of parametric

and nonparametric distributional assumptions for the hazard in the empirical

work below.

                              POPULATION HETEROGENE ITY

       The potential for unobserved heterogeneity among the sample population was

discussed above. If there are variables which I cannot include in the exogenous

vector of characteristics, and which are correlated with AFDC usage, I will

derive inappropriate estimates of duration dependence if this heterogeneity is

not taken into account. Heckman and Singer [1984a} prove that the presence of

population heterogeneity induces a negative bias in the hazard function,

potentially producing estimates of a decreasing hazard when the true underlying

hazard is flat or increasing. To account for heterogeneity, write the hazard

function as h(t,X ,), where e represents a set of unobservable variables. The

density of the underlying distribution of time spent on welfare is

(5)        F(t,X ,e) =   exp(-fh(u,X O)du)    g(e)de,

where g(8) is the distribution of the underlying unobservables. Given both a

distribution for t and a distribution for e, one can estimate the density F.

However, even more uncertainty exists over the appropriate distributional

characterization of 8 than exists over the appropriate distribution for t.1

Most commonly, some form of a mixing distribution is assumed, in which the


                                       12
 parameters that characterize the size and shape of the hazard function are

 allowed to take two or more values, and these values, as well as their associat-

 ed probabilities are estimated as part of a maximum likelihood procedure. (See

Heckman and Singer [l984a, 1984b].)     I will describe below the exact form of the

heterogeneity model estimated in this paper. However, it should be noted that

the results will be dependent upon the form of heterogeneity which is assumed.

     With respect to the issue of time spent on welfare, the concepts of

duration dependence and heterogeneity are rather inextricably linked in the

data, and at some level it is not clear that attempting to separate them out

makes a great deal of sense.     It is quite possible that AFDC usage changes

preferences by affecting these unobservable variables (such as motivation.) In

this case, what we observe as duration dependence in the data may indeed be due

to differences in the unobservables -   - but   these unobservables themselves are

changed by the AFDC program. Alternatively, since we do not observe all women

from their very first spell of welfare, but have a cross section of women over

a given six-year period, it is possible that exposure to AFDC prior to the

beginning of the sample is the cause of the existing heterogeneity.       In this

case also, controlling for the heterogeneity does not eliminate a "bias" from

the true duration effect, but rather eliminates a duration dependence effect

that appears to be part of the unobservable only because our observation period

for welfare spells is too short. The conclusion is that while the heterogeneity

adjustments provide interesting additional information about the duration data,

they are difficult to interpret; the duration estimates done in the absence of

heterogeneity corrections may be the appropriate results to consider.

                             COMPETING RISK MODELS

    Once participating in the AFDC program, there are several ways by which to


                                      13
 leave. A woman can take a job which raises her income above the AFDC eligibi-

 lity boundary; she can experience an increase in non-labor income (such as

alimony or disability assistance) that puts her above the income eligibility

 limit; her children can pass age 18, eliminating her AFDC eligibility; or she

can marry, also eliminating her AFDC eligibility. It is not clear that these

ways of leaving AFDC should all be modeled in a similar manner. The determin-

ants of leaving AFDC via marriage may be quite different from the determinants

of leaving by increased earnings.                     This situation can be handled with a

competing risk model, in which there are multiple ways for a welfare spell to

terminate, each characterized by a different hazard function. Let h1 (t,X ) be

the hazard function associated with leaving welfare via an earnings increase,

and h2 (t,X) be the hazard associated with leaving via another route. Then the

overall probability that a woman will end a welfare spell at time t, given it

has lasted from time 0, is

(6)         hcr(t,Xt)          h1(t,X.) + h2(t,X).

The survival function in a competing risk model becomes

(7)        F (t,X) = exp(-h r                 (u,X )du).
                                        0
The distribution of a completed spell that ends for reason m (ml,2) is

(8)         fm(t,Xt) =     hm(t,X)          exp(-rha(u,X)du).
                                   0
The likelihood function for the sample is
          (11                  vt_
(9)        'Ti
                 f1   (t,X )   r     f2 (t,X ) 'ii F rk (t,X )

where n1 individuals leave welfare via earnings increases, n2 individuals leave

via other changes, and n3 individuals are censored.

                 ALTERNATIVE DISTRIBUTIONAL ASSUNPTIONS FOR THE HAZARD

      As noted above, estimated duration models are often quite sensitive to the

functional form assumed for the hazard function. As a result, I will compare


                                                 14
 estimates based on a variety of different assumptions. This section briefly

presents each of the four hazard functions that are used below.

       (a) eibu11 Distribution.           Because of its mathematical ease, the most

commonly used form for F(t,X )       is   a Weibull distribution.         In this case the
hazard function is12

(10)        h(t,X) =   p*exp(J3)*(exp(yJ3)*t)P    1




(The constant, 13 ,    provides   a measure of the second Weibull parameter, lambda.)

If p<l (p>l) the Weibull hazard monotonically decreases (increases).                If p=l

the Weibull collapses to the exponential distribution which is characterized by

a constant hazard.

       (b) Log-Logistic Distribution.           The log-logistic is computationally

convenient and more flexible than the Weibull. Its hazard function is

(11)       h(t,X) =   p*exp(X3)*(exp(y13)t)P     '1(1 + (exp(X13)*t)P).

If p>l,      the log-logistic hazard increases from zero to a maximum at

t(p-1)1 "/exp(B0 ), and decreases thereafter.

       (c) Flinn-Heckmart Hazard. Flinn and Heckman use a form for the hazard

function which they derive from a particularly flexible general function.              In

their data applications, this becomes

(12)        h(t,X) = exp(130 + t1t + t2t2 + X13).

Typically used with t and t-squared, this imposes a clear quadratic form on the

hazard, although higher powers of t can be included, of course.

       (d) Continuous Stepwise Nonparametric Hazard. To allow the data as far as

possible to reveal the underlying hazard without imposition of a functional

form, I estimate a simple stepwise hazard, allowing the hazard function to take

on a series of constant values as t increases:




                                          .15
(13)                   h(t,X) = c1     if t2,       h(t,X)    c6 if

                       h(t,X) = c2     if           h(t,X)    c7 if

                       h(t,X)       c3 if           h(t,X) = c8 if

                       h(t,X) = c4 if               h(t,X) = c9 if

                       h(t,X) = c5 if

where c1      exp(1301 +   KB).'3    A larger number of steps were tried, but nine

appears to fit the data reasonably well. Increases in the number of steps do

not change the estimates of 13, and significantly increase the cost of estima-

tion.      This stepwise hazard is completely non-parametric, and I will rely on a

comparison between it and other hazard models to determine how well the others

describe the data.



                      5. EMPIRICAL RESULTS OF DURATION MODELS

        The data used in this study is the control group from the Seattle/ Denver

Income Maintenance Experiments (SINE/DINE).'4 The SINE/DIME Monthly Composite

provides monthly information on income and labor market variables for a 6 year

period, 1970-1975 in Seattle and 1971-1976 in Denver. From the control group I

extract all women who head households containing children under the age of 17

at some point during the 6-year period.          This is the group of potential AFDC

users.     There are 1121 such women in the sample. Of this group, 714 receive

AFDC income for at least 1 month over the sample.            While I can observe most

women for the entire 72 months15, few are female heads with children (i.e.,

potentially eligible for AFDC) throughout the sample.                Changes in marital

status and household composition take women out of the eligible category.

       While 72 months of data is a significant length of time over which to


                                            16
 observe household behavior, it is still a shorter time period than one would

 ideally want. Because I have no pre-sample information in the data, any spells

 which are in progress in the first period are left censored and are omitted

 from this analysis.16 Thus, I am limited to spells that start within the time

 period of the sample. The results will necessarily be biased by lack of

 information on very long spells --   they   are either both right and left censored

and do not appear in the data at all, or they are right censored and provide

only limited information to the likelihood function.

     This section estimates duration models of AFDC receipt using the first

observed spell of welfare for each household starting within the sample period.

There are 508 such spells in the data, of which 185 (36%) are right censored.

The analysis assumes that only the current spell on welfare affects spell

duration.   Of course, for households in the midst of multiple spells this may

not be a good assumption.'7

     Table 1 provides information on the distribution of these welfare spells.

Column 1 looks at the length distribution of the 323 completed spells. 15% of

them end within 2 months while 62% end within a year after they start.         (The

average length is a little over a year.) Column 3 indicates the length of the

185 censored spells. While Table 1 shows evidence of a large number of short

spells, no conclusions on spell length can be drawn from it, since both

completed and censored spells must be jointly accounted for to adequately

estimate expected duration.

     One justification given for using annual data to study AFDC dynamics is

that women may move in and out of AFDC for one or two months due to administra-

tive problems, and these should not be counted as real AFDC spell endings. In

my data there is little evidence of this. Out of 605 total observed spell


                                       17
endings in the data, in only 20 cases do women return to AFDC after 1 month.

In 16 cases they return after 2 months, and in 14 cases they return after 3

months.   In other words, while there are some women experiencing only short

periods off AFDC, this is not a predominant pattern. Furthermore, if one looks

at the 50 short spells off AFDC, 29 of them are readily explainable: the

household clearly has increased income in these months, either through employ-

ment, or because of increases in other income sources. Thus, there is little

evidence of "welfare churning" in this data, and little justification for

assuming that brief periods off welfare are not real spell endings.18

     Table 2 looks at the causes behind spell beginnings and endings. 40% of

the spells begin immediately after a change in marital or household status;

only 8% begin with the birth of a child. 52% begin within a household that was

already potentially eligible (i.e., female-headed with children) before ?LFDC

receipt began.

     Looking at spell endings, 36% of the spells are censored, and I therefore

do not know how they end. In 18% of the cases women get married and in 7% of

the cases their children grow past the age of eligibility. 39% of the cases

leave AFDC although they remain female-headed households. These are the cases

which either work their way off AFDC or who find other sources of income.

     Table 3 presents the means of the variables used to estimate AFDC spell

duration. Variables which do not vary over a spell are race, education, and

age at the beginning of the spell. The remainder of the variables can change

as the spell progresses. In Table 3, I report the mean numbers of children and

other income at the beginning of the spell, and the mean unemployment rate and

maximum benefit payment over the entire 6 years.       Other income refers to

non-AFDC, non-labor market income.        For these women it is small (about-


                                     18
 $28/month), and mainly composed of alimony payments, and other sources of

 public income such as social security or disability payments. Unemployment

 rates are for the Seattle and the Denver SMSAs. Benefit maximums are specific

 to each household size in Washington or Colorado. These vary annually if state

 legislatures readjust the rates, and they vary monthly as they are impacted by

inflation.    For both states they tend to decrease over time, as inflation

erosions are larger than legislative increases. All inflation adjustments are

based on the CPI for the Seattle SMSA, or on the average urban CPI for the

nation (for Denver data, which lacks its own CPI during these years.)   Table 3

shows a population that is disproportionately non-white and poorly educated,

with little outside income support.

     Table 4 presents estimates of the probability of exit from an AFDC spell,

using the four functional forms for the hazard presented above. Five of the

variables in the estimation (children under 6, total children, other income,

unemployment, and benefit maximums) are explicitly allowed to vary over time.2°

     All functional forms show quite similar coefficient patterns for the seven

exogenous variables.2' Age and education of the head have significant and

positive effects (i.e., they increase the probability of leaving welfare.)

Race has a significant negative effect.    The impact of children is negative,

but only the total number of children shows significance. Other income

significantly increases the probability of leaving welfare, while the unemploy-

ment coefficient is negative but uniformly insignificant.      The maximum AFDC

benefit payment is generally positive, a counterintuitive result, but the
coefficients are insignificant.       While other research typically finds that

benefit levels are very important in determining welfare participation, much of

the power of this variable comes from the large differences in benefit levels


                                      19
across states within a national data sample.   I have observations from only two

locations, within which the variance in benefit levels over time is relatively

small.2 2

     The Weibull distribution has a P parameter of .92, very close to one.

(Recall that P1 in a Weibull distribution implies a constant hazard.) Thus,

the Weibull indicates only weak duration dependence in the data.     A graph of

the hazard function (Figure 3) confirms this.23 After a small initial fall,

the conditional probability of leaving welfare is almost flat.     (Note that the

hazard rates graphed in figures 3 through 9 are directly interpretable as the

conditional probability of leaving AFDC in a given month, expressed in percent-

age terms.)

     In contrast, the log-logistic distribution has a P of 1.26, which in this

distribution indicates a rising hazard (a increasing probability of leaving

welfare) for 6 months, and a falling hazard thereafter. Figure 4 graphs this

function. The likelihood value indicates that the log-logistic distribution

fits the data much better than the Weibull.

     The Flinn-Heckman hazard shows a somewhat different duration pattern: the

hazard rate decreases from the first month, but after 45 months it levels off

and begins to slowly increase, as Figure 5 shows. This pattern appears largely

due to the restrictions of the quadratic form on the time variable.       I have

experimented with the inclusion of higher orders of the time variable in the

model. While third or fourth order terms are not significant, their inclusion

does decrease the magnitude of the upturn induced in the data by the quadratic

time variable.24   The Flinn-Heckman distribution is inferior to the log-

logistic in overall fit.

     Given the divergence in duration results between the three distributionally


                                     20
defined hazards, the nonparameteric stepwise hazard should provide useful

additional information on the true form of the underlying data. As described

above, this model allows the data to fit its own hazard function across 9

constants. The estimated hazard function (see Figure 6) appears closest to the

log-logistic hazard. The hazard remains essentially flat for the first 8

months, then decreases, but soon flattens out and is essentially constant after

18 months. The likelihood value confirms the similarity between the log-

logistic and the nonparametric estimates.

     There are several conclusions from Table 4.        First, it is clear that

household characteristics are very important in determining how quickly a woman

will leave welfare. White women who are older when their welfare spell starts,

who have higher education, who have higher alternative sources of income, fewer

children and fewer young children move off welfare faster. These results are

entirely consistent with earlier research. Table 5 uses the coefficients from

the non-parametric stepwise distribution in Table 4 to simulate the effect of

changes in race, education and number of children on expected spell length and

exit probabilities from AFDC.    This table further confirms the importance of

household characteristics on AFDC usage.

     Second, functional assumptions are clearly very important and produce

different patterns for the hazard function. Among the parametric distributions,

the log-logistic clearly fits the data best, and produces results very similar

to the nonparametric estimates.       This makes the log-logistic an appealing

functional form, particularly since it is much less computationally expensive

than the nonparameteric stepwise estimates (which must estimate 9 parameters to

describe the hazard, rather than just 1.)

    Third, the hazard rate which best fits the data, is one which is flat (or


                                     21
 rising) for about the first 8 months of welfare use. This falls between 9 and

 18 months and then is essentially constant for all longer spells. Recall that a

 flat or rising hazard contradicts any assumption of welfare dependence.

However, a falling hazard for some period of time after the initial months on

welfare is consistent with a welfare dependence story, in which several months

of participation in AFDC creates reliance on the program.



                        ADDING HETEROGENEITY TO THE MODEL

       As noted above, the observed fall in the hazard rates may be due to

differences in the unobservable characteristics of households. If one group

has a high probability of leaving welfare and a second group has a low probabi-

lity of leaving, over time those on welfare will be more and more likely to

belong to the second group. A single estimated hazard rate will appear to fall

over time as the AFDC population mix changes, even if there are no dependence

effects for either population. Using the above results, I shall assume that

the underlying hazard rate is log-logistic, and characterize population

heterogeneity in a nonparametric manner.

       Assume that the unobservable is reflected in the constant, so that n

heterogeneous groups will have constants e1 ..       e.     The probability that an

individual is in any group i is ii1,   where   Z   = 1.     The appropriate hazard

rate for a member of group i is thus

(14)          h(t,x ,e) =   p*exp(e1+XJ3)*(exp(9+XB)*)P          1
I will estimate a heterogeneity model in which there are three groups, whose 13

coefficients are identical, but whose constants vary. The probability that an

individual is in group 1 or 2 will be estimated as ¶1     and   ¶12 .   (113   =   l-11   1T2   )2 S
       Table 6 presents the results for this heterogeneity model. The coeff 1-


                                       22
 cients on the exogenous variables are quite similar to those presented in Table

4.   However, the allowance for different underlying constants clearly produces

evidence of significant heterogeneity.       Individuals are quite likely to fall

into the first group (probability 52%) or the second group (probability 38%).

There is only a small chance they will be in the third group (probability 9%).

The likelihood function indicates that this model fits the data better than the

simple log-logistic model in Table 4 with no heterogeneity.

     Figure 7 graphs the three hazard functions resulting from the estimates in

Table 6.   (Recall this graph is constructed for the mean individual. Hazard

rates for women with different characteristics would show similar patterns, but

different magnitudes.) If an individual falls into the first group, she enters

AFDC with virtually no probability of leaving, and has a very slowly increasing

hazard which remains low throughout the 72 months.         Clearly this group --   a
majority of the population --   will   rely on welfare a long time. However, there

is no evidence of duration dependence in these spells; i.e., there is no

evidence that this long-term usage is related to time on the program.

     If the individual is part of the second group, she is increasingly likely

to leave AFDC in the first few months (the hazard rises to over 15%); but after

10 months over 60% of this group is off welfare and the hazard begins to fall

steadily, down to around 5%.      The last group, which is least common in the

data, leaves AFDC very early and very fast; their initial probability of

leaving is well over 50%.       Over 90% of this group is off welfare within 4

months. The hazard falls precipitously at this point, as the few that remain

then leave more slowly. The falling hazard rates in these last two groups may

be interpreted as consistent with the welfare dependence models presented

above. However, the fact that the hazard begins to fall only after the majority


                                        23
 of each group has left welfare creates the suspicion that this hazard could be

 created by a model with no welfare dependence effects at all. Once the

 majority of a population has crossed an income threshold, it is statistically

 quite common (given an underlying distribution in propensity for income change)

 for the remainder to cross it more and more slowly.     This possibility will be

 discussed further below.

      The problem with heterogeneity models, of course, is that there is no way

 to identify which group an individual belongs to --   the   distinction is based on

an assumed unobservable variable (all observable variables are already included

in the estimation.) It appears that there is some large group which enters

AIFDC with virtually no alternative opportunities, for whom the possibility of

leaving improves slowly over time, but who will be on welfare a long time.

There are other groups who do have ways of escaping AFDC early, but who become

less and less likely to leave AFDC as time passes. At least part of the falling

hazard estimated in Table 4 is due to the mixing of these different groups, not

to program dependence effects.    Better understanding of these results will

require better data which allows exploration of the nature of that which is

currently being termed 'unobservable.'t



                            A COMPETING RISK MODEL

     Given the uncertainty of interpretation with the heterogeneity results, an

alternative specification is to estimate a competing risk model. In some

sense, the competing risk model is a very restricted form of heterogeneity, in

which heterogeneous groups are explicitly identified by the manner in which

they leave AFDC. Unfortunately,    neither the simple log-logistic model of

Table 4, nor the heterogeneity model of Table 6 are nested within the competing


                                     24
 risk model, thus the likelihood functions will not be directly comparable.

As before, I choose to work with a log-logistic specification for the competing

 risk hazard functions.2

      Table 7 presents estimates of a three-way competing risk model. The first

hazard is estimated for those who leave AFDC when they marry. The second group

leaves welfare through an earnings increase, although their potential eligibi-

lity continues (i.e., they remain female-headed households with children). The

third group also remains female-headed, but leaves via some other change than

earnings.2

     The coefficients on the exogenous variables differ significantly across

these three groups.      The likelihood of leaving AFDC through marriage is

strongly and positively affected by age and strongly negatively affected by

unemployment and race.     This is consistent with other evidence showing that

poor black women are less likely to marry.       In contrast, the probability of

leaving AFDC by earnings increases is primarily affected by education level and

number of children.      Being nonwhite has little effect on the probability of

this type of spell ending -   - the   negative effects of race in the earlier

aggregate models appear to have been solely due to the lower propensity of

black women to marry, rather than their lower probability of leaving welfare by

other means.   This is a result with potentially important policy implications.

Since the third group is a mixture of "other reasons for leaving" it is not

surprising that few explanatory variables are significant. Only other income

shows positive effects, indicating that women with high other income sources

while on welfare are more likely to leave through future increases in this

income.

     The three hazard rates estimated in these competing risk models are


                                       25
 graphed in Figure 8 for the mean individual. The hazard rate for the probabi-

 lity of leaving AFDC via marriage is very low and virtually flat. The probabi-

 lity of leaving by other means is also low (although higher than marriage.) It

decreases slightly over time. In contrast, the probability of leaving AFDC via

 income increases is higher, especially in the initial months, and falls

steadily, from about 1.8% to 1%.        Overall, the competing risk estimation

clearly indicates that the process of leaving AFDC through household changes is

quite different from leaving via an income change, both because of differences

in the coefficients, and differences in the shape of the duration parameters.

Note that the hazard rates are additive in the competing risk model (each

individual is "at risk" of each of the categories), which means that the

magnitude of each hazard rate will necessarily be lower on average than those

estimated in previous models.

     The hazard rate of most interest in the competing risk model is that for

leaving welfare via earnings increases.28       While the hazard rates in earlier

models showed some increases in the early months on AFDC,     the   competing risk

hazard for earnings change clearly has no such property. The hazard decreases

steadily over time, although the rate of decrease is very small.      The lack of

an initial "rising period" in the competing risk earnings hazard seems puzzling

in relation to the earlier estimates.     However, there are reasons to believe

that the competing risk estimates are somewhat less reliable. First, each

hazard rate in the competing risk model is estimated on much less data (only

those who leave via that category.)       This means that the earnings hazard is

determined primarily by those 108 spells which end with earnings increases;

this is probably not enough spells to adequately determine the shape of a 72-

period hazard rate.29 Since the hazard rates in Tables 4 and 6 were estimated


                                     26
from a much larger set of data, they should be more reliable.

        Second, one can calculate a goodness of fit measure to compare the

estimates in Tables 6 and 7 (given at the bottom of these tables).           This is

based on a Pearson chi-squared statistic, comparing the actual versus the

predicted number of people who either complete a spell of a given length, or

are censored after a given period of time (144 potential categories.) The

heterogeneity model has a clearly lower goodness of fit number, indicating that

the predicted fit from this model is closer to the pattern of the actual data.3°

        Several conclusions result from the estimates in Tables 6 and 7.      First,

there is evidence that some significant degree of heterogeneity exists in the

data.      This is one reason for falling hazard rates in the aggregate data.

Second, for a significant number of people (group one in the heterogeneity

estimates, and those at risk of marriage or other changes in the competing risk

model) there is no evidence of time-dependent effects in their propensity to

leave AFDC.     For these AFDC participants, the data do not support a model of

welfare dependence. Third, for other groups, the conditional probabiLity of

leaving AFDC does vary over time. It may be flat or rising in the early months

on the program, but in all models, there is some significant portion of time

over which the hazard rate falls for some AFDC participants. For these groups,

this falling hazard is consistent with a welfare dependence story.          Finally,

the parameter estimates from the competing risk model indicate that race is an

important variable in explaining welfare usage because it is correlated to

different marriage probabilities, not because of its effect on other variables.



           6. A SIMJJLAThD MODEL OF AFDC PARTICIPATION WITHOUT DEPENDENCE

    We started this paper by asserting that a declining hazard was consistent


                                       27
with a model of duration dependence.        Had we found no evidence of declining

hazards, that would have been a strong argument against welfare dependence as

we have defined it.       However, we have found evidence that hazard rates for

leaving AFDC do decline, although not over all spell lengths and not for all

individuals. The next step is to ask whether this is sufficient evidence to

conclude that some degree of welfare dependence exists.          I will investigate

this question by building a model of income change which is unaffected by

participation in AFDC.     I can simulate expected income over time for each of my

AFDC households from the SINE/DIME data. The AFDC participation decision will

be based on a simple comparison of whether simulated income is above or below

the breakeven point.31 This will produce a set of simulated welfare spells.

This requires moving from the purely data-descriptive techniques of hazard

rates, to an explicit model of income dynamics.         If the hazard rates which

describe the data in the above models can be duplicated in the simulated data

without assuming any time-dependence effects of welfare participation, then

those declining hazards are not sufficient proof of welfare dependence.3 2

       Assume that earned income moves over time according to the autocorrelated

model:

(15)            = Yperm   + e, where e = ae. 1 + v
Y is earned income in period t; Yperm is long-run expected permanent earned

income; and v is a normally distributed random error term with mean zero. In

this model, earnings diverge from their long-run level as random shocks occur

and slowly die out over time.       Given a starting value, e1 ,     an estimate of

Yperm, and estimates of a and cc, the variance of v, I can generate a stream of

income expectations for a household.         If the starting point for the model is

the first month of AFDC participation, the expected income for a household in


                                       28
 each succeeding period can be generated and compared with the AFDC cut-off

 point for that household. When expected income crosses the cut-off point, the

 household is      assumed to   leave AFDC.    This creates a sample of simulated AFDC

 spells; the estimated hazard from these simulated spells        can be compared with

the hazard estimated from the actual           data. Note that these simulated spells

have no welfare dependence effects; the generated stream         of household earnings

is unaffected by AFDC participation.

     The attached appendix contains a description of how the starting values

for this simulation are produced and           describes the simulation more fully.

Briefly, I use estimates for a and o             derived from a very similar data set.

Yperm is calculated for each household,        using coefficients estimated from the

monthly earnings of a sample of female-headed households in the SIME/DIME who

do not participate in welfare.         (Yperm is determined by the typical set of

household characteristics which enter most human capital wage equations.)

Households are assigned their actual observed earned income in the first month

on AFDC (Y1).        Income in the second period is calculated using equation (15),

where e1 =   Y1   -Yperm. A random number generator which selected from a normal

distribution with variance         was used to generate values for the random income

shock, v, in each period.

     For much of my sample, this model implies that an AFDC spell starts with a

large negative "shock't to income. (Many women have zero earnings during their

first month on AFDC, so Yl-Yperni-Yperm.)           Over time, the earnings stream

should converge back towards Yperm. An AFDC spell ends when estimated income

exceeds the estimated breakeven point for a household. Spells are censored if

they are still in progress when the SINE/DIME sample period is over. (Each

spell is assumed to start at its actual calendar time.)


                                          29
      The spells generated by this simulation are summarized in Table 8, which

 can be compared to the actual data in Table 1.   188 spells were censored (very

 close to the 185 censored spells in the actual data.) The expected length of a

 completed spell is somewhat longer in the simulated data (20 months) than in

 the actual data (13 months).

     This simulated spell data is used to estimate a log-logistic model of AFDC

 duration, identical to that presented in Column 2 of Table 4.    The results of

 this estimation are in Appendix Table A. Given the nature of the simulation,

 it is not surprising that most exogenous variables have insignificant coeffi-

cients. Figure 9 provides a graph of the resulting hazard function.            For

comparison, Figure 9 also graphs the earnings hazard from the competing risk

model and the hazard function from the simple log-logistic model in Table 4.

     The hazard function resulting from these simulated welfare spells is very

revealing.     The hazard has a somewhat similar shape to that estimated by the

log-logistic model in Table 4, although it starts at a lower point and rises

more slowly.     It rises for 24 months, then falls steadily throughout the rest

of the period.34 The reason behind this decline is clear; a significant number

of AFDC participants cross the income threshold out of AFDC in the initial

months, but over time, those who are left cross at a decreasing rate. Those

whose permanent income is close to (or below) the breakeven point, or those who

receive further negative income shocks, remain on AFDC longer.   Over the range

in which it decreases, the rate of decrease is very similar to the decrease

observed in the earnings hazard from the competing risk model; the two lines

essentially parallel each other at different magnitudes.

    The primary conclusion from this simulation is that a declining hazard has

no necessary relationship to welfare dependence. Indeed, a very simple model


                                     30
 of income change with no AFDC dependence effects can produce a declining hazard

 that is somewhat similar to those hazards estimated from models using actual

 data.      This simulation casts doubt on whether the fact that hazard rates do

 decline for some participants over certain spell lengths, provides any evidence

 of welfare dependence. It also calls into question previous studies of welfare

 dependence which take declining hazards to be proof that welfare dependence

 exists.

                                 7. FINAL COMMENTS

         A few comments need to be made on the interpretation of these results and

their relationship to previous work on welfare dependence. In comparison to

Bane and Eliwood, I      find shorter spells of welfare use3   and less evidence of

duration dependence. Many of the estimated hazard rates in this paper show

either no evidence of duration dependence, or show only a very moderate

decrease over time. In large part, this is probably due to the use of monthly

data versus annual data, which smooths together multiple spells of welfare. In

addition, these differences must also be due to the shorter time period of my

data and the focus on single spells of welfare.          If Ellwood is correct in

finding greater duration dependence over a longer time period, then results

from multi-spell models should show more evidence of duration dependence.

     The simulation results in this paper indicate the danger of drawing causal

inferences from purely data-descriptive techniques.         Even the presence of

significant duration dependence in welfare spells may not reflect any program-

induced effects. This highlights the need to build and test explicit causal

models of welfare participation in future research.

     It is important to note that one should         interpret the results in this

paper as indicating that few women stay on welfare a long time.      In fact, the


                                       31
heterogeneity estimates indicate that the probability of leaving AFDC is very

low for more than half of the sample; these women will clearly rely on welfare

as a long-term source of income support. The primary point of this paper is

that these long spells are not created nor lengthened by the use of AFDC

itself.   The results of this paper indicate that the welfare population is

exceptionally diverse (a conclusion also emphasized by Eliwood), with some women

leaving welfare quickly, while others have few non-welfare opportunities.

Further evidence of the fact that some women have few options outside welfare

comes from the calculation of permanent income which I made for every household

in order to complete the simulation in the previous section. For almost 1/3 of

the households, estimated permanent income levels were below AFDC breakeven

levels.

     Finally, this study also emphasizes the close links between AFDC usage and

household composition change --    particularly   marriage and remarriage rates.

This issue deserves a great deal more research attention than it has received.

Until we have better models of household formation and change, we will be

unable to estimate better causal models of AFDC recipiency.




                                    32
 1. For instance, see Moffitt [1983], Ellwood and Bane [1984], or Blank [1985].

 2. See Moffitt [1983] or Blank [1985]. Plant [1984] looks primarily at single
 participation decisions, but has some multi-period analysis.

 3. When Ellwood redoes his analysis using O'Neill, et. al. 's definitions for
 AFDC spells, he eliminates most (but not all) of the differences in results.

 4. The use of discrete duration models may be particularly questionable when
 the welfare spell is based on annual data, a clear aggregation.

 5. One exception is a study by Feaster, Gottschalk and Jakubson [1985] which
 uses monthly information on AFDC recipients in Wisconsin to investigate the
 impact of the 1981 legislative changes on length of AFDC spells.

6. Bane and Ellwood [1985] and Eliwood [1986] test the effect of not counting
years when the amount of welfare received is very small and find little change.
in their results.

7. Of course, it would be preferable to have monthly data available for as long
a period of time as the annual panel studies.      My data will provide less
information on multiple spells and on long spells, but It should provide more
precise information on AFDC usage within the six year period that it covers.
The prospect is bleak for obtaining a longer sample of monthly data than the 72
months available here. The newly-developed SIPP panel follows households for
36 months before rotating them out of the sample.

8. An exception is Gottschalk [1986], who investigates the impact of tax and
transfer levels on welfare duration in a dynamic model.

9. The most complete study of this issue is Ellwood and Bane [1984].      For a
discussion of earlier literature, see Bishop [1980] and McDonald and Sawhill [1978].

10. Note that this paper only deals with a situation where actual time spent on
AFDC affects these variables. An alternative model might assume that it is the
potential availability of AFDC which affects marriage propensities. This
requires a different set of empirical tests and is not addressed in this paper.


11. In particular, one cannot produce nonparametric estimates of both g(e) and
f(t); at least one of the distributions has to take an explicit assumed form.
Heckman and Singer suggest letting the unobservable take a nonparametric form.
This is the approach used in this paper. However, Trussell and Richards [19851
indicate that this is just as subject to distributional biases as when the
distribution of t is estimated nonparametrically.

12. For the remainder of this section,    I drop the time subscripts on the X
vector for notational simplicity.

13. This is the equivalent of estimating a set of exponential distributions (in
which the hazard is constant) over different values of t. One could also
arrive at this model by replacing the continuous time variables in (12) with

                                     33
dummies for different values of t.

14. SIME/DIME was not a random sample of the populations but had an upper-income
cutoff point at about median income. This will exclude all women who were in a
high-income household at the start of the sample. Since I am interested only
in AFDC spells, to the extent that few women move from high-income households
onto AFDC, this will not greatly affect my results. SIME/DIME also excluded
those for whom labor market participation was not possible (such as the
disabled.)

15. There are some who leave the sample early, including migrants. Moving from
the control group into the experimental group is also considered equivalent to
leaving the sample in this study.

16. While there are techniques to adjust for left-censored data, they are
cumbersome and often arbitrary.

17. While I observe some multiple spells in my data, I choose not to work with
them.   First, they are highly selected, since the sample length permits only
short-duration, closely spaced multiple spells to appear.    Because I have no
information outside of the 6-year sample period, I have no basis on which to
treat the observed multiple spell participants differently from other partici-
pants, whose earlier or later spells may be censored or outside the sample.
Second, the appropriate model for multiple spells requires a model of time both
on and off AFDC (so that the probability of re-entering AFDC for a new spell
can be estimated.) This is more than a simple 2-state model, since time off
AFDC may include marriage,, higher earnings, periods without children, etc.
Given the complexity of this task, together witi the data problems, this paper
is limited to an analysis of single spells.

18. I have eliminated the remaining 21 inexplicable short spells off welfare by
recoding the data to show a continuous spell. (The results are unaffected by
this recoding.)

19. The data in Table 2 were derived by looking at various causal variables for
6 months before a spell began and 6 months after it ended. Changes in marital
or household status or in number of children were coded first. In the remaining
data, if both labor market and other income changed, coding was determined on
the basis of which involved the larger dollar change.

20. When these five variables are set at their beginning-of-spell values and no
time variance is allowed, quite different coefficients are estimated, both in
value and significance.      Likelihood values are significantly lower without
time-varying exogenous variables.

21. The coefficient values across columns in Table 4 are similar, but since
each column is based on a different functional form, they are not directly
comparable.  However, elasticity estimates for the variables also show very
similar patterns across all functional forms. This is not surprising, as the
exogenous variables enter each distribution in a similar manner, through the
term exp(I3X).


                                     34
 22. This variable also appears to act partially as a proxy for differences
 between the two locations. If a dummy variable is included for location in
 Seattle, its coefficient is insignificant, but the coefficient on benefit
 maximums becomes even smaller.

 23. Figures 3 through 9 graph the hazard rates for a black woman in Seattle of
 mean age (27), mean other income ($28/month), with 11 years of education and
 two children, one age 3 and the other age 7. Unemployment and benefit maximums
 are also set equal to their mean levels, so the graphs indicate expected hazard
 rates for the mean individual, holding all exogenous variables constant.

 24. The lack of many spells longer than 45 months means that this long-term
 upturn in the hazard is very imprecisely estimated.

25. Increasing the number of groups results in convergence problems. Using
only two groups, I have tested for heterogeneity in the shape parameters (the
p's) and in the 13's.    There is no evidence of heterogeneity in the 13's. One
can estimate a two-group model in which both the constants and the p's vary
(this model will not converge for three groups.) However, the resulting two
hazard rates look very much like those presented here:   one is virtually flat
and very low, and the other peaks sharply at a high level and then falls
rapidly. Probability weights are evenly spread between the two groups. This
estimate is not presented since it does not provide a great deal of additional
information to the three-group model with varying constants shown here.

26. Since there is no heterogeneity in this model, one could use a non-paramet-
ric procedure.   However, the number of simultaneously-estimated parameters in
the competing risk model is large, and adding. multiple shape parameters for
each hazard would require unacceptably large amounts of computer time and money.

27. This includes those whose income increases by non-earned income changes,
those whose children leave home, and those whose reasons for leaving are unknown.

28. The virtual flatness of the hazards for exiting AFDC through marriage or
other changes indicates that there is no issue of time dependence in these
types of exits.

29. I have attempted to estimate a competing risk model, with heterogeneity in
the probability of leaving via earnings increases. This model has serious
instability problems, largely related to the very few observations from which
it is trying to estimate heterogeneity effects within the earnings hazard.

30. This measure is    E (Actual - Predicted1   )2 /Predicted1 ,   i   1,144. Note
that while this measure is indicative of the comparative fit of both models, it
is not a reliable statistic since its distribution is unknown. It does not
provide a X2 statistic since it does not account for the fact that the predicted
model is based on estimated parameters. Unfortunately, with the censoring in
the data, individuals each have a different number of periods during which they
are "at risk". Good of fit statistics which correct for the this problem (see
Heckman [1983]) all require symmetrical data, in which each individual can
potentially fall into every cell.


                                    35
31. This is similar to the model of AFDC participation that is presented in
Ashenfelter [1983], and tested empirically with annual data in Plant [1984]. It
is also similar to the model of income change developed in Lillard and Willis [1978].

32. Ideally, one would like to be able to directly translate a causal model of
income generation into an estimable hazard model.       This is typically not
possible.    Most dynamic  models  of  income change require a set of flexible
correlations between time periods.    There are no easily estimated functional
forms which allow for intercorrelations between more than 2 or 3 time periods.


33. This model allows women to leave AFDC only through earnings increases. I
have not allowed for the probability of leaving through marriage or other
changes, largely because there is no obvious way of jointly modeling marriage,
divorce, fertility and income changes.     My primary interest will thus be in
comparing the shape of the generated hazard, not its magnitude.

34. One reason for the longer rising hazard in the simulated data is that the
simulation does not allow large and sudden jumps in income, such as often
happens when a woman finds a job.   In the actual data, many of the early
leavers seem to experience such jumps in the first few periods on welfare.

35. Eliwood and Bane calculate a mean expected spell length of 5.2 years-.
Ellwood, using somewhat revised data, calculates a mean length of 4.4 years.
My mean length (Table 5) is 3.1 years.




                                     36
                                 B IBLIOGRAPHY

Ashenfelter, Orley, "Discrete Choice in Labor Supply: The Determinants of
Participation in the Seattle-Denver Income Maintenance Experiments," Journal
of the American Statistical Association. 1983. pp517-525.

Ashenfelter, Orley and David Card, "Using the Longitudinal Structure of
Earnings to Estimate the Effect of Training Programs," Review of Economics and
Statistics.  1985. pp648-660.

Bane, Mary Jo and David T. Eliwood, "The Dynamics of Dependence: The Routes to
Self-Sufficiency,"   Report prepared for the U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services by Urban Systems Research and Engineering, Inc.      Harvard
University. 1983.

Blank, Rebecca M. "The Impact of State Economic Differentials on Household
Welfare and Labor Force Behavior,"   Journal of Public Economics.   1985.
pp25-58.

Bishop, John H. "Jobs, Cash Transfers and Marital Instability: A Review and
Synthesis of .the Evidence," Journal of Human Resources. 1980. pp3Ol-334.

Danziger, Sandra K. "Post-Program Changes in the Lives of AFDC Supported Work
Participants:   A Qualitative Assessment," Journal of Human Resources. 1981.
pp637-648.

Ellwood, David T. "Targeting "Would Be" Long-Term Recipients of AFDC,"
Report prepared for U.S. Department of Health and Human Services by Mathematica
Policy Research, Inc. January 1986.

Eliwood, David T. and Mary Jo Bane, "The Impact of AFDC on Family Structure and
Living Arrangements," Report prepared for the U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services. Harvard University. March 1984.

Feaster, Dan, Peter Gottschalk and George Jakubson, "The Impact of the 1981
AFDC Reforms on Dependency," Unpublished manuscript. June 1985.

Flinn, C. J. and J. J. Heckman, "Models for the Analysis of Labor Force
Dynamics," in Advances in Econometrics, Volume 1.  Greenwich, Conn:   JAI
Press Inc. 1982.

Gottschalk, Peter, "Can Work Disincentives Shorten the Duration of Job Search?"
Unpublished manuscript. 1986.

Heckman, James J. "The X2 Good of Fit Statistic for Models with Parameters
Estimated from Microdata," Econometrica. 1984. ppl543-l547.

Heckman, James J. and Burton Singer, Econometric Duration Analysis,
Journal of Econometrics. 1984. pp63-132.




                                    37
                                 -,   A    Method for Minimizing the Impact of
Distributional Assumptions in Assumptions in Econometric Models for Duration
Data,"   Econometrica.  1984. pp271-319.

Hutchens, Robert, "Entry and Exit Transitions in a Government Transfer Program:
The Case of Aid to Families with Dependent Children," Journal of Human
Resources. 1981. pp217-237.

Kalbfleisch, John D. and Ross L. Prentice, The Statistical Analysis of Failure
Time Data. New York, NY: John Wiley and Sons. 1980.

Lillard, Lee A. and R. Willis, "Dynamic Aspects of Earnings Mobility,'t
Econometrica. 1978. pp341-357.

McDonald,  Maurice and Isabel V.      Sawhill, "Welfare Policy and the Family,"
Public Policy. 1978. pp89-119.

Moffitt, Robert, "An Economic Model of Welfare Stigma," American Economic
Review.  1983. pp1023-1035.

O'Neill, June A, Laurie J. Bassi and Michael T. Hannan, "An Analysis of Time on
Welfare,"   Report prepared for U.S.Department of Health and Human Services by
The Urban Institute. June 1984.

O'Neill, June A, Laurie J. Bass! and Douglas A. Wolf, "The Duration of Welfare
Spells," Unpublished manuscript. December 1985.

Plant, Mark W. "An Empirical Analysis of Welfare Duration," American Economic
Review.  1984. pp673-684.

Plotnick, Robert, "Turnover in the AFDC Population:           An Event History
Analysis," Journal of Human Resources. 1983. pp65-81.

Trussell, James and Toni Richards, "Correcting for Unmeasured Heterogeneity in
Hazard Models:   An Application of the Heckman Singer Strategy to Demographic
Data," Sociological Methodo1ov. 1985.




                                      38
                                 FIGURE 1
               Locational Changes in Utility Curves Due to
               Changing Stigma Effects as Time on Welfare
                                 Increases

   Income




                                                         W* >*
                                                         2     1
                                            U-S(9)
    AFDC
                                                     When past usage is W, person does
                                                        not participate in AFDC.
Benefit Max.
                                                     When past usage is W, person does
                                                        participate in AFbC.

                                                              Hours




                                FIGURE 2
                Curvature Changes in Utility Curves as
                   Time on Welfare Increases

    Income




     AFDC                                              9> 9
Benefit Max.



                                                             Hours
                                  FIGURE 3
                        Weibull Hazard Rate
 0.1
       1
0.09

0.08 -

0.07

0.06 —

0.05-a

0.04

0.03

0.02

0.01 -

   0
         1       11      21      31            41   51        61    71
                                Time (months)

                                      FIGURE   4
                      Log—logistic Hazard Rate
 0.1 -

0.09 -

0.08 -

0.07 -

0.06 -

0.05-




0.01

   0 TII,1111111111111111JI11 I IIlII,IIIIIIIIlI1II1111I1Ihhhhh1
             1   11       21      31           41    51        61   71
                                 Time (months)
                                  FIGURE 5
                     FIinn—Heckman Hazard Rate
        0.1 -

      0.09 -
      0.05 -
      0.07 -
      0.06 -
-tJ

      0.05—

      0.04 -
      0.03 -

      0.02

      0.01

         0                                                  I

                 1   11     21   31       41     51   61   71
                                 Time (months)

                                  FIGURE 6

                          Stepwise Hazard Rate
       0.1
             T

      0.09

      0.08

      0.07

      0.06

N     0.05
a
=
      0.04

      0.03

      0.02

      0.01

         0
             1       11     21   31       41     51   61   71
                                 Tima (months)
                                      FIGURE 7

                      Log—logistic Hazard w/ Heterogeneity
              0.7

                                                    A: Group 1
              06
                                                    B: Group 2
                          \                         C: Group 3




      DN




                      1       11213141 516171
                                     Time (months)

                                     FI-GURE   8

                          3—Way Competing Risk Hazards
           0.05 -
                                                    A: Marriage
                                                    B: Earnings Change
           0.04   -
                                                    C: Other Change


           0.03
0I.
a
N
I
a
           0.02 -




           0.0                                              .:
                  .EE1II                       I1
                                    Time (months)
                               FIGURE 9

               Simulated Hazard Rate vs. Actual
     0.1 -


    0.09                                       A: Simulated Spells
                                               B: Actual Spells,
    0.08                                          Log-logistic estimates
                                                  (Table 4, column 2)
    0.07
                                           C: Actual spells, Competing
    0.06   1                                  Risk Model, Earnings
                                              Change Only (Table 6,
    0.05                                      column 2)
=
    0.04

    0.03

    0.02

    0.01


       0 r;s,,,siu,..,,.,,,
           1      11      21    31        41          51       61          71
                               Tim. (months)
                                           TABLE 1



                            SPELL DISTRIBUTION IN THE MONTHLY
                                     SINE/DIME DATA




            Completed First Observed Spells            Censored First Observed Spells


               Number           Cumulative               Number           Cumulative
   Time     Completed In:    % Completed   In:       Censored After:   % Censored After:


 2 months       47                15%                    10                  5%
 6 months      125                39%                    31                 17%
12 months      201                62%                    56                 30%
24 months      267                83%                   103                 56%
36 months      302                93%                   133                 72%
48 months      316                98%                   158                 85%
60 months      320                99%                   175                 95%
72 months      323               100%                   185                100%




Expected length of completed spells: 13.3 months
                                        TABLE 2



                 BEGINNING & ENDING REASONS FOR FIRST OBSERVED SPELLS


                                   BEGIN}JING REASONS


                                                         Number           Percent
Enter AFDC When Household Eligibility Statys Changes    244               48%
     Change in Marital or Household Status                    205              40%
     Increase in Number of Children                            39                8%
Enter AFDC from Previously Eligible State               264               52%
     Decrease in Headts Labor2Narket Income                   138               27%
     Decrease in Other Income                                  60               12%
     Unable to Determine Reason                                66               13%
Total First Observed Spells                             508              100%




                                    ENDING REASONS


                                                         Number           Percent
Censored                                                185               36%
Leave AFDC When Household Eligibility Status Changes    127               25%
     Change in Marital Status                                 91                18%
     Decrease in Number of Children                           36                 7%

Leave AFDC While Still Eligible                         196               39%
     Increase in Headts Labor2Market Income                   108               21%
     Increase in Other Income                                  51               10%
     Unable to Determine Reason                                37               7%

Total First Observed Spells                             508              100%



1lncludes both divorces/separations and individuals who move out of another
 household (typically their parents'.)

2Other Income includes all household income except labor market income of the head
 and public assistance.



                                          —1—
                                      TABLE 3



                                    DATA NEANS
                       SINE/DINE DATA, FIRST OBSERVED SPELLS




                                      SINE            DINE             TOTAL
 Variable
                                    Subsample       §mle
 Variables   Constant Over Spell:

      Age at Start of Spell           29.4             26.3            27.9
      Race (1 =   Non-white)            .58             .45             .52
      Years of Education              11.1             10.8            11.0
Variables Which Vary Over Spell:

     Number of Children < Age 61       .82             1.00             .91

     Total Children < Age 171         1.98             2.04            2.01
     Other Income Per Nontji1'2     $30.46           $26.99          $28.78
     Unemployment Rate3                9.4%             3.8%           6.6%
     Benefit Naximum Per Honth4       $238             $179           $208
Number of Observations                 262             246             508


1Neasured at start of spell.

2Other Income includes all household income except labor market
                                                                income of
 the head and public assistance. Inflation adjusted.

3Mean for sample period. The Unemployment Rate is the
                                                       reported
 unemployment in the Seattle and Denver SMSA's,
                                                respectively.
4Shown is the mean for a family of 3 for the sample period for the
 states of Washington and Colorado. Inflation adjusted.
                                                     TABLE 4

                         DURATION tIODELS OF FIRST OBSERVED WELFARE SPELLS
                                   With Time Varying Covariates

                                        (Number of Observations = 508)
 Variable                                       Functional Form

                                                                               Nonparametric
                            Weibull         Log-logistic       Flinn-Heckman     Stepwise
                             Hazard            Hazard             Hazard          Hazard
Constant                     4.345**            -4.063**          -3.719**
                                                                                           1

                              (.506)             (.576)            (.494)

Age                            .018**            .017**             .016**         .016**
                              (.007)            (.008)             (.007)         (.007)
Race                         - .257**           -.   259**        -   .213*      -.   213*
(1 =   Nonwhite)              (.123)            (.135)             (.115)         (.114)
Education                     .060*              .060*             .055*          .055*
                             (.033)             (.039)            (.031)         (.031)
Number of                    -   .083           - .064            - .096         -.093
Children < 6                 (.095)             (.103)            (.089)         (.087)
Total Number                 -.   240**             . 316**
                                                -                 -   .171*      -.   164*
of Children                  (.113)             (.130)            (.111)         (.107)
Other Income                  .0004**            .003**            .0004**        .0003*
                             (.0002)            (.001)            (.0002)        (.0002)

Unemployment Rate            - .003             -   .005*         - .002         - .002
                             (.003)             (.003)            (.003)         (.003)
Benefit Maximum               .003               .006*             .002           .002
                             (.003)             (.003)            (.003)         (.003)

Distributional Parameters

P                             .924**            1.256**
                             (.042)             (.057)

Time                                                              —. O39**
                                                                  (.013)

Time Squared                                                          .0004*
                                                                  (.0003)

Likelihood Value             -1381             -1368              -1372          -1369
Mean of Survival                  21                 18                21             22
  Function (in months)

**Significant at the 10% level.
  Significant at the 2% level.
  Standard Errors in Parentheses.

1Stepwise Hazard includes 9 time-varying constants as described in text. All
 are significant at a 2% level.
                                                      TABLE 5


                                         VARIATIONS IN EXPECTED SPELL
                                    LENGTH AND SURVIVAL PROBABILITIES WITH
                                          HOUSEHOLD CHARACTERISTICS*


                                                                                Probability of Remaining
     Race           Years of    # Children      Total           Expected AFDC         On AIFDC After:
(1   = Black)      Education      Under 6     # Children         Spell Length   2 mo.     6 mo.     2 yrs.


       1               11            1            2                36.3 mo.     92.2     77.7       47.7

       o               ii            1            2                30.0         90.5     73.2       40.1

       1               12            1            2                34.7         91.8     76.6       45.8

       O               12            1            2                28.3         90.0      71.9      38.1

       1               11            0            1                28.6         90.1      72.1      38.4

       0               11            0            1                22.7         87.9     66.8       30.7

       1               11            2            3                43.4         93.9      82.3      56.5

       O               11            2            3                37.6         92.6      78.5      49.3




       *
           All calculations are done for a household in Seattle. Age of head is 27 years, with
           $30/month in Other Income. Unemployment rates and benefit maximums are set at their
           mean level in Seattle (9.8% and $238/mo., respectively). Estimates are based on the
           coefficients of the nonparametric stepwise hazard estimated in Table 4, column 4.
                                          Table 6

                DURATION MODEL OF FIRST OBSERVED WELFARE SPELLS
                WITH HETEROGENEITY AND TIME-VARYING COVARIATES

                        (Number of Observations = 508)


                         Shared
Variable              Coefficients           Group 1    Group 2    Group 3
Constant                                     _4.812**   _3.126**   -1.702**
                                               (.440)    (.445)     (.459)

Age                        .019**
                          (.007)

Race                      -. 199*
 (1 —
    —M.-....
      LL.'YLLLL.)         I. 1U)
                             1(r\
Education                     .   069'"
                          (.028)

Number of                 - .078
 Children < 6             (.084)

Total Number              -.      156*
 of Children              (.099)

Other Income               .002**
                          (.001)

Unemployment Rate         -   .004*
                          (.002)

Benefit Maximum            .002
                          (.002)

P (Distributional         2.571**
      Parameter)          (.255)

Probability of                                 .527**    .380**     .093**1
 being in group                               (.038)    (.040)     (.030)

Likelihood Value               -1358

Mean of Survivor Function
      (in months)                               54         8

Goodness of Fit Measure            197

 *Significant at the 10% level.
**Significant at the 2% level.
  Standard Errors in Parentheses.

1Calculated from the probabilities for groups 1 and 2.
                                        TABLE 7



                    DURATION MODELS OF FIRST OBSERVED WELFARE SPELLS
               WITH THREE—WAY COMPETING RISKS AND TIME-VARYING COVARIATES

                                (Numbers of Observations = 508)

Variable                                   Log-Logistic Hazard

                       Spells Ending          Spells Ending       Spells Ending
                            with              with Earnings         with Other
                          Marriage              Increase             Changes

Constant                  _3.989**                _7.818**           _5.360*
                           (.700)                 (1.039)             (.957)
Age                         .029**                 -.003                 .019
                           (.011)                  (.016)             (.016)
Race                      _.738**                   .134             -.005
(1 =   Nonwhite)           (.298)                  (.269)             (.027)
Education                   .027                    .243**           -   .017
                           (.053)                  (.090)             (.082)
Number of                 - .004                  - .216             -   .052
Children < 6               (.014)                  (.193)             (.226)
Total Number              -. 168                  -   •543*          - .201
of Children                (.153)                  (.417)             (.613)
Other Income                  .001                  .002                 .005*
                          (.002)                   (.002)             (.002)
Unemployment Rate         -   . 009**             - .001              .001
                          (.004)                   (.007)            (.009)
Benefit Maximum            .001                     .010              .004
                          (.004)                   (.008)            (.012)

P (Distributional         1.200**                 1.012**             .953**
   Parameter)             (.087)                  (.078)             (.090)
Likelihood Value                                  -1698

Mean of Survivor Function
   (in months)                                         20

Goodness of Fit Measure                               226

.,Significant at the 10% 1eve1.
  Significant at the 2% level.
  Standard Errors in Parentheses.
                                                TABLE 8



                             SPELL DISTRIBUTION OF SIMULATED SPELLS



                        Completed Spells                            Censored Spells


                 Number            Cumulative                 Number            Cumulative
 Time         Completed In:      ¼ Completed    In:       Censored After:   ¼ Censored After:

 2 months          28                      9%                   6                      3%
 6 months          53                  17%                     22                     12%
12 months         109                  34%                     44                     23%
24 months         227                  71%                     82                     44%
48 months        305                   95%                    146                     78%
72 months        320                  100%                    188                 100%



Expected length of completed spells: 19.6 months.
Appendix

                                                  APPENDIX

                  A SIMULATION MODEL OF INCOME CHANGE AND AFDC PARTICIPATION

             The model of income generation is a simple autocorrelated procedure,

     (Al)         Y =   Yperm +   e   ,   where    e =   cxe -   1+v
     Simulated income for each household is generated starting with the first period

    when they enter AFDC. In this first period their earned income is set at its

     actual value (Y1).

             Yperm for each household is estimated by using those households in June of

     1973 (the mid-point of the sample) who were female-headed but did not receive

     AFDC.     Earned income among this sample was estimated with a maximum likelihood

     equation in which the probability of labor market participation and monthli

     earnings were estimated simultaneously. The coefficients from this estimation

    were used to calculate expected earnings among each AFDC household (conditional

    upon participation) as an estimate of Yperm. (These estimates were adjusted for

    price changes between June 1973 and the months when the household was on AFDC.)

             Estimates of a, the autocorrelation coefficient, and civ, the standard

     error of the random term v, were taken from Ashenfelter and Card [1985], who

    have a very similar sample of earners. Their research estimates the structure

    of earnings from a national sample of low-income women between the years 1970

     and 1975, who participate in the CETA program in 1976. Their data was annual.

    Their estimated autocorrelation coefficient is .791, which translates into a

    monthly coefficient of .98.             They find that 71.5% of the variation in income

    over time was due to random variation.               Calculating 71.5% of the variance in

     income among my sample over time, I arrive at an estimate for ci. of 89.65.

     (This is in dollars per month.)


                                                     1
Appendix

            In order to set the income generation process running, I need an estimate

    of e1 ,    the "shock" to income occuring in the first period when these women

    enter welfare. I assume that this is equal to Y1 -Yperm, the difference between

    actual and predicted earnings in this first period.

           With these parameters, earned income in the second period on welfare
    becomes

    (A2)             Y2 = Yperm + e2       where e2 =   e1   + v2

    v2 is generated from a number generator which selects from a normal distribu-.

    tion, based on a zero mean and a standard error of 89.65.

    In a similar fashion, I can generate earnings expectations from period 2 into

    the future.

           Total income in each period is simply

    (A3)             Ytot =   Y   + Yoth, + Benefit

    where Y is the earnings generated by the above model in period t, Yoth, is the

    observed other income of the household (provided in the data), and Benefit is

    calculated according to the formula

                    Benefit = BenMx    -
    (A4)                                   t,, (Y - 30.   + Yoth ).

   BenMx is the benefit maximum for the household's size and location. T is the

   participant tax rate, calculated according to the formula used in Blank [1985].

   The 30 represents the $30 set-aside in effect during this time period for AFDC

   participants.      Clearly, as a household nears the breakeven level, Benefit

   approaches zero.

           The AFDC breakeven point occurs where Benefito. It is assumed that each

   household is on AFDC as long as t, (Y - 30 +Yoth) is less than BenNx. In the

   time period when this is no longer true, the household is assumed to leave


                                              2
Appendix

     AFDC, ending their welfare spell. Spells are assumed to begin in their actual

     calendar time, thus any household which has not left AFDC by the end of the

     SINE/DIME sample period is counted as censored.

           Table 8 in the text presents a summary of the AFDC spells generated by

    this model. These spells are used to estimate a standard log-logistic model of

    welfare duration.    The results of this estimation are presented in Appendix

    Table A. Few of the exogenous variables are significant, not surprising since

    they have only indirect effects on spell length (through their effect on the

    estimate of Yperm, and on the estimate of Benefit .)




                                          3
