NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

LEARNING MILLENNIAL-STYLE
Bruce I. Carlin
Li Jiang
Stephen A. Spiller
Working Paper 20268
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20268

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2014

The authors thank Shlomo Bernartzi, Bhagwan Chowdry, Craig Fox, and Suzanne Shu for their insightful
comments at the start of this project. The authors are indebted to Britt Benston at UCLA for his generosity
and help in producing our videos. Any errors are the authors’. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Bruce I. Carlin, Li Jiang, and Stephen A. Spiller. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Learning Millennial-Style
Bruce I. Carlin, Li Jiang, and Stephen A. Spiller
NBER Working Paper No. 20268
June 2014
JEL No. A20,G00,I21
ABSTRACT
The growing use of on-line educational content and related video services has changed the way people
access education, share knowledge, and possibly make life decisions. In this paper, we characterize
how video content affects individual decision-making and willingness to share in the context of a personal
financial decision. Content geared toward giving better instructions leads to better financial decisions,
but less information sharing. Misleading advertising not only causes worse decisions, but makes it
less likely that videos with useful content get shared in the market. This implies that the effects of
deception have externalities on other peoples’ literacy and decision-making. Our work has important
implications for policies guiding financial literacy training, and also has broader impact for education
in the information age.

Bruce I. Carlin
Anderson Graduate School of Management
UCLA
110 Westwood Plaza, Suite C413
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
and NBER
bruce.carlin@anderson.ucla.edu
Li Jiang
110 Westwood Plaza
Los Angeles, CA 90095
li.jiang.2014@anderson.ucla.edu

Stephen A. Spiller
110 Westwood Plaza
Los Angeles, CA 90095
stephen.spiller@anderson.ucla.edu

1. Introduction
Demand for on-line educational content and related video services has exploded over the
last few years, suggesting that we are experiencing a global paradigm shift in the way people
access education, share knowledge, and possibly make decisions. According to You Tube, over
one billion unique users access their content every month 1 and the views of educational content
have nearly doubled from 2011 to 2013 2. More U.S. adults 18-34 access YouTube than any
cable network (Nielsen ratings), and its impact is growing as people of all ages are adopting this
form of learning.
What makes this education channel particularly powerful is its information sharing
capabilities. Helpful information can be used and then easily shared 3, which potentiates the
effects of directed education. Especially considering the growth of Facebook and Twitter, this
outlet is a potentially useful channel to influence the literacy and decision-making of our
population. In the best case scenario, useful content goes viral and distributes itself. This is not
only interesting for academics, but is an opportunity for policy makers to improve the decisions
that people make. Regrettably, though, studying the interplay between sharing media and taking
the action advocated by that media has been largely overlooked by both 4.

1

According to You Tube, six million hours of video content are watched per month and one
hundred hours of new video content is uploaded to the website every minute.
2
Specifically, from 2011 to 2013, views of educational videos on You Tube increased by 99% in
the United States. In the summer of 2013, people spent over 142 million hours watching
educational content, which was a 100% increase over the summer of 2012.
3
Indeed, according the You Tube, every auto-tweet resulted in at least six new You Tube
browsing sessions.
4
For example, while there has been considerable recent work that has examined the factors that
influence sharing (e.g., Berger 2011; Berger and Milkman 2012; Chen and Berger 2013) and the
effects of social media on sales (e.g., Stephen and Galak 2012), there has been little to study the
interplay between the two.
2

In this paper, we investigate how video content affects individual decision-making and
willingness to share, and how its efficacy is impacted by other sources of competing information.
We study this in the context of a personal financial decision, while keeping in mind that the
lessons from our work likely apply to other life decisions. Addressing poor financial literacy is
clearly a first order concern (e.g., Carlin and Robinson, 2012), but efforts to ameliorate this
problem have not taken advantage of millennial-style learning. Indeed, it appears that “just in
time” financial education may be superior to traditional channels (Fernandes, Lynch, and
Netemeyer, 2014), videos can enhance financial literacy (Heinberg et al., 2014), and vicarious
learning through entertainment can be quite effective (Berg & Zia 2013).
We began by producing our own video, which is a cartoon in which a TV viewer uses a
“magic remote” to uncover hidden messages while watching a credit card commercial 5. Instead
of cherry-picking videos that already existed on You Tube, we made this investment so that we
could control the content of the video and produce variation by creating several versions that
differed in particular ways. Moreover, doing so removed the concern that subjects could have
previously viewed our videos before participating in our experiments.
All versions of the video contained three main messages: 1) beware of credit card fees; 2)
interest rates may not be fixed; 3) the credit limits may not be specified, but do exist. When we
created the videos, we added elements from Heath and Heath (2007) to maximize the probability
that people would share our video. As such, the videos were meant to be simple, humorous,
engaging, concrete, and tell a story. Before conducting our main experiment, we pilot-tested the
videos and confirmed them to be perceived by subjects to be sharable, enjoyable, and useful.

5

The video may be viewed at http://player.vimeo.com/video/70597491. The password is
“remote”. Please do not download, post, or share the video.
3

In our main experiment, subjects first viewed a version of the video and subsequently
were asked to choose one of four credit cards from an on-line offering. One of the credit cards
was in fact the optimal choice, based on its interest rate, fees, and credit limit. All four credit
cards were presented on a single page, with links to key pricing and terms. As such, we could
also keep track of how much time subjects spent analyzing prices and how many clicks they
made before making a choice. Following the credit card choice, subjects were asked whether
they wished to share the video with others (Berger, 2011) and were asked to rate the video on
several dimensions based on how the subject felt (Olney, Holbrook, and Batra, 1991). Finally,
we collected demographic data on the subjects.
The study used a 2x2 between-subject design. Subjects were randomized between
viewing our baseline video and our treatment video, which was the baseline video plus an
additional tag that included both a summary of the three main messages and a segment that
explained where to locate these pieces of information on a typical credit card. Subjects were also
randomized based on whether the credit card page included deceptive advertising or not.
Deceptive advertising was communicated by labeling the credit cards with misleading statements
such as “low APR” or “low fees” when there were other cards available with lower APR or fees.
Subjects who were not treated with deceptive advertising did not view labels at all on their credit
card offerings.
Not surprisingly, viewing the tagged video increased the choice of the best credit card. In
contrast, deceptive advertising led to less time spent in making the decision and worse choices.
These results are what we would have expected ex ante, and if anything confirm that subjects
appeared to understand their tasks and take the study seriously. In addition to these effects on
choice and amount of attention, there were important differences in relative focus of attention.

4

The tagged video increased the focus on the optimal card whereas the misleading ads reduced
that focus.
Just as importantly, subjects perceived the tagged video as less sharable than the base
video, even though the tagged video aided decisions and was considered to be more useful and
more effective. Indeed, adding the tag increased the likelihood that subjects would apply for a
credit card in the future. Also, the tagged video was able to counteract the negative effect that
deceptive advertising had on credit card choice. Notwithstanding this, however, the base video
was perceived as more unique and more likely to be shared, even though it was perceived as less
useful, did not assist people as much, and was less able to counteract the adverse effects of
deception.
Along the same lines, there was an interaction between deceptive advertising and the type
of video that a subject watched. The tagged video was perceived to be more useful when no
advertising was present than when there was deceptive advertising. This underscores an
important implication: deceptive advertising not only leads to worse financial decisions, but also
has the potential to decrease the percolation of “good” information in the marketplace.
One caveat to this, though, is a sub-analysis that we performed with regard to whether
people chose the correct credit card when exposed to deceptive advertising. For people who
chose correctly, the presence of deceptive advertising actually increased the tendency to share
information. Participants who made good decisions found sharable value in the added content of
the tagged video. However, for those who chose incorrectly, deceptive advertising did not
increase sharing and obviated the efficacy of the tagged video.
Finally, we analyzed how these influences were moderated by demographics. Many of
the effects we have described hold over a wide variety of individuals, and the significant

5

moderators that did emerge were of magnitude rather than sign. The tagged video tended to be
most effective for men, for younger participants, and for participants with greater than minimal
income (i.e., those earning more than $25,000 per year). Female subjects in our study were the
most susceptible to deceptive practices as the tagged video was not successful in counteracting
the adverse effects of deception.
Based on this, our study yields several novel insights. First, online videos do have the
potential to increase the quality of household financial decisions, but merely presenting the
information in an engaging sticky format is not sufficient. The information must be interpretable
and implementable in order to direct attention appropriately. Second, effective does not
necessarily mean sharable. In our study, the more effective video was marginally less likely to be
shared. In fact, had it not been perceived to be more effective, it would have been considerably
less likely to be shared than the baseline video.
Third, the perceived effectiveness, and the impact of actual effectiveness, depend on the
choice context. Consumers found our implemental video to be more effective than our baseline
video, but that difference was attenuated in the presence of deceptive advertisements.
Participants who made the right choice were more likely to share the video than those who did
not, but only when faced with deceptive advertisements. Presumably those participants were the
only ones who could (a) detect the right answer, and (b) recognize the potential that others might
be fooled. Finally, we provide process evidence suggesting how the video and deceptive
advertisements affected choice through their respective effects on the amount and allocation of
attention, as well as the importance of understanding multiple paths to sharing. Factors that
increase perceived effectiveness alone without affecting properties of the video may increase the

6

likelihood of sharing, but an ineffectively tagged video that does not enhance perceived
effectiveness could actually decrease sharing.

2. Method and Design
2.1 Video Production
The storyline and production of the video was accomplished with a professional
animator. Our goal was to make the video informative for a common but important life choice,
but also to make it entertaining enough to make it worth watching and sharing with others. We
chose the domain of credit card traps because we felt it would be relevant to a broad crosssection of the population. In choosing the storyline and developing the video, we focused on
Heath and Heath’s (2007) features of “stickiness” to maximize its potential for effectiveness and
longevity of effects.
The animated video leads the viewer through a story from a first-person perspective. The
main character watches a credit card commercial on television and discovers a “magic remote”
on his coffee table that allows him to uncover hidden captions in the commercials, see what the
spokesman in the commercial is hiding by flipping around the perspective of the camera, and
detect hidden messages when rewinding the video.
The video is approximately two minutes long and conveys three basic points about credit
cards. The first is that “no preset spending limit” is not the same as “no spending limit”. The
second is that there are a lot of hidden fees that can add up. The third is that “fixed APR” does
not necessarily mean that an APR that cannot change.
In our experiment, we presented two different versions of the video to our subjects. The
first version, which we call our “baseline” video, is the standalone story as described above. The

7

basic idea was to convey the three primary messages in a humorous format, as many popular
online videos tend to be. The second version, which we call the “tagged” video, included a short
addition to the baseline video, which was composed of a recap of the three main messages and a
schematic of where to find key information on the standard pricing and terms document that
typically accompanies credit card offers (see Figure 1). This “tagged” version was designed to
make it crystal clear to the viewer exactly how to use the information that was contained in the
base video. Indeed, previous research (e.g., Beshears et al. 2010) has indicated that many
consumers are not be able to act on simplified information like this, if it is not clear how to use it.
Before performing the experiment as described more below, we performed pretests on
subjects to determine how the video is perceived. Pretesting indicated that participants from our
subject population found the video to be engaging and shareable. It also indicated that the recap
and the implementation schematic had additive effects on video effectiveness. As such, we used
the combination of the two in our tagged video. This enabled a large enough effect size to
observe whether it was moderated by other factors, but also meant that the observed effects are
the result of the combination of summary and implementation instructions.

2.2 Credit Card Choice
After viewing a video, participants in the study made a hypothetical credit card choice
from a website that we constructed to emulate real on-line websites. 6 Figure 2 is a screenshot
from our experiment. Subjects were asked to choose from among four credit cards. The initial
screen had only cursory information about the four credit cards, but had a “Pricing and Terms”
6

Specifically, we constructed our screenshots to be similar to the credit card offerings at
www.chase.com. Additionally, we used pricing and term disclosures that were very similar to
those at Chase. The bottom panel of Figure 3 provides a screenshot from the Chase website that
demonstrates how it is similar to what was used in our experiment.
8

link below each card. Using the links, participants could seek out diagnostic information such as
APR’s, fees, and spending limits, in order to compare the terms offered from the various cards.
Clicking on the “Pricing and Terms” link led subjects to view a standardized form similar to the
ones typically used in on-line credit card offers (Figure 2).
Based on the factors emphasized in the video, one of the credit cards was the optimal
choice. That is, it was strictly better than the other three cards in at least one dimension and at
least as good in all of the others. The only way to learn this for certain, however, was to uncover
and compare the pricing and terms of all four credit cards. As such, choice of the optimal card
served as one dependent variable of interest and indicated high choice quality.
Since we were able to observe when subjects clicked on each link, how long they spent
examining each term sheet, and the number of total clicks they used, we could calibrate the effort
subjects used to acquire information about their decision. It also allowed us to record where
participants directed their attention and identify when subjects simply rushed through the
experiment
Because consumers frequently have to contend with competing information when they
make real decisions, we chose to study a particularly pernicious source: deceptive advertising.
Indeed, as in the everyday consumer environment, the advertising may not be technically wrong,
but is deceiving to consumers as it makes a product sound more attractive than it really is. In our
study, we examined the effect of this competing information by assigning some participants to
see no advertising and some to see relatively minor deceptive advertising in the form of tag lines
associated with each credit card in the choice phase of the study. These tag lines were not
necessarily false, but they appeared to be more diagnostic than they truly were. For example, one
card was labeled “Low APR”. That statement may have been true in an absolute sense, though

9

the card actually had the highest APR from the set and so the statement was misleading in a
relative sense. Figure 3 contrasts the two versions of the screenshots that subjects viewed before
making their choice. Panel A of Figure 3 shows a case in which no added information was given,
whereas Panel B adds the taglines to each card.

2.3 Design and Procedure
Two key factors were manipulated in the experiment, so we used a 2 (Video: Traditional,
Traditional + Implementation) x 2 (Advertisements: No Ads, Misleading Ads) betweenparticipant experimental design. The traditional baseline video provided an entertaining
presentation of three credit card traps. The tagged video gave a brief recap and additional
guidance regarding where to find the information embedded in a pricing and terms pamphlet. In
the Misleading Ads condition, when consumers were choosing a credit card, they saw taglines
for each of four cards (“Low minimum payment”, “Low fees”, “Use it anywhere”, “Low APR”),
which were intentionally misleading. The “Use it anywhere” card was the optimal option. In the
No Ads condition, there were no taglines associated with any card.
Our procedure was as follows. Participants began by watching one of two videos,
depending on condition. After viewing the video, participants chose one credit card from a set of
four. Each credit card was identified by letter (A, B, C, D; card C was the optimal card), a stock
picture of a credit card, and a link that would reveal pricing and terms below the card display.
Participants in the Misleading Ads condition also saw taglines for each card. The survey
recorded which option participants chose, how many times they viewed the pricing and terms for
each card, and the amount of time spent viewing the pricing and terms for each card.

10

After the credit card choice, the survey assessed sharing using measures based on Berger
(2011). Participants reported willingness to share and likelihood of sharing the video with
friends, family members, and coworkers on seven-point scales (from 1 = Not at all to 7 =
Extremely). These six items were combined into a single sharing scale. Also, based on Barasch
and Berger (2013), we asked whether participants were more likely to share the video with a
specific individual or a broad group.
After measuring willingness and likelihood of sharing, we measured how effective
participants thought the video was and how confident they were in their choice. Participants
rated five items measuring choice efficacy and video effectiveness on a 7-point scale (where 1 =
Strongly disagree, 7 = Strongly agree). These items were: 1) “I am confident that I picked the
best credit card;” 2) “Choosing the best credit card was easy;” 3) “The video helped me make my
choice more efficiently;” 4) “I would have made the same choice without the video” (reverse
coded); and 5) “The video would help my best friend make the right credit card choice.”
Following that, we asked a variety of 7-point semantic differential items regarding how
the participant was feeling, based on Olney, Holbrook, and Batra (1991). The scales assessed
current happiness (Happy-Unhappy, Pleased-Annoyed, Satisfied-Unsatisfied, ContentedMelancholic, Hopeful-Despairing) and arousal (Relaxed-Bored, Stimulated-Relaxed, ExcitedCalm, Frenzied-Sluggish, Jittery-Dull, Wide awake-Sleepy, Aroused-Unaroused). Also based on
Olney et al.’s measures of advertisements, we measured how participants would describe the
video along several dimensions: special (Peculiar-Ordinary, Just like any other video-Different
from any other video, Average-Special, Weird-Normal, Nothing special-Outstanding), hedonic
(Unpleasant-Pleasant, Fun to watch-Not fun to watch, Not entertaining-Entertaining, EnjoyableNot enjoyable), utilitarian (Important-Not important, Informative-Uninformative, Helpful-Not

11

helpful, Useful-Not useful), and interesting (Makes me curious-Does not make me curious, Not
boring-Boring, Interesting-Not interesting, Keeps my attention-Does not keep my attention).
These measures allowed us to assess how the videos were perceived and whether the tag changed
the assessment of the video.
To test whether the effects of the video or ads varied according to important consumer
characteristics, participants reported how frequently they share videos through each of four
channels (Facebook, Email, Twitter, and Google+), and whether or not they have a credit card
(and if so how many credit cards). As the choice among four credit cards assumed participants
were going to apply for a card, we also measured the extent to which participants thought the
video made them more or less likely to apply for a credit card. Finally, participants described
their reactions to the video in their own words and provided basic demographic information
(Age, Sex, Ethnicity, Education, Income).

2.4 Participants
Four hundred and one participants recruited on Amazon Mechanical Turk participated in
this study. These participants, though not a representative sample, reflect a broader cross-section
of the US population than a college-student population. 44% of the sample was female. Age
ranged from 18 to 72, with a median age of 29. Median income fell between $25,000 and
$50,000, and median education was some college, but not a four-year degree. As our study
focused on sharing of videos via social media, it was important to assess whether this action was
relevant to our subject population. Indeed, more than 50% of the sample shared reported sharing
a video via Facebook, email, Twitter, or Google+ at least 2 to 3 times per month.

12

3. Results
In this experiment, we examined a variety of dependent variables to get a wide
assessment of the effects of implemental instructions and deceptive advertising on sharing and
choice, and of how sharing and choice are related to one another. We begin by reporting how
attention and choice varied as a function of the type of video and the presence of deceptive
advertisements. Then, we consider the effect of these variables on perceived effectiveness and
sharing. Finally, we analyze the process by which perceptions of the video and choice mediated
the participants’ decisions to share.

3.1 Attention and Choice
Attention paid to each card was operationalized by taking the log of the number of
seconds the participants spent looking at pricing and terms for each card; 1 was added to each
duration prior to taking the log to account for 0’s. Reported means were transformed back into
the original metric for ease of interpretation. Logged durations for cards A, B, and D (the
dominated options) were averaged together, as we had no a priori hypotheses about differential
effects on the dominated cards. The resulting attention measures were analyzed using a 2 (Video:
No tag; Tag) x 2 (Advertisements: No ads; Deceptive ads) x 2 (Card: C; Average of A, B, and D)
repeated measures ANOVA where the first two measures were between-subject and the third
was within-subject.
There was a main effect of Ads such that participants spent less time examining the
pricing and terms of each card when there were deceptive ads (M = 4.57 seconds) than when
there were no ads (M = 10.68 seconds; F(1, 397) = 40.18, p < .0001). Advertising, even though it
was misleading, crowded out active information acquisition. There was also a main effect of

13

card, such that participants spent more time examining card C (M = 7.53 seconds) than the
average of cards A, B, and D (M = 6.76 seconds; F(1, 397) = 19.46, p < .0001). Across
conditions, participants spent more time than expected by chance looking at the optimal card.
However, that effect was qualified by two two-way interactions. First, the difference between the
time spent examining card C and the other cards was reduced when there were misleading ads
compared to no ads (MMisleadC = 4.77 seconds, MMisleadOther = 4.50 seconds, MNoneC = 12.02
seconds, MMisleadOther = 10.27 seconds; F(1, 397) = 4.54, p < .05). The misleading ads reduced
information acquisition overall and wiped out any difference in attention paid across cards.
Second, the difference between time spent examining card C and the other cards was larger for
participants who saw the video including the tag (MTagC = 8.51 seconds, MTagOther = 7.15 seconds,
MBaseC = 6.66 seconds, MBaseOther = 6.41 seconds; F(1, 397) = 8.10, p < .01). Even though the
information regarding pricing terms was available for all of the participants, the tag in the video
helped treated subjects to focus their attention on the important information 7.
We also examined how choice of the optimal option varied as a function of the type of
video, advertisements, and their interaction via logistic regression. Those who saw misleading
advertisements were less likely to choose the optimal option than those who saw no
advertisements (34.5% vs 57.1%, Wald χ2(1) = 21.68, p < .0001). Participants who saw the
tagged video were more likely to choose the optimal option than those who saw the video
without the tag (52.8% vs. 38.6%, Wald χ2(1) = 9.58, p < .005). There was no significant
interaction between advertisement and video type (p > .2). The effect was directionally, but not
significantly, larger for the deceptive ads condition than the no ads condition; see Figure 4. This
7

This finding underscores our assertion that subjects took the decision in our experiment
seriously, even though they were not given explicit monetary incentives. Indeed, as one would
expect, for those subjects that were further “educated” in the video, they spent more time
investigating and search for the optimal choice.
14

finding reinforces the notion that a clever informative video is not enough: the information must
also be actionable.
Finally, we considered the effects the treatments had on the propensity for people to
apply for a credit card following the experiment. Admittedly, when choosing one of four credit
cards, participants were not given a “no choice” option. The key question then is whether their
likelihood of applying for a credit card was affected by the ads or the video. The ads had no main
or interactive effects, but the type of video had a strong effect on likelihood of applying (F(1,
397) = 31.70, p < .0001). Participants rated themselves as significantly more likely to apply for a
credit card when shown the video including the tag (M = 3.51, SD = 1.31) than the baseline video
(M = 2.77, SD = 1.30). Apparently the baseline video made participants wary of credit cards
without empowering them with the ability to make an effective choice. By showing them where
to find the necessary information, the tagged video enhanced the likelihood of applying

3.2 Perceptions and Attitudes toward Sharing
One of the key variables was the perceived effectiveness of the video. To assess this, we
combined the five effectiveness items into a single measure (Cronbach’s α = 0.59). We analyzed
this measure as a function of the type of video, ads, and their interaction. When the participants
saw misleading ads, participants reported that the video was marginally less effective (M = 4.12,
SD = 0.91) than when there were no ads (M = 4.26, SD = 1.00; F(1, 397) = 3.63, p < .06).
Participants reported that the video with the tag was significantly more effective (M = 4.55, SD =
0.85) than the video without the tag (M = 3.83, SD = 0.93; F(1, 397) = 69.26, p < .0001). Each of
these effects was qualified by a significant interaction (F(1, 397) = 5.93, p < .05). When
participants saw the base video, they rated it equally effective whether they saw misleading ads

15

(M = 3.85, SD = 0.85) or no ads (M = 3.81, SD = 1.00). However, when participants saw the
tagged video, they rated it as less effective when they saw misleading ads (M = 4.37, SD = 0.90)
than when they saw no ads at all (M = 4.75, SD = 0.74). Even though the effect of the video on
actual choice was equally strong whether or not there were ads (and was directionally stronger
when there were deceptive ads), the ads made participants report that the video was less
effective. Non-diagnostic information at the time of choice decreased the perceived diagnosticity
of the useful implemental information contained in the video.
We then proceeded to analyze how the different versions of the videos differed with
regard to the subjects’ overall assessments and feelings. First, we analyzed happiness and arousal
as functions of the type of video, ads, and their interaction. No effects were significant. This
suggests that differences in sharing were not due to differences in arousal level (Berger 2011).
Next, we analyzed whether how special, hedonic, utilitarian, and interesting the videos
were varied as a function of the type of video, ad, and their interaction. The tagged video was
perceived as less special (MBase = 4.87, SD = 0.93; MTag = 4.64, SD = 0.89; F(1, 397) = 6.26, p
< .05) and more utilitarian (MBase = 5.25, SD = 1.23; MTag = 5.73, SD = 1.06; F(1, 397) = 17.84, p
< .0001), but did not differ on hedonic or interesting. There was a non-interpretable interaction
between ads and the type of video on hedonic ratings (F(1, 397) = 4.13, p < .05), though this
may reflect a spurious effect at the 5% level given the number of analyses conducted. There was
also a marginal interaction between ads and the type of video on utilitarian ratings (F(1, 397) =
3.07, p < .1), indicating that the usefulness of the tagged video over the base video may have
been somewhat larger for the no ad group than the misleading ad group.
Finally, we considered how the various treatments affected peoples’ tendency to share.
The six sharing items (Cronbach’s α = 0.94) were combined into a single sharing measure and

16

analyzed as a function of video, ads, and their interaction. The baseline video was marginally
more shareable than the tagged video (MBase = 4.74, SDBase = 1.68; MTag = 4.44, SDTag = 1.62;
F(1, 397) = 3.47, p < .07). Even though the video including the implemental tag had a significant
effect on choice, it was somewhat less likely to be shared. We explore these opposing influences
next.

3.3 Mediation Analysis
3.3.1 Attention Mediates Effects on Choice
As described above, the video tag and deceptive ads affected the total amount of attention
allotted to pricing and terms, the allocation of attention across different cards, and choice quality.
Did variation in attention explain variation in choice? To examine this question, we conducted
mediation analyses using Hayes’ (2013) PROCESS macro (model 8) with confidence intervals
based on 10,000 bootstrapped samples. We tested whether there were effects of false advertising,
video tag, or their interaction on choice through parallel mediators of amount of attention
(average log duration) and allocation of attention (difference in log duration between card C and
the average of cards A, B, and D). In other words, were there indirect effects of the manipulation
on choice through attention?
We answered this question by conducting three sets of analyses on bootstrapped samples
(see Hayes 2013 for details). One analysis regressed the average log duration on ads, video, and
their interaction. The second regressed differences in the log duration on ads, video, and their
interaction. The third regressed choice quality on ads, video, their interaction, average log
duration, and difference in log duration. See Table 1 for individual regression results. The
indirect effects of the interaction were not significant, as indicated by 95% bootstrapped

17

confidence intervals that did not exclude 0, so we focused on the effects of each variable when
estimated at the average value of the other variable.
Compared to no ads, deceptive ads had two significant detrimental effects on choice.
First, deceptive ads reduced choice quality by reducing the amount of attention paid to pricing
and terms overall (B = -0.1039, SE = 0.0435, 95% CI: [-0.2028, -0.0321]). Second, deceptive ads
also reduced choice quality by reducing the asymmetry in attention paid to card C vs. cards A, B,
or D (B = -0.1051, SE = 0.0539, 95% CI: [-0.2211, -0.0097]). There was also evidence for a
residual negative direct effect of false ads on choice quality that was not accounted for by our
measure of attention (B = -0.3557, SE = 0.1197, p < .01), providing evidence for complementary
mediation such that the indirect and direct effects were each significant and operated in the same
direction (Zhao, Lynch, and Chen 2011). The direct effect suggests that there may be additional
processes by which misleading advertisements influenced choice.
Compared to the baseline video, the tagged video enabled better choices through the
reallocation of attention rather than through increased attention. There was no significant effect
of the video tag on choice quality through amount of attention (B = 0.0207, SE = 0.0188, 95%
CI: [-0.0073, 0.0685]). However, there was a significant effect of the video tag on choice quality
through the relative attention paid to card C vs. cards A, B, or D (B = 0.1405, SE = 0.0570, 95%
CI: [0.0403, 0.2663]). There was no residual direct effect of video tag (B = 0.2182, SE = 0.1170,
p > .05), providing evidence for indirect-only mediation meaning that there was an indirect effect
but no direct effect (Zhao et al. 2011). Although deceptive advertisements affected choice quality
by both reducing the amount of attention and the proper allocation of attention, the video tag
increased choice quality by improving the allocation of attention without needlessly drawing on
additional resources. This suggests that the education was effective at increasing the efficiency of

18

cognitive resource use rather than increasing the deployment of cognitive resources. Analogous
analyses indicate that there was an indirect effect of video tag on likelihood of applying for a
credit card through allocation of attention.

3.3.2 Perceived Effectiveness Mediates Effect on Sharing
We also examined the extent to which the perceived effectiveness of the video mediated
the effects of video and advertisements on the likelihood and willingness to share. We again used
Hayes’ (2013) PROCESS macro (model 8) to examine the interactive effects of the video tag and
misleading advertisements on sharing through perceptions of video effectiveness. See Table 2.
The interaction had a significant indirect effect, as indicated by a 95% confidence interval that
excluded 0 (B = -0.0662, SE = 0.0314, 95% CI: [-0.1372, -0.0145]), so we examine the
conditional effects of the video for the no ads condition and the misleading ads condition. In
each condition, the tagged video had a significant positive indirect effect on sharing through
perceived effectiveness. This effect was larger when there were no ads (B = 0.2922, SE =
0.0622, 95% CI: [0.1787, 0.4245]) than when there were misleading ads (B = 0.1599, SE =
0.0439, 95% CI: [0.0838, 0.2558]). These results indicate that the video tag increased perceived
effectiveness, which in turn increased sharing. Although there were positive effects of the video
tag on sharing through perceived effectiveness across the board, they were reduced in the
presence of misleading ads.
However, there is an important caveat to these findings. After accounting for the indirect
effects via perceived effectiveness, there was a residual direct effect of the video tag on sharing.
Notably, this direct effect is negative (B = -0.3799, SE = 0.0847, p < .0001), providing evidence
for competitive mediation such that the indirect and direct effects operate in opposite directions

19

(Zhao et al. 2013). Above, we reported that the tagged video was marginally less likely to be
shared than the baseline video. This marginal decrease hides two strong competing effects. The
tagged video did increase sharing by increasing perceived effectiveness. However, it also
decreased sharing directly. The relative weights on these two paths may differ in different
circumstances, and therein lies a fundamental problem for encouraging good financial decisions
through social media: the very videos that have the greatest potential to increase decision quality
may also be the ones that are the least shareable.

3.3.3 Choice, Perceived Effectiveness, and Sharing
So far we have described two separate analyses, one on choice quality as a function of
attention, and one on sharing intentions as a function of perceived effectiveness. But these two
analyses are fundamentally linked. What is the relationship between choice quality and perceived
effectiveness? To answer that question, we analyzed the perceived effectiveness as a function of
the type of video, ads, choice quality, and all two and three-way interactions. Those who chose
better-quality options (M = 4.48, SD = 0.92) found the video to be more effective than those who
chose worse-quality options (M = 3.94, SD = 0.92; F(1, 393) = 24.42, p < .0001). However, this
did not interact with either ads or type of videos. In other words, participants who were able to
put the information in the video to good use rated it as more effective than those who were not
able to put it to good use.
What is the relationship between choice quality and sharing? To answer that question, we
analyzed sharing as a function of the type of video, ads, choice quality, and all two and threeway interactions. We found an unexpected but explainable interaction between choice quality
and misleading ads (F(1, 393) = 5.78, p < .05). When participants made a poor choice (i.e., they

20

chose card A, B, or D), they were equally likely to share the video whether they chose in the
presence of misleading ads (M = 4.48, SD = 1.82) or no ads (M = 4.62, SD = 1.60). However,
when participants made a good choice (i.e., they chose card C), they were more likely to share
the video when they chose in the presence of misleading ads (M = 5.07, SD = 1.51) rather than in
the presence of no ads (M = 4.40, SD = 1.54). This interaction is shown in Figure 7. This
suggests that the impact of quality decisions on sharing necessitates the proper context. If the
context makes it easy to see how someone else could be fooled (e.g., through deceptive
advertising), even though oneself was not fooled, one will be more likely to share the video to
help others compared to when the context does not make it so clear that someone else might be
fooled.
3.4 Moderators
We next examined whether the effect of our manipulations on our measures of interest
(amount of attention, focus of attention, choice, sharing, perceived effectiveness, and likelihood
of applying) were moderated by demographics (sex, age, education, income), or credit card
status (have vs. do not have). No effects were significantly moderated by frequency of sharing
via one’s most frequent sharing source. We discuss the significant (p < .05) results below.
Sex. The tag was more impactful for men in our sample than women. For log average
time spent on the video, there was a significant three-way interaction among ads, video, and sex
(F(1, 393) = 4.38, p < .05). Men spent more time when there were no ads rather than misleading
ads and when they had seen the video tag rather than the baseline tag; the three-way interaction
was because the effect of the tag for men was marginally stronger for misleading ads than no ads.
Women spent more time when there were no ads rather than misleading ads, but were not
affected by the video tag. There was also a significant interaction between sex and tag on choice
21

of the optimal card (χ2(1) = 4.72, p < .05). Men who saw the tag made better choices than those
who did not, whereas the tag showed no benefit for women. No other interactions involving sex
were significant.
Age. All interactions included Age as a continuous variable. For interpretability, we
report estimated effects for 20 and 40 year olds. Attention to the pricing and terms varied as a
function of ads, video, and sex (F(1, 393) = 4.87, p < .05. For 20-year-olds, the tag increased
attention when there were false ads but not when there were no ads. For 40-year olds, the tag did
not increase attention. The effect of misleading ads on attention to the optimal card (vs. the other
cards) varied as a function of age (F(1, 393) = 4.25, p < .05). 20-year-olds spent more time on
the optimal card whether there were misleading ads or not, whereas 40-year olds spent more time
on the optimal card only when there were no ads and not when there were misleading ads.
Likelihood of applying for a card varied as a function of the video, ads, and age (F(1,
393) = 4.52, p < .05), such that the difference in application likelihood between tagged and base
videos was particularly pronounced for 20-year-olds faced with misleading ads. No other
interactions involving age were significant.
Credit Card Status. Nearly one-third of the sample did not have a credit card. Did the
effects vary according to credit card status? There was a three-way interaction on amount of
attention between video, ads, and having a credit card (F(1, 393) = 5.43, p < .05). Participants
without a credit card who were faced with misleading ads were most strongly affected by the
video tag. Likelihood of applying for a credit card varied as a function of having a card and
misleading ads (F(1, 393) = 4.74, p < .05). Misleading ads decreased application likelihood for
those without credit cards but not those with credit cards. No other interactions involving credit
card status were significant.

22

Education. Sharing varied as a function of education and misleading ads (F(1, 393) =
4.90, p < .05). For interpretability, we report the estimated effects for those with less than a high
school education and those who are college graduates. Misleading ads increased the likelihood of
sharing for those with less than a high school education but not for college graduates. The effect
of misleading ads on perceived effectiveness varied as a function of education (F(1, 393) = 3.91,
p < .05), such that misleading ads decreased perceived effectiveness for college grads but not for
those with no high school degree.
Income. We include our ordinal income measure as a continuous variable, reporting
estimated effects for those falling in the lowest income bracket (under $25,000, 29% of the
sample) and those in the third income bracket ($50,000 to $74,999, covering the 58th to 80th
percentile of our sample). The effect of video tag on choice varied with income (χ2(1) = 4.20, p
< .05). There was no effect for low-income individuals, but the tag improved choice for higherincome individuals.
The effect of the tag on sharing also varied with income (F(1, 393) = 6.60, p < .05). At
lower incomes, the tag decreased sharing, whereas at higher incomes, it did not. Finally, the
effect of the tag on perceived effectiveness also varied with income (F(1, 393) = 7.88, p < .01).
The tag increased perceived effectiveness even for those with low incomes, but the effect was
stronger for those with higher incomes.
Overall, the influence of our tagged video tended to be strongest for men, younger
participants, and higher-income participants.

23

4. Conclusion
This relatively simple experiment has yielded a rich dataset. First, online videos do have
the potential to increase the quality of household financial decisions, but merely presenting the
information in an engaging sticky format is not sufficient. The information must be interpretable
and implementable in order to direct attention appropriately. Second, effective does not indicate
sharable. In our study, increasing the effectiveness of the video by adding an implementation tag
also marginally decreased sharing. In fact, had it not been perceived to be more effective, it
would have been considerably less likely to be shared. Third, the perceived effectiveness, and the
effect of actual effectiveness, depend on the choice context. Consumers found our implemental
video to be more efficacious than our baseline video, but that difference was attenuated in the
presence of deceptive advertisements. Participants who made the right choice were more likely
to share the video than those who did not, but only when faced with deceptive advertisements.
Presumably those participants were the only ones who could (a) detect the right answer, and (b)
recognize the potential to be fooled. Finally, we provide process evidence suggesting how the
video and deceptive advertisements affected choice through their respective effects on amount
and allocation of attention, as well as the importance of understanding multiple paths to sharing.
Factors that increase perceived effectiveness alone without affecting properties of the video may
increase the likelihood of sharing, but changing the video without affecting perceived
effectiveness can actually decrease sharing.

24

References
Berg, G., Zia, B. 2013. Harnessing emotional connections to improve financial decisions: evaluating the
impact of financial education in mainstream media. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper
#6407
Berger, J. 2011. Arousal increases social transmission of information. Psychological Science, 22(7), 891893.
Carlin, B., Robinson, D. T. 2012. What does financial literacy teach us? Journal of Economic
Education, 43, 235-247.
Fernandes, D., Lynch Jr, J. G., Netemeyer, R. G. 2014. Financial Literacy, Financial Education and
Downstream Financial Behaviors. Forthcoming in Management Science.
Hayes, A. F. 2013. Introduction to mediation, moderation, and conditional process analysis: A
regression-based approach. Guilford Press.
Heath, C., Heath, D. 2007. Made to Stick: Why Some Ideas Survive and Others Die. Random House, Inc.
New York, NY.
Heinberg, A., Hung, A., Kapteyn, A., Lusardi, A., Samek, A., Yoong, J. 2014. Five steps to planning
success. Experimental evidence from US households. NBER Working Paper, #20203.
Lynch Jr, J. G. 2011. Introduction to the journal of marketing research special interdisciplinary issue on
consumer financial decision making. Journal of Marketing Research, 48(SPL), Siv-Sviii.
Soll, J. B., Keeney, R. L., Larrick, R. P. 2013. Consumer misunderstanding of credit card use, payments,
and debt: causes and solutions. Journal of Public Policy & Marketing, 32(1), 66-81.
Zhao, X., Lynch, J. G., & Chen, Q. 2010. Reconsidering Baron and Kenny: Myths and truths about
mediation analysis. Journal of Consumer Research,37(2), 197-206.

25

Figure 1. Video screenshots. The top left panel shows the video protagonist using the magic
remote to turn on sub-titles. The top right panel shows the subtitles that are displayed. The
bottom left panel shows the recap. The bottom right shows the implementation instructions of
how to act on that information. The tag, portrayed via the two bottom panels, was not shown to
the baseline participants.

26

Figure 2. Choice stimuli used in the study. The taglines (e.g., “Low minimum payment”) were
excluded in the “No Ads” condition. The Pricing & Terms information was only shown if
participants clicked on “Pricing & Terms” under a card. If participants clicked on the Pricing &
Terms for Card B while the screen displayed the information for Card C, the information would
change to Card B.

27

Figure 3. Credit card stimuli. The top panel shows the misleading ads condition. The middle
panel shows the no ads condition. The bottom panel shows the similar offering from Chase.com.

28

Figure 4. Choice share per condition. Darker areas represent choice of the best card.

100%

Choice Share

80%

38%

48%

56%

76%

60%
40%
20%

62%

52%

44%

24%

0%
No Ads

Misleading Ads

Baseline Video
Optimal Choice

No Ads

Misleading Ads

Recap Video
Suboptimal Choice

29

Table 1. Regression coefficients for mediation model. Tagged video was coded 1 for tagged
video, -1 for baseline video. Misleading ads was coded 1 for misleading ads condition, -1 for no
ads condition.

AvgLnTime
Antecedent

DiffLnTime

Choice (Logits)

Coeff

SE

p

Coeff

SE

p

Coeff

SE

p

Constant

1.9430

0.0685

<.0001

0.1080

0.0245

<.0001

-0.8941

0.2001

<.0001

Tagged Video

0.0851

0.0685

.2151

0.0697

0.0245

.0047

0.2182

0.1170

.0620

Misleading Ads

-0.4274

0.0685

<.0001

-0.0521

0.0245

.0338

-0.3557

0.1197

.0030

Tag x Mislead

0.0364

0.0685

.5952

-0.0021

0.0245

.9318

0.1367

0.1166

.2412

AvgLnTime

0.2432

0.0834

.0035

DiffLnTime

2.0166

0.3038

<.0001

Table 2. Regression coefficients for mediation model. Tagged video was coded 1 for tagged
video, -1 for baseline video. Misleading ads was coded 1 for misleading ads condition, -1 for no
ads condition.
Perceived Effectiveness
Antecedent

Coeff

SE

p

Constant

4.1958

0.0441

<.0001

Tagged Video

0.3666

0.0441

<.0001

Misleading Ads

-0.0840

0.0441

.0574

Tag x Mislead

-0.1073

0.0441

.0153

Perc. Effectiveness

Sharing
Coeff

SE

p

1.989

0.3815

<.0001

-0.3799

0.0847

<.0001

0.1519

0.0785

.0536

0.0931

0.0787

.2377

0.6166

0.0890

<.0001

30

