NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

COORDINATION AND CRISIS IN MONETARY UNIONS
Mark Aguiar
Manuel Amador
Emmanuel Farhi
Gita Gopinath
Working Paper 20277
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20277

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2014

We thank Cristina Arellano, Enrique Mendoza, Tommaso Monacelli, and seminar participants at several
places for useful comments. We also thank Ben Hebert for excellent research assistance. Manuel Amador
acknowledges support from the NSF (award number 0952816). The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, the Federal Reserve
System or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Mark Aguiar, Manuel Amador, Emmanuel Farhi, and Gita Gopinath. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Coordination and Crisis in Monetary Unions
Mark Aguiar, Manuel Amador, Emmanuel Farhi, and Gita Gopinath
NBER Working Paper No. 20277
July 2014
JEL No. E0,F0
ABSTRACT
We characterize fiscal and monetary policy in a monetary union with the potential for rollover crises
in sovereign debt markets. Member-country fiscal authorities lack commitment to repay their debt
and choose fiscal policy independently. A common monetary authority chooses inflation for the union,
also without commitment. We first describe the existence of a fiscal externality that arises in the presence
of limited commitment and leads countries to over borrow; this externality rationalizes the imposition
of debt ceilings in a monetary union. We then investigate the impact of the composition of debt in
a monetary union, that is the fraction of high-debt versus low-debt members, on the occurrence of
self-fulfilling debt crises. We demonstrate that a high-debt country may be less vulnerable to crises
and have higher welfare when it belongs to a union with an intermediate mix of high- and low-debt
members, than one where all other members are low-debt. This contrasts with the conventional wisdom
that all countries should prefer a union with low-debt members, as such a union can credibly deliver
low inflation. These findings shed new light on the criteria for an optimal currency area in the presence
of rollover crises.

Mark Aguiar
Department of Economics
Princeton University
Fisher Hall
Princeton, NJ 08544-1021
and NBER
mark@markaguiar.com

Emmanuel Farhi
Harvard University
Department of Economics
Littauer Center
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
efarhi@harvard.edu

Manuel Amador
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
Research Department
90 Hennepin Avenue
Minneapolis, MN 55401
and NBER
amador.manuel@gmail.com

Gita Gopinath
Department of Economics
Harvard University
1875 Cambridge Street
Littauer 206
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
gopinath@harvard.edu

1

Introduction

Monetary unions like the euro zone are characterized by centralized monetary policy and
decentralized fiscal policy. The on going crisis in the euro zone highlights the well known
problems associated with stabilizing asymmetric shocks with a common monetary policy.
These problems have been studied in depth starting with the seminal work of Mundell
(1961) on optimal currency areas. The crisis however has brought to the forefront a much
less understood phenomena of the consequences of heterogenous sovereign debt positions in
a monetary union on monetary policy and the conflicts that can arise. For instance there is
significant disagreement among euro zone members on how to confront the sovereign debt
crisis in high-debt countries. Countries like Germany are concerned about the fiscal and
inflationary consequences of the ECB’s promise to purchase sovereign debt of periphery
economies in the event of a crisis. On the other hand, crisis economies like Spain, Portugal,
Ireland and Greece argue that a lender of last resort is required to remove or mitigate the
threat of a self-fulfilling rollover crisis.1 In this paper we shed light on these under studied
issues. We introduce a framework that allows us to address the role of uncoordinated fiscal
policy but centralized monetary policy in nominal debt dynamics and exposure to selffulfilling debt crises.2 Our findings shed new light on the criteria for an optimal currency
area in the presence of debt crises.3
The environment consists of individual fiscal authorities that choose how much to consume and borrow by issuing nominal bonds. A common monetary authority chooses inflation
for the union, taking as given the fiscal policy of its member countries. Both fiscal and monetary policy is implemented without commitment. The lack of commitment on fiscal policy
raises the possibility of default. The lack of commitment on monetary policy makes the
central bank vulnerable to the temptation to inflate away the real value of its members’
nominal debt. In choosing the optimal policy ex post, the monetary authority trades off the
distortionary costs of inflation against the fiscal benefits of debt reduction. Lenders recognize
this temptation and charge a higher nominal interest rate ex ante, making ex post inflation
1

De Grauwe (2011) emphasizes the importance of the lender of last resort role for the ECB.
Araujo et al. (2012) consider some implications of currency denomination of debt in the presence of
self-fulfilling crisis. Dixit and Lambertini (2001) and Dixit and Lambertini (2003) examine the implications
for output and inflation in a monetary union where fiscal policy is decentralized and monetary policy is
centralized, allowing for the authorities to have conflicting goals for output and inflation. Cooper et al.
(2009) and Cooper et al. (2010) examine the interaction between fiscal and monetary policy in a monetary
union including exploring the incentives for a monetary bailout in the presence of regional debt. There exists
an important literature jointly analyzing fiscal and monetary policies in a monetary union in the presence of
New Keynesian frictions such as for example Beetsma and Jensen (2005), Gali and Monacelli (2008), Ferrero
(2009) and Farhi and Werning (2013). The focus of our paper differs from this literature as it is on debt,
inflation and crises.
3
For a survey on optimal currency areas see Silva and Tenreyro (2010).
2

2

self defeating.4
The joint lack of commitment and coordination gives rise to a fiscal externality in a monetary union. The monetary authority’s incentive to inflate depends on the aggregate value of
debt in the union. Each country in the union ignores the impact of its borrowing decisions
on the evolution of aggregate debt and hence on inflation. We compare this to the case of a
small open economy where the fiscal and monetary authority coordinate on decisions while
maintaining the assumption of limited commitment. We show that a monetary union leads
to higher debt, higher long-run inflation and lower welfare. While coordination eliminates
the fiscal externality, it does not replicate the full-commitment outcome. We show that full
commitment in monetary policy gives rise to the first best level of welfare, with or without
coordination on fiscal policy. These two cases allow us to decompose the welfare losses in
the monetary union due to lack of coordination versus lack of commitment.5 The presence
of this fiscal externality rationalizes the imposition of debt ceilings in a monetary union.6
In this context of debt overhang onto monetary policy, we explore the composition of
the monetary union. In particular, we consider a union comprised of high- and low-debt
economies, where the groups differ by the level of debt at the start of the monetary union.
Consider first the case without rollover crises, that is there is no coordination failure among
lenders in rolling over maturing debt. While inflation is designed to alleviate the real debt
burden of the members, all members, regardless of debt levels, would like to be part of a lowdebt monetary union. This is because in a high-debt monetary union the common monetary
authority is tempted to inflate to provide debt relief ex post but the lenders anticipate this
and the higher inflation is priced into interest rates ex ante. Consequently, the members
in a union obtain no debt relief and only incur the dead weight cost of inflation. A lowdebt monetary union therefore better approximates the full-commitment allocation of low
inflation and correspondingly low nominal interest rates. High-debt members recognize they
will roll over their nominal bonds at a lower interest rate in such a union, thereby benefiting
from joining a low-debt monetary union. This agreement on membership criteria however
does not survive the possibility of rollover crises.
In particular, we consider equilibria in which lenders fail to coordinate on rolling over
4

Barro and Gordon (1983) in a seminal paper demonstrate the time inconsistency of monetary policy and
the resulting inflationary bias.
5
Chari and Kehoe (2007) describe the roll of commitment in eliminating the fiscal externality in a monetary union. We demonstrate the separate role of coordination and of commitment in affecting inflation, debt
dynamics and welfare in a monetary union.
6
Debt ceilings on member countries are a feature of the Stability and Growth pact in the eurozone.
Similarly debt ceilings exist on individual states in the U.S. Von Hagen and Eichengreen (1996) provide
evidence of debt constraints on sub-national governments in a large number of countries, each of which
works like a monetary union. Beetsma and Uhlig (1999) provide an argument for debt ceilings in a monetary
union that arise from political economy constraints, namely short-sighted governments.

3

maturing debt. This opens the door to self-fulfilling debt crises for members with high
enough debt levels. In this environment, there is a trade off regarding membership criteria.
As in the no-crisis benchmark, a low-debt union can credibly promise low inflation, which
leads to low nominal interest rates and low distortions. However, in the presence of rollover
crises monetary policy not only should deliver low inflation in tranquil times but also serve
as a lender of last resort to address (and potentially eliminate) coordination failures among
lenders. The monetary authority of a union comprised mainly of low-debtors may be unwilling to inflate in the event of a crisis, as such inflation benefits only the highly indebted
members at the expense of higher inflation in all members. That is, while low-debt membership provides commitment to deliver low inflation in good times, it undermines the central
banks credibility to act as lender of last resort. Therefore, highly indebted economies prefer
a monetary union in which a sizeable fraction of members also have high debt, balancing
commitment to low inflation against commitment to act as a lender of last resort.
Importantly, the credibility to inflate in response to a crisis (an off-equilibrium promise)
may eliminate a self-fulfilling crisis without the need to inflate in equilibrium. This is reminiscent of the events in the summer of 2012 when the announcement by the ECB president
Mario Draghi to defend the euro at all costs sharply reduced the borrowing costs for Spain,
Italy, Portugal, Greece and Ireland. This put the brakes on what arguably looked like a selffulfilling debt crises in the euro zone, without the ECB having to buy any distress country
debt.7
One way to interpret these findings is to consider the decision of an indebted country to
join a monetary union or to have independent control over its monetary policy. In the absence
of rollover crises the country is best served by joining a monetary union with low aggregate
debt, as in such a union the monetary authority will deliver low inflation. This is the classic
argument for joining a union with a monetary authority that has greater credibility to keep
inflation low.8 By contrast, in the presence of self-fulfilling roll-over crises, the country can
be better off by joining a monetary union with intermediate level of aggregate debt, as this
reduces its vulnerability to self-fulfilling crises compared to a union with low aggregate debt.
Importantly, inflation credibility can be influenced endogenously through the debt composition of the monetary union. These findings shed new light on the criteria for an optimal
currency area and relates to the literature on institutional design for monetary policy. Rogoff
7

An alternative strategy would be for the core countries to promise fiscal transfers to the periphery in the
event of the crisis. The political economy constraints on engineering such transfers and the weak credibility
of such promises make the ECB intervention more practical and credible, which is why we focus on the latter.
8
Alesina and Barro (2002) highlight the benefits of joining a currency union whose monetary authority
has greater commitment to keeping inflation low in an environment where Keynesian price stickiness provides
an incentive for monetary authorities to inflate ex post.

4

(1985) highlighted the virtues of delegating monetary authority to a central banker whose
objective function can differ from society’s, so as to gain inflation credibility. Implementing such delegation however may be difficulty if society disagrees with the central banker’s
objectives. Here we demonstrate how debt characteristics of monetary union members endogenously impacts the inflation credibility of the monetary authority.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 presents the model in an environment without roll-over crises. It characterizes the fiscal externality in a monetary union.
Section 3 analyzes the case with roll-over crises. Section 5 discusses the implications for
the optimal composition of a union an indebted country is considering joining and Section
6 concludes.

2

Model

2.1

Environment

There is a measure-one continuum of small open economies, indexed by i ∈ [0, 1], that form
a monetary union. Fiscal policy is determined independently at the country-level, while
monetary policy is chosen by a single monetary authority. In this section we consider the
case where economies are not subject to roll-over risk, that is lenders can commit to roll-over
debt. We introduce rollover risk in section 3.
Time is continuous and there is a single traded consumption good with a world price
normalized to one. Each economy is endowed with yi = y units of the good each period
that is assumed to be constant. The local currency price at time t is denoted Pt = P (t) =
´t
P (0)e 0 π(t)dt , where π(t) denotes the rate of inflation at time t.9 The domestic-currency
price level is the same across member countries and its evolution is controlled by the central
monetary authority.10
Preferences Each fiscal authority has preferences over paths for consumption and inflation
given by:
ˆ
f

U =
0

∞

e−ρt (u (ci (t)) − ψ(π(t))) dt.

9

(Uf )

As we shall see, we assume that the monetary authority’s policy selects π(t) ≤ π̄ < ∞, and so the
domestic price level is a continuous function of time. Moreover, we treat the initial price level P (0) as
a primitive of the environment, which avoids complications arising from a large devaluation in the initial
period.
10
For evidence of convergence in euro area inflation rates and price levels see Lopez and Papell (2012) and
Rogers (2001).

5

Utility over consumption satisfies the usual conditions, u0 > 0, u00 < 0, limc↓0 u0 (c) = ∞.
As the fiscal authority controls ci (t), u(c) is the relevant portion of the objective function
in terms of fiscal choices. The second term, ψ(π(t)) reflects the preferences of the fiscal
authority in each country over the inflation choices made by the central monetary authority.
This term captures in reduced form the distortionary costs of inflation borne by the individual
countries. For tractability purposes we assume ψ(π(t)) ≡ ψ0 π(t) and we restrict the choice
of inflation to the interval π ∈ [0, π̄].
The monetary authority preferences are an equally-weighted aggregate:
ˆ
U

m

=
0

∞

e

−ρt

ˆ
i


u (ci (t)) di − ψ(π(t)) dt.

(Um )

Bond Markets Each country i can issue a non-contingent nominal bond that must be
continuously rolled over. Denote Bi (t) the outstanding stock of country i’s debt, the real
(t)
value of which is denoted bi (t) ≡ BPi(t)
. We normalize the price of a bond to one in local
currency and clear the market by allowing the equilibrium nominal interest rate ri (t) to
adjust. Denoting country i’s consumption by ci (t), the evolution of nominal and real debt
is given by:
Ḃi (t) = P (t) (ci (t) − y) + ri (t)Bi (t)
ḃi (t) = ci (t) − y + (ri (t) − π(t)) bi (t),
where the second line uses the identity ḃ(t)/b(t) = Ḃ(t)/B(t) − π(t).
Fiscal authorities cannot commit to repay loans. At any moment, a fiscal authority can
default and pay zero. If it defaults, it is punished by permanent loss of access to international
debt markets plus a loss to output given by the parameter χ. We assume that when an
individual country makes the decision to default it is not excluded from the union. We let
V represent the continuation value after a default.
u((1 − χ)y)
V =
−
ρ

ˆ

∞

e−ρt ψ(π(t))dt.

(1)

0

Note that the default payoff depends on currency-wide inflation, but does not depend on the
amount of debt prior to default.
Bonds are purchased by risk-neutral lenders who behave competitively and have an opportunity cost of funds r? = ρ. We ignore the resource constraint of lenders as a group by
assuming that the monetary union is small in world financial markets (although each country
is a large player in terms of its own debt). In particular, we assume that country i’s bond

6

market clears as long as the expected real return is r? .

2.2

Symmetric Markov Perfect Equilibrium

We are interested in the equilibrium of the game between competitive lenders, individual
fiscal authorities, and a centralized monetary authority. In particular, we construct a Markov
perfect equilibrium in which each member country behaves symmetrically in terms of policy
functions. The payoff-relevant state variables are the outstanding amounts of nominal debt
issued by member countries. We can substitute the real value of debt under the assumption
that P (0) is given; that is, the monetary authority cannot erase all nominal liabilities at the
start of time with a discrete devaluation of the price level. This is similar to bounding the
initial capital levy in a canonical Ramsey taxation program.11
In general, the aggregate state is the distribution of bonds across all members of the
monetary union. We are interested in environments in which members differ in their debt
stocks, allowing us to explore potential disagreement among members regarding policy and
the optimal composition of the monetary union. On the other hand, tractability requires
limiting the dimension of the state variable. To this end, we consider a union comprised
of high and low debt countries in the initial period. Let η ∈ (0, 1] denote the measure of
high-debt economies, and denote this group H and the low-debt group L. For tractability,
we assume that there is no within-group heterogeneity; that is, bi (0) = bH (0) for all i ∈ H
and bj (0) = bL (0) for all j ∈ L, with bH (0) > bL (0).
We focus on equilibria with symmetric policy functions, and so the initial within-group
symmetry is preserved in equilibrium. It is useful to introduce the following notation. Let
´
b(t)H = η1 i∈H bi (t)di denote the mean debt stock of the high-debt group, and similarly
´
1
b(t)L = 1−η
b (t)di denote the debt stock of the low-debt group. Let b = (bH , bL )
i∈L i
denote the vector of mean debt stocks in the two subgroups of members.
Using this notation, the relevant state variable for an individual fiscal authority is the
triplet (b, bH , bL ) = (b, b), where the first argument is the country’s own debt level and the
latter characterizes the aggregate state. Let C(b, b) denote the optimal policy function for
the representative fiscal authority in the symmetric equilibrium. The monetary authority’s
policy function is denoted Π(b), where we incorporate in the notation that monetary policy
is driven by aggregate states alone and does not respond to idiosyncratic deviations from
the symmetric equilibrium.
11
This also speaks to the differences between our environment and the “fiscal theory of the price level.”
In that literature, the initial price level adjusts to ensure that real liabilities equal a given discounted stream
of fiscal surpluses. In our environment, we take the initial price level as given and solve for the equilibrium
path of fiscal surpluses and inflation.

7

The individual fiscal authority faces an equilibrium interest rate schedule denoted r(b, b).
The interest rate depends on the first argument via the risk of default and the latter two
arguments via anticipated inflation. In the current environment we abstract from rollover
crises and focus on perfect-foresight equilibria. Lenders will not purchase bonds if default
is perfectly anticipated, and thus fiscal authorities will have debt correspondingly rationed.
From the lender’s perspective, the real return on government bonds absent default is r(b, b)−
Π(b), which must equal r? in equilibrium.12 In the deterministic case, there is no interest
rate that supports bond purchases if the government will default. Let Ω̄ ⊂ [0, ∞) denote the
endogenous domain of debt stocks that can be issued in equilibrium.13
Each fiscal authority takes the inflation policy function of the monetary authority Π(b)
as given, as well as the consumption policy functions of the other members of the union,
which we distinguish using a tilde, C̃(b, b). Given an initial state (b, b) ∈ Ω̄3 and facing an
interest rate schedule r(b) and domain Ω, the fiscal authority with initial debt b ∈ Ω solves
the problem:
ˆ
V (b, b) = max
c(t)

∞

0

e−ρt (u (c(t)) − ψ0 π(b(t))) dt,

(P1)

subject to
ḃ(t) = c(t) − y + (r(b(t)) − π(b(t)))b(t) with b(0) = b
b˙j (t) = C̃(bj (t), b(t)) − y + (r(b(t)) − Π(b(t)))bj (t), for j = H, L
b(t) ∈ Ω̄, t ≥ 0.
Note that this problem is written under the premise the government does not default. This
will be the case for any domain Ω̄ that is sustainable in equilibrium.
The monetary authority sets inflation π(t) in every period without commitment. The
decision of the monetary authority can be represented by a sequence problem where the
12

To expand on this break-even condition, consider a bond purchased in period t that matures in period
t + m and carries a fixed interest rate rt = r(b(t), b(t)). The nominal return of this bond is ert m . Equilibrium
requires that the real return per unit time is r? :
 e

?
P (t + m) rt m
e
= er m ,
P (t)
where superscript e denotes equilibrium expectations. Taking logs of both sides, dividing by m, letting
e
P (t)
, gives the condition rt = r? − π e (t).
m → 0, and using the definition that π e (t) = limm↓0 ln P (t+m)−ln
m
e
In equilibrium, π (t) = Π(bH (t), bL (t)), which gives the expression in the text.
13
More specifically, let D(b, b) denote the default policy function, with D(b, b) = 1 if the fiscal authority
defaults and zero otherwise. The additive separability in U implies that the equilibrium default decision
of an idiosyncratic fiscal authority is independent of inflation, and hence aggregate debt. Therefore, Ω̄ =
{b|D(b, b) = 0} does not depend on the aggregate states. The restriction that b ≥ 0 is not restrictive in our
environment, as no fiscal authority has an incentive to accumulate net foreign assets.

8

monetary authority takes the interest rate function r(bH , bL ) and the representative fiscal
authority’s consumption function C(b, b) as a primitive of the environment. For any debt
2
level (bH , bL ) ∈ Ω the monetary authority solves the following problem:
J(b) =

ˆ

max

π(t)∈[0,π̄]

0

(P2)
∞

e−ρt [ηu(C(bH (t), bH (t), bL (t))) + (1 − η)u(C(bL (t), bH (t), bL (t)))

−ψ0 π(t))] dt,
subject to
b˙j (t) = C(bj (t), b(t)) + (r(b(t)) − π(t))bj (t) − y
with bj (0) = bj for j = H, L.
Note that the monetary authority takes the equilibrium interest rate schedule r(b) as given.
From the lenders’ break-even constraint, we have that r(b) = r? +π e , where π e is the lenders’
expectation of inflation. In this sense the monetary authority is solving its problem taking
inflationary expectations as a given. This is why the solution to the sequence problem P2
is time consistent; the monetary authority is not directly manipulating inflationary expectations with its choice of inflation. In equilibrium, π e = Π(b), but this equivalence is not
incorporated into the monetary authority’s problem as the central bank cannot credibly manipulate market expectations. This contrasts with the full-commitment Ramsey problem in
which the monetary authority commits to a path of inflation at time zero and thereby selects
market expectations. The solution to that problem is to set π = 0 every period.
Before discussing the solution to the problem of the fiscal and monetary authorities, we
define our equilibrium concept as follows.
Definition 1. A symmetric Recursive Competitive Equilibrium (RCE) is an interest rate
schedule r; a fiscal authority value function V and associated policy function C; and a
monetary authority value function J and associated policy function Π, such that:
(i) V is the value function for the solution to the fiscal authority’s problem (P1) and C
is the associated policy function when Problem (P1) satisfies the consistency condition
C̃ = C;
(ii) J is the value function for the solution to the monetary authority’s problem and Π is
the associated policy function for inflation;
(iii) Bond holders break even: r(b) = r? + Π(b);
9

3

(iv) V (b, b) ≥ V for all (b, b) ∈ Ω .
The last condition imposes that default is never optimal in equilibrium. In the absence of
rollover risk, there is no uncertainty and any default would be inconsistent with the lender’s
break-even requirement. As we shall see, this condition imposes a restriction on the domain
of equilibrium debt levels. It also ensures that problem (P1), which presumes no default, is
consistent with equilibrium. That is, by construction the constraint b(t) ∈ Ω̄ in (P1) ensures
that the government would never exercise its option to default in any equilibrium.
Equilibrium Allocations As ρ = r? , a natural starting point for characterizing the equilibrium is that fiscal authorities would like to maintain a constant level of consumption and
stationary debt. Of course, this conjecture must be verified given that fiscal policy is implemented with nominal bonds rather than real bonds. To this end, we conjecture and verify
that stationary debt is an equilibrium.
Consider the problem of the fiscal authority when r satisfies the equilibrium condition
r(b) − Π(b) = r? = ρ. As b is beyond the control of an individual fiscal authority, we
can substitute this condition into Problem (P1), and, focusing on the part of the objective
function that is relevant for the fiscal authority, consider the simple consumption-savings
problem:
ˆ
max
c(t)

∞

e−ρt u(c(t))dt,

0

subject to ḃ(t) = c(t) − y + ρb(t). For b(0) ∈ Ω, the solution to this problem is constant
3
consumption; that is, C(b, b) = y − ρb for all (b, b) ∈ Ω . As this policy is followed for all
3
level of debt, ḃ(t) = ḃH (t) = ḃL (t) = 0. The associated value function for (b, b) ∈ Ω is
therefore:
ˆ ∞
u(y − ρb)
− ψ0
e−ρt Π(b(t))dt
V (b, b) =
ρ
0
u(y − ρb) − ψ0 Π(b)
=
,
ρ
which is conditional on the inflation policy function of the monetary authority.
The equilibrium domain Ω̄ can be determined from the condition:
V (b, b) ≥ V ,

10

which can be rewritten as
u((1 − χ)y) − ψ0 Π(b)
u(y − ρb) − ψ0 Π(b)
≥
,
ρ
ρ
or
b≤
h

χy
ρ

χy
.
ρ

i
. Note that this outcome verifies the conjecture that Ω is indepen-

Therefore, Ω = 0,
dent of aggregate states.
Turning to the monetary authority, faced with the above fiscal policy functions its problem becomes:
ˆ ∞
J(b) = max
e−ρt [ηu(y − ρbH (t)) + (1 − η)u(y − ρbL (t)) − ψ0 π(t))] dt,
π(t)∈[0,π̄]

0

subject to
b˙j (t) = C(bj (t), bH (t), bL (t)) + (r(b(t)) − π(t))bj (t) − y,
= [r(b(t)) − π(t) − ρ] bj (t),

j = H, L,

where the second line of the constraint substitutes C(b, ·) = y − ρb.
The solution to this problem satisfies the recursive Bellman equation:
ρJ(b) = max u(y − ρb) − ψ0 π + (r(b) − π − ρ)∇J(bH , bL ) · b0 ,
π∈[0,π̄]

wherever ∇J(b) = (JH , JL ) =
yields:



∂J
, ∂J
∂bH ∂bL



exists. The first order condition with respect to π



if
 0
Π(b) =
∈ [0, π̄] if


π̄
if

ψ0 > −∇J(b) · b0 ,
ψ0 = ∇J(b) · b0 ,
ψ0 < −∇J(b) · b0 .

(2)

The inequalities that determine whether inflation is zero, maximal, or intermediate, have a
natural interpretation. The marginal disutility of inflation is ψ0 . The gain from inflation is
a reduction in real debt levels conditional on consumption. This reduction is proportional
to the level of debt, and is translated into utility units via the terms ∇J = (JH , JL ).
Conditional on the optimal inflation policy, as well as the equilibrium behavior of lenders

11

and the fiscal authorities, the monetary authority’s value function is:
J(b) =
For b such that ∇Π(b) =



ηu(y − ρbH ) + (1 − η)u(y − ρbL ) − ψ0 Π(b)
.
ρ
∂Π ∂Π
,
∂bH ∂bL

"
− ∇J(b) =



(3)

exists, this implies

ηu0 (y − ρbH )
(1 − η)u0 (y − ρbL )

#
+

ψ0
∇Π(b).
ρ

(4)

We can construct an equilibrium by finding a pair (J(b, Π(b)) that satisfies (2) and (3).
There are many such pairs. The multiplicity arises because the monetary authority takes
the nominal interest rate function r(b) as given and chooses Π(b) as its best response.
Correspondingly, lenders set r(b) based on the monetary authority’s policy function. There
may be many pairs of functions that are best-response pairs.
One natural property is for the equilibrium to be monotonic, i.e. that Π(b) (and equivalently r(b)) be weakly increasing in each argument. From (4), monotonicity implies that
−∇J(b) · b ≥ ηu0 (y − ρbH )bH + (1 − η)u0 (y − ρbL )bL .
From (2), if the right hand side is strictly greater than ψ0 , then optimal inflation is π̄ in any
monotone equilibrium. It is useful to define the locus of points that defines this region. In
particular, for each bL ∈ Ω, let the cutoff bπ (bL ) be defined by:
ηu0 (y − ρbπ )bπ + (1 − η)u0 (y − ρbL )bL = ψ0 .

(5)

Note that the concavity of u implies that bπ is a well defined function and strictly decreasing
in bL . We thus have:
2

Lemma 1. In any monotone equilibrium, Π(b) = π̄ for b ∈ Ω such that bH > bπ (bL ).
As inflation is a deadweight loss in a perfect-foresight equilibrium, the best case scenario
in a monotone equilibrium is for π = 0 on the complement of this set. Doing so is Pareto
efficient in the sense that lenders are indifferent and both fiscal and monetary authorities
prefer equilibria with lower inflation. In particular, we have:
2

Lemma 2. The best (Pareto efficient) monotone equilibrium has Π(b) = 0 for b ∈ Ω such
that bH ≤ bπ (bL ).
Not all monotone equilibria are characterized by a simple threshold that separates zero
and maximal inflation. In particular, it is possible to construct monotone equilibrium with
12

Π(b) ∈ (0, π̄) for a non-trivial domain of b. These equilibria, however, are Pareto dominated
by the threshold equilibrium.
We collect the above in the following proposition:
i
h
χy
Proposition 1. Define bπ (bL ) from equation (5) and Ω = 0, ρ . The following is the best
3

monotone equilibrium: For all (b, b) ∈ Ω :
(i) Consumption policy functions:
C(b, b) = u(y − ρb);
(ii) Inflation policy function:

0 if b ≤ b (b ),
H
π L
Π(b) =
π̄ if b > b (b );
H
π L
(iii) Interest rate schedule:
(

r?
if
r? + π̄ if

(

u(y−ρb)
ρ
u(y−ρb)−ψ0 π̄
ρ

r(b) =

bH ≤ bπ (bL ),
bH > bπ (bL );

(iv) Value functions:
V (b, b) =

if
if

bH ≤ bπ (bL ),
bH > bπ (bL );

and J(b) = ηV (bH , b) + (1 − η)V (bL , b).
The best monotone equilibrium is graphically depicted in figure 1. We do so for a given bL
and let bH vary along the horizontal axis. Given the symmetry of the environment, diagrams
holding bH constant and varying bL have similar shapes, but with thresholds defined by the
inverse of bπ .
A prominent feature of this equilibrium is the discontinuity in the value functions at bπ .
A small decrease in debt in the neighborhood above bπ leads to a discrete jump in welfare.
The lack of coordination between fiscal and monetary authorities prevents the currency union
from exploiting this opportunity. We now discuss this “fiscal externality” in greater detail.
For expositional ease, we do so in the case of homogenous debt levels (η = 1). We then
return to the case of heterogeneity to explore the extent of disagreement about policy and
composition of the monetary union.
13

V (bH , b)

r(b)
•
◦

V

bπ

r? + π̄

◦

r?

•
bπ

bH

(a) Value Function

bH

(b) Interest Rates

C(bH , b)

Π(b)

bH
(c) Consumption Policy

π̄

◦

0

•
bπ

bH

(d) Inflation Policy

Figure 1: Solution in the Monetary Union with No Crisis
Figure 1: Solution in the Monetary Union with No Crisis

2.3 Fiscal externalities in a monetary union
2.3 Fiscal externalities in a monetary union
In this subsection, we assume all members of the monetary union have the same level of
In this subsection, we assume all members of the monetary union have the same level of
debt. In particular, we set η = 1, let b denote bH and let bπ denote the solution to (5) when
debt. In particular,
we set η = 1, let b denote bH and let bπ denote the solution to (5) when
η = 1 (that is, u00 (y − ρbπ )bπ = ψ0 ).
η = 1 (that is, u (y − ρbπ )bπ = ψ0 ).
The equilibrium described in Proposition 1 reflects the combination of lack of commitment
The equilibrium described in Proposition 1 reflects the combination of lack of commitment
and lack of coordination. With full commitment, the monetary authority would commit to
and lack of coordination. With
full commitment, the monetary authority would commit to
14
zero inflation in every period.14
In this equilibrium, nominal interest rates would equal r? .
zero inflation in every period. In this equilibrium, nominal interest rates would equal r? .
This generates the same level of consumption, but strictly higher utility for b > bπ . This is
This generates the same level of consumption, but strictly higher utility for b > bπ . This is
the Ramsey allocation depicted in figure 2, in which V = u(y − ρb)/ρ for all b. The figure
the Ramsey allocation depicted in figure 2, in which V = u(y − ρb)/ρ for all b. The figure
also depicts the allocation of Proposition 1, which is denoted “MU” for monetary union.
also depicts the allocation of Proposition 1, which is denoted “MU” for monetary union.
Clearly, the Ramsey allocation strictly dominates the monetary union case in the region of
Clearly, the Ramsey allocation strictly dominates the monetary union case in the region of
high inflation.
high inflation.
This point is reminiscent of the result in Chari and Kehoe (2007), which compares monThis point is reminiscent of the result in Chari and Kehoe (2007), which compares mon14
It
14

could also use commitment to rule out default and borrow above χy/ρ, but would have no incentive
It so.
could also use commitment to rule out default and borrow above χy/ρ, but would have no incentive
to do
to do so.

14
14

etary unions in which the monetary authority has full commitment versus one that lacks
commitment. This comparison is enriched by considering the role of coordination in an
environment of limited commitment, a point to which we now turn.
Absent commitment, the members of the monetary union cannot achieve the Ramsey outcome at higher levels of debt. However, they may be able to do better than the benchmark
allocation by coordinating monetary and fiscal policy, even under limited commitment. As
noted above, the discontinuity in the value function at bπ represents an unexploited opportunity for a small amount of savings to generate a discrete gain in welfare. With coordinated
fiscal and monetary policy, the optimal policy under limited commitment would be to reduce
debt in the neighborhood above bπ . Specifically, coordination makes the monetary union
a fiscal union as well, and we can consider the entire region a small open economy (SOE)
that faces a world real interest rate r? . This environment is characterized in detail in Aguiar
et al. (2012). Here we simply sketch the equilibrium so as to compare it to the solution of
the monetary union (MU) and refer the reader to the paper for the details of the derivation.
Specifically, we consider the same threshold equilibrium defined in Proposition 1.15 In
particular, consider an interest rate schedule r(b) defined on Ω which equals r? for b ≤ bπ
and r? + π̄ for b > bπ . We now sketch how the centralized fiscal and monetary authority
responds to this schedule, and verify that it is indeed an equilibrium. We then contrast the
resulting allocation with that depicted in figure 1.
Faced with this schedule, the unified “SOE” government solves the following problem:
ˆ
VE (b) =

max

{π(t)∈[0,π̄],c(t)}

0

∞

e−ρt (u(c(b(t)) − ψπ(t))dt,

(P3)

subject to
ḃ(t) = c(t) + (r(b(t)) − π(t))b(t) − y,

b(0) = b and b(t) ∈ Ω,

where the subscript E refers to the value for a small open economy. Unlike the problem in
the monetary union, fiscal and monetary policies are determined jointly in P3. Therefore
the impact of debt choices on inflation is internalized by the single authority.
At points where the value function is differentiable, the Bellman equation is given by,
ρVE (b) =
15

max

π(t)∈[0,π̄],c(t)

n
o
0
u(c) − ψ0 π + VE (b) (c − y + (r(b) − π)b) .

There are other coordinated SOE equilibria. See Aguiar et al. (2012) for details.

15

(6)

The first order conditions are:
0

u0 (c) = −VE (b),

0 if ψ ≥ −V 0 (b)b = u0 (c)b
0
E
π=
π̄ if ψ < u0 (c)b.
0
The first condition is the familiar envelope condition that equates marginal utility of consumption to the marginal disutility of another unit of debt. However, such a condition is
not satisfied by the monetary authority’s value function in the uncoordinated equilibrium,
as seen in equation (4). In the coordinated case, there is no disagreement between monetary
and fiscal authorities regarding the cost of another unit of debt. In particular, this provides
the incentive for the fiscal authority to reduce debt in the neighborhood above bπ in the
coordinated equilibrium.
In the region b ∈ [0, bπ ], the SOE, like the benchmark, faces an interest rate of r? and
finds it optimal to set c = y − ρb and π = 0. The consumption is optimal as the rate
of time preference equals the interest rate and the latter is optimal as –by definition –
ψ0 ≤ u0 (y − ρb)b for b ≤ bπ . Thus π = 0 satisfies the first order condition for inflation on
this domain.
The distinction between a SOE and the benchmark MU allocation becomes apparent
in the neighborhood above bπ . We start with the allocation at bπ . At this debt level,
VE = u(y − ρbπ )/ρ, which is the value achieved in the MU equilibrium. As in the MU
economy, in the neighborhood above bπ , a small open economy cannot credibly deliver zero
inflation, as ψ0 < u0 (y − ρb) for b > bπ . However, by saving it can do better than the MU
allocation. Specifically, the SOE chooses CE (b) < y −ρb, where CE denotes the consumption
policy function of the coordinated fiscal policy, and thus ḃ(t) < 0. At this consumption,
ψ0 > u0 (CE ), and so the associated inflation remains ΠE (b) = π̄, validating the jump in the
equilibrium interest rate.
In the neighborhood above bπ , the SOE can achieve the value V (bπ ) by saving a small
amount. That is, the SOE value function will be continuous at bπ . As noted above, the
monetary union keeps debt constant in this neighborhood as the idiosyncratic fiscal authorities do not internalize this potential jump in welfare from a small decrease in aggregate debt.
There is no such externality in the coordinated case.
The precise level of consumption in the neighborhood above bπ can be determined by
substituting in the envelope condition into (6) and using continuity of VE . In particular,

16

define cE ∈ (0, y − ρbπ ) as the solution to:
u(y − ρbπ ) = u(cE ) − ψ0 π̄ − u0 (cE ) (cE − y + ρb) .
This consumption level satisfies the Bellman equation in the neighborhood above bπ . In
this neighborhood, debt is declining and the economy approaches bπ from above. Along this
trajectory, there is no incentive for the government to tilt consumption as its effective real
interest rate is ρ. That is, CE (b) = cE < y − ρbπ = CE (bπ ) on a domain (bπ , b∗ ), where the
upper bound on this domain is given by y − cE = ρb∗ , the debt level at which cE no longer
generates b0 (t) < 0. For debt above b∗ , the government prefers not to save towards bπ as the
length of time required to reach this threshold is prohibitive.
Collecting the above points, we can characterize the SOE allocation, which is depicted
in figure 2 alongside the benchmark “MU” and Ramsey economies. For b ≤ bπ , the SOE,
Ramsey, and MU economies are identical. For b > b∗ , the SOE and MU economies are
likewise identical, as the SOE economy finds it optimal to set ḃ(t) = 0 despite having high
inflation, as in the benchmark. However, there is a difference for b ∈ (bπ , b∗ ). Continuity at
bπ places the SOE value function strictly above the MU case; however, limited commitment
places SOE strictly below the Ramsey welfare. More specifically, from the envelope condition,
the SOE’s flat consumption policy function (panel b) is associated with a constant VE0 (b);
that is, VE is linear on (bπ , b∗ ). Moreover, this value function is continuous, and thus the
line connects the MU value function at bπ to the MU value at b∗ . This line lies strictly above
the MU value function on this domain, representing the welfare loss MU experiences from
lack of coordination, but strictly below Ramsey, representing the welfare loss due to limited
commitment.
The presence of fiscal externalities rationalizes the imposition of debt ceilings in a monetary union. They can be designed to correct the incentives of individual fiscal authorities
and implement the SOE outcome in a monetary union by simply imposing b(t) ≤ bSOE
. Of
t
course the problem is that it is difficult to make such debt ceilings credible in the face of
ex-post challenges—as illustrated by the repeated violations of the Stability and Growth
pact in the eurozone.

2.4

Heterogeneity absent Crises

We conclude this section by discussing to what extent heterogeneity in debt positions creates
disagreement within a monetary union. We are particularly interested in the question of
whether existing members disagree about the debt choices of other members (or potential
new members). The answer to this question in the current environment contrasts with
17

V (b)
Ramsey

SOE
MU

V

b∗

bπ

b

(a) Value Functions

C(b)

MU, Ramsey

SOE

◦
b∗

b̄π

b

(b) Consumption Policy

Π(b)

MU, SOE
π̄

◦

0

•
Ramsey
bπ

b

(c) Inflation Policy

Figure
2: Fiscal
Externality,
Valueof of
Coordination
Figure
2: Fiscal
Externality,Value
Valueof
of Commitment,
Commitment, Value
Coordination
18

the answer when rollover crises are possible in equilibrium, and so the discussion in this
subsection sets the stage for a key result of the next section.
18

To do so, we consider η ∈ (0, 1), where recall that η is the measure of high-debt members
that enter with bH > bL . From the value functions defined in Proposition 1, all members
benefit from a higher bπ . From the definition of this threshold in equation (5), note that all
else equal, bπ is decreasing in η if bπ (bL ) > bL . This is the relevant domain as otherwise,
even low debtors have high enough debt to induce maximal inflation. This implies that even
high-debt members would like to see the fraction of low-debt members increase. Although
high-debt members trigger high inflation ex post, they would like ex ante commitment to
low inflation at the time they roll over their debt, which happens every period. This is
accomplished by membership in a low-debt monetary union. In fact, for bL < bπ (bL ), the
Ramsey allocation is implemented as η → 0. There is also no disagreement among the
heterogeneous members that this is welfare improving. The result that high-debt countries
benefit by joining a low-debt monetary union is not necessarily true when we introduce
rollover crises, the focus of the next section.

3

Rollover Crises

We now enrich our setup to allow for rollover crises defined as a situation where lenders
may refuse to roll over debt. This can generate default in equilibrium, unlike the analysis of
section 2. The distinction between high and low debtors will be a central focus of the analysis.
As in the no-crisis equilibrium from the previous section, in the equilibrium described below,
countries that start with low enough debt have no debt dynamics; as we shall see, this is
no longer the case for high debtors. To simplify the exposition, we set bL = 0 and drop bL
from the notation, as this state variable is always static in the equilibria under consideration.
That is b = bH is sufficient to characterize the aggregate state in the equilibria described
below.
To introduce rollover crises, we follow Cole and Kehoe (2000) and consider coordination
failures among creditors. That is, we construct equilibria in which there is no default if
lenders roll over outstanding bonds, but there is default if lenders do not roll over debt. In
continuous time with instantaneous bonds, failure to roll over outstanding bonds implies a
stock of debt must be repaid with an endowment flow. To allow some notion of maturity
in a tractable manner, we follow Aguiar et al. (2012) and assume that the fiscal authority
is provided with a “grace period” of exogenous length δ during which it can repay the
bonds plus accumulated interest at the interest rate originally contracted on the debt. If it
repays within the grace period it returns to the financial markets in good standing. If the
government fails to make full repayment within the grace period and defaults, it is punished
by permanent loss of access to international debt markets plus a loss of output given by the
19

parameter χ. We continue to assume that it is not excluded from the union.
We construct a crisis equilibrium as follows. We first consider the fiscal authority and
monetary authority’s problem in the grace period when creditors refuse to roll over outstanding debt. We compute the welfare of repaying the bonds within the grace period and
compare that to the welfare from outright default. This will allow us to determine whether
or not a rollover crisis is possible. We then define the full problem of the fiscal and monetary
authorities under the threat of a roll over crisis and characterize the equilibria.

3.1

The Grace-Period Problem

In this subsection, we characterize the equilibrium response to a rollover crisis. We continue
our focus on symmetric equilibrium and thus characterize the problem for an individual
country with debt b and the remaining debtors having debt b. This will allow us to establish
the payoffs to an idiosyncratic deviation. Countries with 0 debt are by definition not subject
to roll-over crisis and with ρ = r∗ their consumption c = y. We therefore focus on high-debt
countries. We re-normalize time to zero at the start of the grace period for convenience.
3.1.1

Fiscal authorities

When a fiscal authority is faced with a run on its debt it cannot issue new bonds to repay
maturing bonds. It has the option of repaying all debt within the grace period of length
δ or defaulting. When making its decision the individual fiscal authority takes the policies
of the other fiscal authorities and the monetary authority as given. However the payoff to
repayment depends on these other policies, which in turn depends on whether the other fiscal
authorities are themselves subject to a rollover crisis. To capture this dependence we index
the grace period problem for an individual fiscal authority by the aggregate policy function
Π̂(b, r, δ, t).
In the grace period problem, the government is obligated to repay the nominal balance
on or before date δ, with interest accruing over the grace period at the original contracted
rate r.16 In equilibrium, r = r(b, b) and r = r(b), but for now we treat r and r as arbitrary
primitives of the grace period problem.
We now state the problem of the fiscal authority with outstanding real debt b at interest
rate r when aggregate outstanding real debt is b and aggregate interest rate is r. Because a
fiscal authority takes inflation as given, it will be useful to define the value of repaying and
16

As in Aguiar et al. (2012) we impose the pari passu condition that all bond holders have equal standing;
that is, the fiscal authority cannot default on a subset of bonds, while repaying the remaining bondholders.
Therefore, the relevant state variable is the entire stock of outstanding debt at the time the fiscal authority
enters the grace period.

20

of default net of inflation costs V̂ G , given by
ˆ

δ

G

V̂ (b, b, r, r, δ; Π̂) = max
c(t)

e−ρt u (c(t)) dt + e−ρδ V̂ (0),

(7)

0

subject to
ḃ(t) = c(t) − y + (r0 − Π̂(b, r, δ, t)b(t),
b(0) = b,

b(δ) = 0,

(8)

and ḃ(t) ≤ −Π̂(b, r, δ, t)b(t).

The term V̂ (0) in the objective function represents the equilibrium value of returning to
the markets with zero debt at the end of the grace period. The constraint
ḃ(t) ≤ −Π̂(b, r, t)b(t) imposes that no new nominal bonds be issued, that is Ḃ(t) ≤ 0.
The alternative to repayment is default. The value of default (net of inflation costs) in
response to a rollover crisis is given by:
V̂ =

u ((1 − χ)y)
.
ρ

We write C G (b, b, r, r, δ, t; Π̂) for the fiscal authority’s consumption function.
The best response of the fiscal authority to a run on its debt is determined by V̂ G ≷ V̂ .
The value V̂ G (b, b, r, r, δ; Π̂) is decreasing in b and r. Note that the direct utility costs of
inflation do not enter into the decision to default in a crisis. These costs are borne regardless
of the individual fiscal authority’s decision. However, inflation also enters into the budget
constraint (8). Higher inflation relaxes this constraint making it easier for the fiscal authority
to repay its debt quickly. This is not offset by a higher (post-crisis) interest rate, as the fiscal
authority is not rolling over its debt at a new interest rate. Therefore, a fiscal authority facing
a crisis will find repayment relatively attractive the more accommodating is monetary policy.
We now turn to the monetary authority’s best response to a crisis.
3.1.2

Monetary authority

We now consider optimal monetary policy when the representative fiscal authority with debt
b0 faces a rollover crisis. In a symmetric equilibrium, all debtors will be subject to the same
crisis and choose the same response (default or repay). In selecting optimal monetary policy
during a rollover crisis, the monetary authority takes the crisis and response of the fiscal
authorities as given. If the fiscal authorities default, then the monetary authority simply
sets πt = 0 for all t, as no member of the currency union holds debt after default. If the
representative fiscal authority does not default, the monetary authority’s problem is:

21

ˆ
G

J (b, r, δ) = max

π(t)∈[0,π̄]

0

δ



e−ρt ηu(C G (b(t), b(t), r, r, δ − t, 0; Π̃G )) + (1 − η)u(y) − ψ0 π(t) dt
+

e−ρδ
J(0),
ρ

subject to
ḃ(t) = C G (b(t), b(t), r, r, δ − t, 0; Π̃G ) − y + (r − π(t))b(t),

b(0) = b.

This yields an inflation function ΠG (b, r, δ, t). Equilibrium requires that Π̃G (b, r, δ, t) =
ΠG (b, r, δ, t), and as a result C G (b(t), b(t), r, r, δ − t, 0; ΠG ) = C G (b, b, r, r, δ, t; ΠG ). The
reason we have introduced the notation Π̃G (b, r, δ, t) is to make explicit which effects are or
are not a priori internalized by the monetary authority, which lacks commitment. In Appendix A, we examine whether there are in fact inefficiencies arising from lack of commitment
or coordination between fiscal and monetary authorities in the grace period.
The value function J G (b, r, δ) is decreasing in b and r. We note that the objective function of the monetary authority and the fiscal authority differ because the former maximizes
aggregate welfare and recognizes that only a fraction η of countries have positive levels of
debt. Consequently the benefits from inflating are restricted to this η fraction of countries.
As we will see later, the problem of the monetary union with heterogeneity is isomorphic to
the problem with symmetric countries but with the monetary authority facing a perceived
cost of inflation ψ = ψ0 /η that differs from ψ0 . For a given (b, r), the monetary authority is
more likely to inflate the larger the fraction of countries with positive debt, i.e. the higher
is η.

3.2

Rollover Crises

Having characterized the equilibrium best response to a rollover crisis, we explore how runs
occur in equilibrium. To see how a run can be supported in equilibrium, consider an individual fiscal authority with debt b that faces a roll over crisis. Consider the problem of
an individual creditor when all other creditors refuse to purchase new bonds from the fiscal
authority, conditional on the aggregate state. If V̂ G < V̂ , then the best response of the
fiscal authorities to the rollover crisis is to default. An individual creditor that purchases
new bonds is not large enough to alter this decision and thus will receive zero in return for
any bonds it purchases. Thus, it is individually optimal for the creditor to also refuse to
purchase new bonds. On the other hand, if V̂ G ≥ V̂ , bondholders receive the contracted
nominal payment and thus the fiscal authority’s bonds would trade at a strictly positive
22

price. A run can therefore be sustained in equilibrium at a given level of debt as long as the
fiscal authority’s best response is to default.
While a run may be sustained at a particular level of debt, it is not the only equilibrium
outcome possible. Absent a run, the fiscal authority may be willing to service the debt
as usual, paying off maturing bonds by issuing new bonds. Moreover, as discussed in the
previous subsections, the response of an individual fiscal authority depends on whether
the other fiscal authorities are facing a crisis as well. To incorporate this multiplicity and
interdependence in a tractable manner, we extend the environment of Cole and Kehoe (2000),
which considers the case of a small open economy. Specifically, part of the equilibrium will
be a region of the debt state space in which a fiscal authority is vulnerable to a rollover
crisis. Following Cole and Kehoe, we shall refer to this region as the crisis region. To
characterize a symmetric equilibrium, this region needs to be defined over two dimensions–
the idiosyncratic debt of a fiscal authority and the debt of the representative debtor. Also
following Cole and Kehoe (2000), we introduce a sunspot that coordinates creditor beliefs.
Specifically, if (b, b) is in the crisis region of a fiscal authority with debt b, then with Poisson
arrival λ creditors refuse to roll over maturing debt and the fiscal authority defaults. We hew
as closely as possible to the single-country case of Cole and Kehoe (2000) by considering a
simple threshold bλ , such that an individual debtor with debt b ∈ Ω is vulnerable to a crisis
if b > bλ for all b ∈ Ω. We shall refer to the set {b ∈ Ω|b > bλ } as the “crisis zone,” and its
complement in Ω as the “safe zone.”
3.2.1

Fiscal Authorities

We now state the problem of the government when not in default. We assume the government
faces a bond-market equilibrium characterized by an interest rate function r(b, b) defined on
2
a domain Ω , an aggregate interest rate function r(b). The parameters defining the duration
of the grace period (δ) and crisis arrival probability intensity (λ) conditional on b > bλ are
taken as primitives of the environment.
Let T ∈ (0, ∞] denote the first time loans are called (i.e., a rollover crisis occurs). From
the fiscal authority’s and an individual creditor’s perspective, T is a random variable with a
distribution that depends on the path of the state variable. In particular,
P r(T ≤ τ ) = 1 − e−λ

´τ
0

1bt >bλ dt

.

The realization of T is public information and it is the only uncertainty in the model.
Given that an individual country takes the monetary policy as given, it is helpful to
define V̂ (b) to be the utility function without the inflation costs for a country that has an
23

amount of debt b. The government’s problem can then be defined to be:
ˆ

∞

´t

e−ρt−λ 0 1{bs >bλ } ds u(c(t))dt
V̂ (b) = max
c(t)
ˆ ∞ 0
´t
e−ρt−λ 0 1{bs >bλ } ds λV̂ dt
+

(P3)

0

subject to
ḃ(t) = c(t) − y + (r? + λ1{bt >bλ } )b(t),

b(0) = b and b(t) ∈ Ω.

where V̂ = u((1 − χ)y)/ρ (that is, the default value function excluding the inflation
costs). Note, we have used that in equilibrium the nominal interest rate the government
faces is r? + λ1{bt >bλ } + π(t). It follows then that the real rate that the government faces at
any time t is independent of the government’s choices at time t and equal to r? + λ1{bt >bλ } .
The solution to this problem delivers a consumption function C(b).
3.2.2

Monetary Authority

The problem of the monetary authority is given by:
ˆ

∞

´t

J(b) = max
e−ρt−λ 0 1bs >bλ ds (ηu(C(b(t)) + (1 − η)u(y))) dt
π(t)
ˆ ∞ 0
´t
e−ρt−λ 0 1bs >bλ ds λV dt
+
ˆ0 ∞
´t
−
e−ρt ψ0 e−λ 0 1bs >bλ ds π(t)dt,

(P4)

0

subject to
ḃ(t) = C(b(t)) − y + (r(b(t)) − π(t))b(t) and b(0) = b.
This generates an inflation function Π(b).

3.3

Crisis Equilibrium

We now state the definition of equilibrium with crisis:
Definition 2. A Recursive Competitive Equilibrium with crisis specifies an aggregate interest rate schedule r(b), an individual interest rate schedule r(b, b), a consumption function
C(b), an inflation function Π(b), value functions V̂ (b) for a fiscal authority and J(b) for
the monetary authority, a value function (net of inflation costs) for a fiscal authority in the
grace period V̂ G (b, b, r, r, t; Π̂), and finally a threshold bλ , such that:

24

(i) V̂ (b) is the value function for the solution to the fiscal authority’s problem and C(b) is
the maximizing policy function for consumption;
(ii) J(b) is the value functions for the solution to the monetary authority’s problem and
Π(b) is the maximizing policy function for inflation;
(iii) Bond holders earn a real return r∗ , that is r(b, b) = r∗ + Π(b) + λ1b>bλ and r(b) =
r∗ + Π(b) + λ1b>bλ ;
(iv) V̂ (b) ≥ V̂ ;
(v) if b ≤ bλ and b > bλ then V̂ G (b, b, r(b, b), r(b), δ; Π) < V̂ ; if b > bλ and b > bλ then
V̂ G (b, 0, r(b, b), r(b), δ; Π) < V̂ , where with a slight abuse of notation, we write Π̂ = Π
for the equilibrium inflation policy function with Π(b, r, t) given by Π(b, r, t) = Π(b(t))
where b(t) is defined by the following differential equation ḃ(t) = C(b(t)) − y + (r(b) −
Π(b(t)))b(t) with b(0) = b.
Condition (v) stipulates that an individual country facing a rollover crisis prefers to
default when its debt b at the start of the crisis exceeds bλ regardless of what the debt
b of the representative debtor is at the start of the crisis. The inflation policy chosen by
the monetary authority varies depending on whether the representative debtor country with
debt b is in the safe zone or in the crisis zone. If it is in the crisis zone inflation policies
correspond to inflation choices with b = 0 because the representative country defaults in the
crisis area.
The solution to the problem of the fiscal authority with positive debt level in the safe
zone is exactly the same as that of problem (P1) described in Section 2. The consumption
policy function is the steady state solution C(b) = y − ρb.
The solution to the problem of the monetary authority (P4) in the safe zone, is also the
same as the solution to problem (P2) in the no-crisis equilibria. The first order condition for
inflation as before requires comparing ψ0 to −J 0 (b)b where now:
− J 0 (b) = ηu0 (y − ρb) +

ψ0 Π0 (b)b
ρ

(9)

The cut off level of debt b̄π above which there will be high inflation in the safe zone is
therefore determined by the condition:
u0 (y − ρb̄π )b̄π =

25

ψ0
η

(10)

This equation follows intuitively. As the fraction of countries with positive debt increases the
monetary authority is more tempted to inflate as it perceives more countries benefiting from
the reduction in the real value of debt. In this sense as long as η < 1 there is a difference
between the cost/benefit of inflation as perceived by the monetary authority ψ0 /η and the
private cost of inflation ψ0 .

3.4

Threshold for the safe zone

There are many recursive threshold equilibria corresponding to different thresholds bλ . We
now propose a particular equilibrium selection, which leads to a specific determination of
the threshold for the safe zone bλ . We then motivate our equilibrium selection.
Consider a recursive threshold equilibrium. Let V̂ G (b, b, r, r, δ; Π̂) be the value function
(net of inflation costs) for a fiscal authority in the grace period, and let ΠG (b, r, δ, t) be
the inflation function for the monetary authority in the grace period when it satisfies the
consistency requirement ΠG = Π̃G . Define bλ and bλ by:
Definition 3. Let
?

(1 − e−r δ )y G
bλ ≡ sup b ≤
V̂ (b, b, r∗ + π̄, r∗ + π̄, δ; ΠG ) ≥ V̂
ρ


?
(1 − e−r δ )y G
∗ ∗
G
bλ ≡ sup b ≤
V̂ (b, b, r , r , δ; Π ) ≥ V̂ .
ρe−π̄δ



;

These two thresholds correspond to the maximal debt the government is willing to repay
within the grace period if the interest rate is r? + π̄ and r? , respectively. Note that we
have only to consider these two interest rates because we are firstly focusing on threshold
equilibria where inflation takes the two value 0 or π̄ and secondly because there is no rollover
crisis in equilibrium in the safe zone.
From the fiscal authority’s problem described in Section 3.1, we have bλ < bλ . This
follows from the fact that V̂ G (b, b, r, r, δ; ΠG ) is strictly decreasing in r. The equilibrium
threshold for a rollover crisis bλ lies in ∈ [bλ , bλ ], the exact value within this interval being
determined by optimal inflation.
We motivate our equilibrium selection as follows. In Appendix A, we show formally that
that in the grace period there is no fiscal externality. That is, if all countries are symmetric
and if fiscal and monetary decisions for all countries are delegated to a central authority,
then in the grace period, this authority would implement exactly the same allocation as that
reached in an equilibrium with independent fiscal authorities.
Despite the absence of the traditional fiscal externality in the grace period, there remains
26

a “default externality.” The default externality arises because there may be more than
one equilibrium best response from the monetary union. If the fiscal authorities default,
the monetary authority will not inflate thus making repayment difficult. Conversely, an
alternative equilibrium response may exist in which fiscal authorities repay within the grace
period, aided by accommodative monetary policy.
While the default externality may be of interest in some contexts, it is not robust to a
straightforward coordination of beliefs among members of the monetary union. In Appendix
A, we show that if all countries are symmetric and if default, fiscal and monetary decisions
for all countries are delegated to a central authority, then faced with a rollover crisis, the
allocation implemented by this authority can also be reached in an equilibrium when default
and fiscal decisions are made by independent fiscal authorities. That is, the monetary union
can achieve the single-decision-maker outcome in the symmetric equilibrium by coordinating
beliefs on the preferable equilibrium response.17
Our equilibrium selection imposes the requirement that if there exists an equilibrium
best response in which the monetary authority comes to the rescue of the fiscal authorities
in a crisis by generating high inflation, the fiscal authorities proceed as if they will be
rescued. This selection is appealing given the plausibility that beliefs within the union can
be coordinated in this way.
Given this requirement, our equilibrium is the monotone threshold equilibrium with the
largest possible crisis zone, i.e. the lowest possible value of bλ .18

3.5

Crisis vulnerability and the composition of debt

In this section we determine how the threshold for the safe zone bλ varies with the fraction
of countries with positive debt η. In our environment we can perform this analysis without
solving the problem of the crisis zone.
In figure 3 we graph the thresholds bλ , bλ and b̄π as a function of 1/η. From the problem
of the monetary authority in the grace period, Section 3.1.2, we have that the monetary
authority is more likely to inflate the higher is η. V̂ G (b, b, r, r, δ; ΠG ) excludes the direct cost
of inflation (as fiscal authorities ignore the impact of their decisions on inflation) but includes
the indirect benefit that arises from higher consumption when debt is inflated away. Since
the monetary authority is more likely to inflate the higher is η we have V̂ G (b, b, r, r, δ; ΠG )
17

Note that this is very different than the fiscal externality in section 2.3. In that case, there was not a
consistent set of equilibrium beliefs that resolved the fiscal externality. Indeed, this result stems from the
fact that there is no fiscal externality in the grace period as the interest rate on debt in arrears is constant.
18
In the safe zone a unique monotone threshold equilibrium will always exist. However, as we discuss
below for some values of ψ0 monotone threshold equilibria may not exist in the region where crisis is an
equilibrium possibility.

27

(weakly) increasing in η and accordingly bλ and bλ are weakly decreasing in η −1 . As drawn
in figure 3 there is a flat segment initially which allows for the possibility that for a range of
−1
−1
very low This
η −1 implies
the monetary
authority
chooses
inflate
tobλthe
maximal
that the relevant
threshold
for theto
crisis
zone is
. When
η1−1 < ηlevel
< ηand
2 , therefore
bπ ∈ [bλ , bλ ]of
and
jump inThe
inflation
triggersthreshold
a crisis andb̄theiscrisis
thresholdin
bλ η −1 , which
V̂ G is independent
η therefore
over thistherange.
inflation
increasing
π
−1
tracks bπ . To the right of η2 a crisis is triggered even when inflation is low and accordingly
follows straightforwardly
from equation (10).
−1
bλ tracks bλ . The crisis threshold evolves non-monotonically with η .
bπ
bλ

bλ

bλ

η1−1

η2−1

η −1

Figure 3: Crisis threshold and debt composition
Figure 3: Crisis threshold and debt composition

When there are a large number of debtor countries, very low η −1 , the monetary authority
−1 time, −1
times and
in responsejumps
to a roll-over
of safe zone.
In theinflates
rangeallηthe
< η1both
is inflation
from crisis.
0 to Since
π̄ in allthe
, binλ tranquil
> bπ , that
the inflation is priced into interest rates there is no gain from inflating in crisis times.
At
This implies that the relevant−1threshold for the crisis zone is bλ . When η1−1 < η −1 < η2−1 ,
the other extreme, when η is very high, there are so few countries with positive debt that
bπ ∈ [bλ , the
bλ ]monetary
and therefore
jump
in neither
inflation
triggers
a crisis
the tocrisis
threshold bλ
authoritythe
never
inflates,
in tranquil
times
nor in and
response
a crisis.
tracks bπ For
. Tointermediate
the rightlevels
of η2−1
a crisis
is triggered
even
when inflation
is low and
of debtor
nations
and therefore
intermediate
levels of aggregate
debtaccordingly
−1
the
monetary
authority
is
able
to
keep
inflation
low
in
tranquil
times
and
therefore
interest
bλ tracks bλ . The crisis threshold evolves non-monotonically with η .
rates are low in tranquil times and have surprise inflation in response to a crisis. This ability
When there are a large number of debtor countries, very low η −1 , the monetary authority
to generate surprise inflation reduces the real value of debt the country with positive debt
inflates all
theandtime,
both
tranquil
and there
in response
to acrisis.
roll-over crisis. Since all of
owes
increases
theinregion
of debttimes
over which
is no rollover
more
colorful
presentation
this idea
wouldis
be no
as follows:
Suppose
we refer toin
countries
the inflationA is
priced
into
interestof rates
there
gain from
inflating
crisis times. At
with zero debt as “Germany”
and countries with positive debt as “Greece”, for certain levels
−1
the other extreme, when η is very high, there are so few countries with positive debt that
of debt b, being in a union with lesser “Germany” can eliminate its exposure to roll-over
the monetary
authority never inflates, neither in tranquil times nor in response to a crisis.
risk, as compared to a union with all “Germany”.
For intermediate
levels
debtor nations
andthetherefore
intermediate
levels of aggregate debt
In Section
4 weofanalytically
characterize
full solution
to the crisis problem.

the monetary authority is able to keep inflation low in tranquil times and therefore interest
28
rates are low in tranquil times and have surprise inflation in response to a crisis. This ability
to generate surprise inflation reduces the real value of debt the country with positive debt
owes and increases the region of debt over which there is no rollover crisis.
In Section 4 we analytically characterize the full solution to the crisis problem.
28

4

Full Solution for Crisis Equilibria

4.1

Fiscal Authorities

We have already described the solution to the problem of the fiscal authority in the safe
zone. In this section we turn to the solution over the entire domain of debt, including the
crisis region, which is defined by the threshold bλ . The fiscal authority’s value given its
idiosyncratic debt as well as union-wide debt is V (b, b). However, aggregate debt only enters
the fiscal authority’s problem due to the inflation costs, which is additively separable and –
from the perspective of the fiscal authority – independent of fiscal policy. We can therefore
consider the fiscal authority’s problem net of inflation costs. This net value is denoted
V̂ (b). Note that this separability also exploits the fact that the crisis threshold faced by an
idiosyncratic fiscal authority, bλ , is independent of aggregate debt.
At points of differentiability b > bλ of the value function, the HJB of the planning
problem is:
(ρ + λ)V̂ (b) = max u(c) + V̂ 0 (b)[(ρ + λ)b + c − y] + λV̂ .
c

The first-order condition for consumption and the envelope condition are simply
u0 (c) = −V̂ 0 (b),
V̂ 00 (b)[(ρ + λ)b + c − y] = 0.
We continue to assume ρ = r∗ , however it is no longer the case that the solution for
the fiscal authority in the crisis zone for all levels of debt is the stationary solution. This is
because while fiscal authorities do not internalize the effect of their decisions on inflation,
they do internalize the effect of their debt choices on the individual interest rate they face
as it depends on the country’s default probability. The stationary level of consumption in
the crisis zone will be C(b) = y − (ρ + λ)b and consequently the stationary solution for
V̂ = u(y − (ρ + λ)b)/(ρ + λ). This V̂ is discontinuously lower to the right of bλ , the crisis
threshold, when compared to the V̂ = u(y − ρb)/ρ in the safe zone. Just as in Cole and
Kehoe (2000), the fiscal authority therefore has an incentive to save to the right of bλ so as
to exit the crisis zone, trading off lower consumption in the transition for higher steady state
consumption. There is an optimal level of debt bmax > b∗ > bλ such that for b > b∗ the fiscal
authority prefers the stationary solution, the “staying zone”, as it is too costly in terms of
foregone consumption to save out of the crisis zone.
Over the “saving zone” we have (ρ + λ)b + c − y < 0. Satisfying the envelope condition
requires that V̂ 00 (b) = 0, that is the value function is linear over the range of debt where the
29

country saves. As a result V̂ 0 (b) and consumption u0 (c) = −V̂ 0 (b) are constant. The solution
for the constant consumption in the saving zone, Cλ (bλ ) is determined by value matching
using the HJB at bλ . Smooth pasting at b∗ imposes that this constant consumption level
Cλ (bλ ) = y − (ρ + λ)b∗ .
The equilibrium solution for consumption, given the crisis threshold bλ is then given by:


if b ≤ bλ ,
 y − ρb
C(b) =
Cλ (bλ )
if bλ < b < b∗ ,


y − (ρ + λ)b if b∗ ≤ b ≤ bmax ,
where Cλ (bλ ) is defined implicitly by
λ u(χy)
Cλ (bλ ) − y + (ρ + λ)bλ
u(y − ρbλ ) u(Cλ (bλ ))
−
−
+ u0 (Cλ (bλ ))
= 0,
ρ
ρ+λ
ρ+λ ρ
ρ+λ
and b∗ by Cλ (bλ ) = y − (ρ + λ)b∗ . Note that the consumption policy function depends on η
through its impact on the equilibrium determination of bλ .
As a technical aside, we have characterized the fiscal authority’s problem as the solution
to the HJB where differentiable. Note that the fiscal authority’s optimal consumption policy
involves a discontinuity at bλ . This reflects the desire to save out of the crisis region. Once
the safe region is reached, consumption jumps to the stationary-debt level. From the first
order condition, u0 (c) = −V̂ 0 (b), this discrete jump in consumption implies that bλ is a point
of non-differentiability. While the HJB cannot hold in the classical sense at this point, it
does satisfy the conditions for a “viscosity” solution, which is the appropriate generalized
solution.19

4.2

Monetary Authority

Having already described the solution for the problem of the monetary authority in the safe
zone, we evaluate the problem in the crisis zone. The HJB for the monetary authority in
the crisis zone, where differentiable is given by:
(ρ + λ)J(b) = max ηu(C(b)) + (1 − η)u(y) − ψ0 π + J 0 (b)[(r(b) − π)b + C(b) − y] + λV .
π∈[0,π̄]

19

See Aguiar et al. (2012) for a discussion of viscosity solutions in a related context.

30

The first order condition and envelope condition are given by:

 0 if ψ /η ≥ −J 0 (b)b,
0
Π(b) =
 π̄ if ψ /η < −J 0 (b)b.
0
J 0 (b)Π0 (b)b + J 00 (b) ((ρ + λ)b + C(b) − y) = 0.

(11)

The full solution will depend on the value of η that in turn determines whether the jump
in inflation takes place in the safe zone or the crisis zone. As a counterpart to b̄π , which is
the debt threshold above which the monetary authority chooses high inflation when faced
with the interest rate ρ, define b̃π as the maximum debt threshold above which the monetary
authority will choose high inflation when faced with the interest rate ρ + λ. The equilibrium
inflation threshold is denoted by bπ .
Before providing the full analytical characterization of the solution for different values of
η in section 5.1, we describe using an example the circumstances under which a high-debt
country can be better off in a monetary union with an appropriate number of high debtors
than one with only low-debt countries. This relates to the discussion in the introduction
about optimal currency areas in the presence of self-fulfilling crises.

5

Optimal composition of a currency union

In the case without self-fulfilling crises a country with high debt is strictly better off when
every other member has low debt, (η = 0) as discussed in Section 2. This composition of the
currency union endogenously lowers the benefit of inflation for the monetary authority thus
enabling it to deliver the commitment outcome of zero inflation. However, this conclusion
changes when countries are exposed to roll-over risk. In this case a country with high debt
may be better off when there is an appropriate measure of high debtors, i.e. η is sufficiently
greater than zero, as it can lower the vulnerability of the country to self-fulfilling crises, if
that pushes the central bank to inflate in response to a roll-over crisis but not in tranquil
times.
To illustrate this, consider a currency union where every country has low debt i.e. η = 0.
In this case the perceived cost of inflation, ψ0 /η goes to infinity and the monetary authority
never inflates, neither in tranquil times nor in crisis times. Define bλ1 as the crisis threshold
in this case. Now consider increasing the fraction η in the currency union such that it leads
to an increase in bλ (as shown earlier) to bλ2 with the jump in inflation occurring to the
31

To illustrate this, consider the case where every country is has low debt i.e. η = 0. In
this case the perceived cost of inflation, ψ0 /η goes to infinity and the monetary authority
never inflates, neither in tranquil times nor in crisis times. Define bλ1 as the crisis threshold
in this case. Now consider increasing the fraction η in the currency union such that it leads
toright
an increase
in comparison
bλ (as shownofearlier)
bλ2 with
the jump in
inflation
occurring
the right
of bλ2 . A
the twotocases
demonstrates
that
a country
with atodebt
level
ofbλb1λ2<
. In
the country
withoffa joining
debt level
bλ2 is with
necessarily
better
off in
λ1 < b < union
b <this
bλ2 case
is necessarily
better
thebcurrency
a few high
debtors
the
currency
high debtors
> 0),only
than
in debtors
a currency
withtwo
onlyvalue
low
(the
second union
case), with
than ainfew
a currency
union(ηwith
low
(η =union
0). The
debtors.
valueinfunctions
in isfigure
5. The value
argument
is simple.
functionsThe
are two
depicted
figure 4. are
Thedepicted
argument
simple.
functions
at bλ1 The
are
0
0
value
at bλ1 −u
are(C
equal
(Cλ (bλwith
function
with
η=0
equalfunctions
and the slope
)) ofthe
theslope
value−u
function
= 0value
is strictly
more
negative
1 )) ofηthe
λ (bλ1and
isthan
strictly
thatη u>0 (y0 −
ρbλ1C)λwith
the more
slope negative
u0 (y − ρbthan
since
(bλ1 ) η<>y 0−since
ρbλ1 . Cλ (bλ1 ) < y − ρbλ1 .
λ1 ) with
There
Thereisistherefore
thereforeaarange
rangeofofhigh-debt
high-debtover
overwhich
which welfare
welfare is
is higher
higher for a high-debt member
ininaamonetary
monetaryunion
unionwith
with aa larger
larger number
number of
of high-debt
high-debt members
members than with too few high
debt
debtmembers.
members.When
Whenηηisishigh
highthe
themonetary
monetary authority
authority is
is credibly
credibly able to keep inflation low
tranquiltimes
timesbut
butinflate
inflateininresponse
response to
to aa crisis.
crisis. This
This greater
greater use of inflation in the grace
inintranquil
periodincreases
increasesthe
thesize
sizeofofthe
thesafe
safezone
zone and
and increases
increases the
the welfare
welfare of the country. Given our
period
assumptionon
oninflation
inflationcosts,
costs,low-debt
low-debt members
members are
are not
not worse
worse off following the increase in
assumption
20
18
becauseinflation
inflationhappens
happensoff-equilibrium.
off-equilibrium.
ηηbecause
V (b, b)

V

bλ1 bλ2

Figure 4: Welfare and debt composition

Figure 4: Welfare and debt composition
18

Alternative
cost specifications
mightthe
lead
to an increase
in the
equilibrium inflation
level, but the
point
We now describe
analytically
different
possible
configurations
of equilibrium
threshthat the impact on the crisis threshold depends on off-equilibrium inflation remains.

olds and their implications for welfare.

5.1

Cases

32

Case 1: b̄π < bλ
This is the case when the fraction of countries with positive debt is so high that the jump
in inflation takes place in the safe zone. The solution is depicted in figure 5.
20

Alternative cost specifications might lead to an increase in the equilibrium inflation level, but the point
that the impact on the crisis threshold depends on off-equilibrium inflation remains.

32

(i) Consumption policy function:


 u(y − ρb) if b ≤ bλ ,
C(b) =
Cλ (bλ )
if bλ < b < b∗ ,


u(y − ρb) if b∗ ≤ b ≤ bmax .
(ii) Inflation policy function:

Π(b) =


0
π̄

if b ≤ b̄π ,
if b̄π < b ≤ bmax .

(iii) Interest rate schedule:


if b ≤ b̄π ,
 ρ
r(b) =
ρ + π̄
if b̄π < b ≤ bλ ,


ρ + π̄ + λ if bλ < b ≤ bmax .
(iv) Value functions:

V (b) =


u(y−ρb)



ρ



 u(y−ρb)−ψ0 π̄

if b ≤ b̄π ,
if b̄π < b ≤ bλ,

ρ



V (bλ ) − u0 (Cλ (bλ ))(b − bλ ) if bλ < b ≤ b∗,




 u(y−(ρ+λ)b)−ψ0 π̄ + λ V
if b∗ < b ≤ bmax .
ρ+λ
ρ+λ

Case 2: b̄λ < b̃π < b∗ This is the case when the jump in inflation takes place within the
saving zone. In this case a monotone threshold equilibrium may not exist for certain values
of η as we discuss below. When it exists, the solution is as described below and depicted in
figure 6.

33

V (b, b)

V

b̄π bλ

b∗

(a) Value Function

r(b)

C(b)

ρ + π̄ + λ
ρ + π̄

◦

ρ

•
b

b̄π bλ

b̄π bλ

b∗

(c) Consumption Policy

(b) Interest Rates

Π(b)

π̄

◦

0

•
b

b̄π
(d) Inflation Policy

Figure 5: Solution in the case when b̄π < bλ
Figure 6: Solution in the case when b̄π < bλ

35

34

b

(i) Consumption policy function:



u(y − ρb) if b ≤ b̄λ ,


C(b) = Cλ (b̄λ )
if b̄λ < b < b∗ ,



u(y − ρb) if b∗ ≤ b ≤ b .
max
(ii) Inflation policy function:

Π(b) =


0
π̄

if b ≤ b̃π ,
if b̃π < b ≤ bmax .

(iii) Interest rate schedule:



ρ
if b ≤ b̄λ ,


r(b) = ρ + λ
if b̄λ < b ≤ b̃π ,



ρ + π̄ + λ if b̃ < b ≤ b .
π
max
(iv) Value functions:

u(y−ρb)



ρ



V (b̄λ ) − u0 (Cλ (b̄λ ))(b − b̄λ )
V (b) =
ψ0 π


V (b̃π ) − [u0 (Cλ (b̄λ )) + (ρ+λ)(b
∗ −b̃ ) ](b − b̃π )

π



 (u(y−(ρ+λ)b)−ψ0 π̄) + λ V
ρ+λ
ρ+λ

if b ≤ b̄λ ,
if b̄λ < b ≤ b̃π ,
if b̃π < b ≤ b∗ ,

if b∗ < b ≤ bmax .

The value function in this solution has a concave kink at b̃π and a convex kink at b∗ . To
ensure that a monotone threshold equilibrium exists, that is inflation does not jump down
to the right of b∗ , we require that the following condition holds: u0 (Cλ (b̄λ ))b∗ − ψ0 ≥ 0.21

Case 3: bλ < b∗ < b̃π < bmax
This is the case when the jump in inflation takes place within the staying zone. The
21

We can prove that [u0 (Cλ (b̄λ ))b∗ +

ψ0 π
(ρ+λ)(1−

b̃π )
b∗

] − ψ0 ≥ 0 is satisfied, but this is not sufficient. As

b̃π → b∗ , the second term can get large.

35

J(b)

V

bλ b̃π b∗
(a) Value Function

r(b)

C(b)

ρ + π̄ + λ
ρ+λ
ρ
b

bλ b̃π

bλ b̃π b∗

(b) Interest Rates

(c) Consumption Policy

Π(b)

π̄

◦

0

•
b̃π

b

(d) Inflation Policy
∗
Figure
in the
thecase
casewhen
when
<π b̃<πb<
∗ b
λ b̃
Figure6:7: Solution
Solution in
b̄λb̄<

38

solution described below is depicted in figure 7.

36

b

(i) Consumption policy function:



u(y − ρb) if b ≤ b̄λ ,


C(b) = Cλ (bλ )
if b̄λ < b < b∗ ,



u(y − ρb) if b∗ ≤ b ≤ b .
max
(ii) Inflation policy function:

Π(b) =


0
π̄

if b ≤ b̃π ,
if b̃π < b ≤ bmax ,

(iii) Interest rate schedule:



ρ
if b ≤ b̄λ ,


r(b) = ρ + λ
if b̄λ < b ≤ b̃π ,



ρ + π̄ + λ if b̃ < b ≤ b .
π
max
(iv) Value functions:

u(y−ρb)



ρ



V (b̄ ) − u0 (C (b̄ ))(b − b̄ )
λ
λ λ
λ
V (b) =
u(y−(ρ+λ)b
λ


+ ρ+λ
V

ρ+λ



 u(y−(ρ+λ)b)−ψ0 π̄ + λ V
ρ+λ
ρ+λ

37

if b ≤ b̄λ ,

if b̄λ < b ≤ b∗ ,

if b∗ < b ≤ b̃π ,
if b̃π < b ≤ bmax .

V (b, b)

V

bλ

b∗b̃π

(a) Value Function

r(b)

C(b)

ρ + π̄ + λ
ρ+λ
ρ
bλ

b̃π

b

bλ

(b) Interest Rates

b∗b̃π

(c) Consumption Policy

Π(b)

π̄

◦

0

•
b̃π

b

(d) Inflation Policy

∗ < b̄ < b
Figure
the case
casewhen
whenb∗b<
Figure7:8: Solution
Solution in the
b̄π <
π bmaxmax

39

38

b

6

Conclusion

The ongoing euro zone crisis has brought to the fore front the inherent tensions in a monetary
union where individual countries have control over fiscal decisions but where monetary decisions are made by a union wide monetary authority that maximizes welfare of the union as a
whole. It is a familiar argument that individual countries in a union are worse off when there
is limited synchronization in business cycles across countries, as a common monetary policy
for the union can be inconsistent with the needs of different countries. Here we highlight
another tension that arises when countries are subject to roll-over risk in debt markets.
The monetary authority may be able to use surprise inflation to reduce the real value of
debt owed and thus eliminate a roll-over crisis. Whether it will choose to do so and whether
it can effectively do so depends on the aggregate level of debt in the union. If the aggregate
level of debt in the union is low the monetary authority will choose never to inflate, neither
in tranquil nor in crisis time. At the other extreme, if the aggregate debt in the union is
high, the monetary authority uses inflation all the time and consequently fails to generate
surprise inflation. On the other hand when there is an intermediate level of aggregate debt
the monetary authority chooses low inflation in normal times and high inflation in crisis
times, thus generating surprise inflation and helps prevent a roll-over crisis. An indebted
country in the union therefore gets no help from the monetary authority in preventing selffulfilling crises when everyone else in the union is as indebted as it is or when no one in the
union is like it. A “Greece” is better off in a monetary union with some “Germany”, but
not all “Germany”. This composition gives “Greece” both low inflation and eliminates its
exposure to self-fulfilling crisis. Importantly, this can take place without any loss of welfare
to “Germany” if the use of inflation is done off-equilibrium.22
Clearly, debt crises disappear when a country’s debt is low enough. However, we demonstrate the existence of a fiscal externality that limits individual countries incentive to reduce
their debt. This arises because they fail to internalize the impact of their debt on the union
monetary authorities incentive to inflate. Consequently they end up with higher debt than
if they were an independent country with control over both fiscal and monetary policy.

22

We have described an environment where the debt of members of the union are held outside the union.
In reality, as in the case of the euro zone, a significant fraction of the debt is held by members of the union.
In our environment this would have similar effects to reducing η and therefore the incentive to inflate.

39

References
Aguiar, M., Amador, M., Farhi, E., and Gopinath, G. (2012). Crisis and commitment:
Inflation credibility and the vulnerability to self-fulfilling debt crises. Working paper.
Alesina, A. and Barro, R. J. (2002). Currency unions. The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
117(2):409–436.
Araujo, A., Leon, M., and Santos, R. (2012). Welfare analysis of currency regimes with
defaultable debts. Journal of International Economics.
Barro, R. J. and Gordon, D. B. (1983). Rules, discretion and reputation in a model of
monetary policy. Journal of Monetary Economics, 12(1):101–121.
Beetsma, R. and Uhlig, H. (1999). An analysis of the stability and growth pact. The
Economic Journal, 109(458):pp. 546–571.
Beetsma, R. M. and Jensen, H. (2005). Monetary and fiscal policy interactions in a microfounded model of a monetary union. Journal of International Economics, 67(2):320–352.
Chari, V. and Kehoe, P. J. (2007). On the need for fiscal constraints in a monetary union.
Journal of Monetary Economics, 54(8):2399–2408.
Cole, H. and Kehoe, T. (2000). Self-fulfilling debt crises. The Review of Economic Studies,
67:91–116.
Cooper, R., Kempf, H., and Peled, D. (2009). Insulation Impossible: Fiscal Spillovers in a
Monetary Union. NBER Working Papers 15176, National Bureau of Economic Research,
Inc.
Cooper, R., Kempf, H., and Peled, D. (2010). Regional debt in monetary unions: Is it
inflationary? European Economic Review, 54(3):345–358.
De Grauwe, P. (2011). The european central bank: Lender of last resort in the government
bond markets? CESifo Working Paper Series 3569, CESifo Group Munich.
Dixit, A. and Lambertini, L. (2001). Monetary-fiscal policy interactions and commitment
versus discretion in a monetary union. European Economic Review, 45(4-6):977–987.
Dixit, A. and Lambertini, L. (2003). Symbiosis of monetary and fiscal policies in a monetary
union. Journal of International Economics, 60(2):235–247.
Farhi, E. and Werning, I. (2013). Fiscal unions. working paper.
40

Ferrero, A. (2009). Fiscal and monetary rules for a currency union. Journal of International
Economics, 77(1):1–10.
Gali, J. and Monacelli, T. (2008). Optimal monetary and fiscal policy in a currency union.
Journal of International Economics, 76(1):116–132.
Lopez, C. and Papell, D. H. (2012). Convergence of euro area inflation rates. Journal of
International Money and Finance, 31(6):1440–1458.
Mundell, R. (1961). A theory of optimum currency areas. American Economic Review,
51:657–665.
Rogers, J. H. (2001). Price level convergence, relative prices, and inflation in europe. International Finance Discussion Papers 699, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System (U.S.).
Rogoff, K. (1985). The optimal degree of commitment to an intermediate monetary target.
The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 100(4):1169–89.
Silva, J. S. and Tenreyro, S. (2010). Currency unions in prospect and retrospect. Annual
Review of Economics, 2(1):51–74.
Von Hagen, J. and Eichengreen, B. (1996). Federalism, fiscal restraints, and european monetary union. American Economic Review, 86(2):134–38.

41

A

Fiscal and Default Externalities in Rollover Crises

The motivation for our equilibrium selection in Section 3.4 is that in response to a rollover
crisis, the optimal coordinated fiscal and monetary policies are a symmetric equilibrium best
response. In this section, we formalize this arguments. We break it down into two related
results. First we establish that in the grace period problem, the optimal coordinated fiscal
and monetary policies are a symmetric equilibrium best response. Second we establish that
in response to a rollover crisis, the optimal coordinated default, fiscal and monetary policies
are a symmetric equilibrium best response.
We start by showing that there is no fiscal externality in the grace period. To see this
formally, it is useful to consider the best response to a grace period when monetary and fiscal
policies are chosen by the same decision maker during the grace period. This is the scenario
of the small open economy considered in section 2.3:
ˆ
VEG (b, r, δ)

=

max

{π(t)∈[0,π̄],c(t)}

0

δ

e−ρt (ηu(c(t)) + (1 − η)u(y) − ψ0 π(t))dt + e−ρδ

u(y)
,
ρ

(12)

subject to
ḃ(t) = c(t) + (r − π(t))b(t) − y
b(0) = b,

b(δ) = 0,

where as before r is the contracted interest rate at the start of the crisis (which is the
equilibrium rate of the decentralized monetary union). For this problem, consumption and
inflation are coordinated. We have the following result.
Result 1. When the representative country is in the grace period, the optimal coordinated
fiscal and monetary policies are the only symmetric equilibrium best response.
This follows from the discussion of fiscal externalities in Section 2.3. Fiscal externalities
arise because fiscal authorities fail to internalize the impact of their debt choices on the
interest rates they face through its impact on inflation. In the grace period, the nominal
interest rate r is fixed at r0 , independent of the level of aggregate debt b(t). As a result,
fiscal authorities correctly internalize all the effects of their debt decisions. In other words,
there is no fiscal externality.
Despite the absence of the traditional fiscal externality in the grace period, there remains
a “default externality.” The default externality arises because there may be more than
one equilibrium best response from the monetary union. If the fiscal authorities default,
the monetary authority will not inflate thus making repayment difficult. Conversely, an
42

alternative equilibrium response may exist in which fiscal authorities repay within the grace
period, aided by accommodative monetary policy.
While the default externality may be of interest in some contexts, it is not robust to a
straightforward coordination of beliefs among members of the monetary union. To see this
formally, consider the best response to a rollover crisis when monetary and fiscal policies
are chosen by the same decision maker. The unified decision maker can decide to repay, in
which case optimal monetary and fiscal policies are determined as above in equation (12).
The unified decision maker can also choose default and receive V̂ E = η u((1−χ)y)
+ (1 − η) u(y)
.
ρ
o ρ
n
The coordinated best response leads to a value VE (b, r, δ) = max VEG (b, r, δ), V̂ E . We
have the following result.
Result 2. When the representative country is subject to a rollover crisis, the optimal coordinated default, fiscal and monetary policies are a symmetric equilibrium best response.
This result shows that the default externality is not robust to simple coordination.

43

