                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              DEPOSIT INSURANCE DATABASE

                                        Asli Demirgüç-Kunt
                                          Edward J. Kane
                                            Luc Laeven

                                        Working Paper 20278
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20278


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2014




This research was performed at the IMF and World Bank. This paper was also published as IMF Working
Paper 14/118. We would like to thank Belen Bazano and Lindsay Mollineaux for excellent research
assistance, and IMF colleagues for their useful comments and help in checking the accuracy of the
database. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the IMF, the IMF Board, the World Bank, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w20278.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Asli Demirgüç-Kunt, Edward J. Kane, and Luc Laeven. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Deposit Insurance Database
Asli Demirgüç-Kunt, Edward J. Kane, and Luc Laeven
NBER Working Paper No. 20278
July 2014
JEL No. G01,G21,G28

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper provides a comprehensive, global database of deposit insurance arrangements as of 2013.
We extend our earlier dataset by including recent adopters of deposit insurance and information on
the use of government guarantees on banks’ assets and liabilities, including during the recent global
financial crisis. We also create a Safety Net Index capturing the generosity of the deposit insurance
scheme and government guarantees on banks’ balance sheets. The data show that deposit insurance
has become more widespread and more extensive in coverage since the global financial crisis, which
also triggered a temporary increase in the government protection of non-deposit liabilities and bank
assets. In most cases, these guarantees have since been formally removed but coverage of deposit insurance
remains above pre-crisis levels, raising concerns about implicit coverage and moral hazard going forward.


Asli Demirgüç-Kunt                                  Luc Laeven
The World Bank                                      Deputy Division Chief
1818 H Street                                       International Monetary Fund
Washington, DC 20433                                700 19th Avenue, NW
ademirguckunt@worldbank.org                         Washington, DC 20431
                                                    and CEPR
Edward J. Kane                                      Llaeven@imf.org
Boston College
2325 E Calle Los Altos
Tucson, AZ 85718
and NBER
edward.kane@bc.edu




An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w20278
                                       Deposit Insurance Database

               Prepared by Asli Demirgüç-Kunt, Edward Kane, and Luc Laeven1

                                                  June 2014


Demirgüç-Kunt is Director of Research at the World Bank; Kane is Professor of Finance at
Boston College and a Research Associate of the NBER: Leaven is Lead Economist in the
Research Department of the International Monetary Fund and Research Fellow at CEPR in
London


                                                   Abstract

This paper provides a comprehensive, global database of deposit insurance arrangements
as of 2013. We extend our earlier dataset by including recent adopters of deposit insurance
and information on the use of government guarantees on banks’ assets and liabilities,
including during the recent global financial crisis. We also create a Safety Net Index
capturing the generosity of the deposit insurance scheme and government guarantees on
banks’ balance sheets. The data show that deposit insurance has become more widespread
and more extensive in coverage since the global financial crisis, which also triggered a
temporary increase in the government protection of non-deposit liabilities and bank assets.
In most cases, these guarantees have since been formally removed but coverage of deposit
insurance remains above pre-crisis levels, raising concerns about implicit coverage and
moral hazard going forward.

JEL Classification Numbers: G20

Keywords: Deposit insurance; Financial institutions; Financial crises
Authors’ E-Mail Addresses: ademirguckunt@worldbank.org; edward.kane@bc.edu;
llaeven@imf.org




1
 We would like to thank Belen Bazano and Lindsay Mollineaux for excellent research assistance, and IMF
colleagues for their useful comments and help in checking the accuracy of the database. The views expressed here
are our own and not those of the IMF or IMF Board.
                                                                  2


                                                           CONTENTS                                                                 PAGE

I. Introduction ............................................................................................................................3

II. The Database .........................................................................................................................4
        A. Variable Definitions ..................................................................................................4

III. Main Features of Deposit Insurance Schemes Around the World .....................................11

IV. Depositor Protection During the Global Financial Crisis ..................................................14

V. Concluding Remarks ...........................................................................................................18

References ................................................................................................................................20


Figures
Figure 1. Explicit Deposit Insurance by Income Group, 2013 ................................................23
Figure 2. Explicit Deposit Insurance by Region, 2013 ............................................................23
Figure 3. Type of DI Scheme, 2013 .........................................................................................24
Figure 4. Objective of the DI Scheme, 2013 ...........................................................................24
Figure 5. Organization of the DI Scheme, 2013 ......................................................................25
Figure 6. Administration of the DI Scheme, 2013 ...................................................................25
Figure 7. Funding of the DI Scheme, 2013 ..............................................................................26
Figure 8. Coverage Increased During Crisis and Remains Above Pre-Crisis Levels ..............26
Figure 9. Decline of Coinsurance, 2003−2013 ........................................................................27
Figure 10. Risk Adjustment of DI Premiums, 2013 ................................................................27
Figure 11. Government Support of DI Schemes, 2013 ............................................................28
Figure 12. Increase in Depositor Protection, 2007−2013 ........................................................28
Figure 13. Potential Deposit Liabilities and Ability to Pay by the DIS Fund, end-2010 ........29
Figure 14. Total Deposits and Ability to Pay by the Government, end-2010 .........................29
Figure 15. Size of DIS Fund Relative to Covered Deposits and Government Indebtedness...30
Figure 16. Safety Net Index, 2013 ...........................................................................................31


Tables
Table 1. Explicit Deposit Insurance Schemes Around the World, end-2013 ..........................32
Table 2. Coverage of Explicit Deposit Insurance Schemes Around the World, end-2013 .....34
Table 3. Design of Explicit Deposit Insurance Schemes Around the World, end-2013 .........37
Table 4. Recent Changes to Depositor Protection, 2007−2013 ...............................................40
Table 5. Fund Size and Coverage of Existing DIS, 2010 ........................................................43
                                              3


                                        I. INTRODUCTION

The recent global crisis tested and tried deposit insurance schemes (DIS), and their ability to
protect household savings in banks. Country authorities and financial regulators reacted to the
extraordinary circumstances of the crisis by expanding the coverage offered in existing deposit
insurance arrangements or adopting deposit insurance where it was not already in place. This
pattern of policy response exposed the adverse distributional effects of generous schemes and
underscored the strengths and weaknesses of different DIS features.

This paper presents a comprehensive database of deposit insurance arrangements through the end
of 2013, covering the IMF membership of 188 countries plus Liechtenstein. For countries with
an explicit deposit insurance scheme, information is provided on the characteristics of the DIS
(such as type, management, coverage, funding, and payouts). For recent years, we add
information on deposit coverage increases, government guarantees on deposits and non-deposit
liabilities, as well as whether a country experienced a significant nationalization of banks. To
assess a country’s ability to honor its deposit insurance (and other safety net) obligations, we
supplement these data with information on the size of potential deposit liabilities, the amount of
DIS funds, and government indebtedness.

While it is too early to draw definitive conclusions about the adequacy of DIS during the recent
global financial crisis, our preliminary assessment is that, by and large, DIS fulfilled its foremost
purpose of preventing open runs on bank deposits. In the face of large shocks to the global
financial system, as well as concerted and protracted concerns about the solvency of practically
every large financial institution in the world, we did not observe widespread bank runs. There
were some notable exceptions (such as Northern Rock in the UK) and there were protracted
withdrawals by uninsured depositors, but the world did not experience systemic bank runs by
insured depositors. From this perspective, DIS delivered on its narrow objective. However, as we
look to what we hope are many post-crisis years, the expansion of the financial safety net (both
through an extended coverage of deposit insurance and increased reliance on government
guarantees and demonstrated rescue propensities to support the financial sector) raises important
research issues. These issues include: (i) whether government finances are adequate to support
the promises of existing DIS in future periods of stress (the more so given that governments will
likely face renewed pressures to further increase DIS promises in future crises) and (ii) how to
balance the objective of preventing bank runs with the potentially negative effects of DIS in the
form of moral hazard and the threat to financial stability from incentives for aggressive risk-
taking.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the main database, with a
description of each variable included. Section 3 surveys the current state of DIS worldwide.
Section 4 reviews policies undertaken during the financial crisis period to protect depositors
against the loss of value of their deposit savings. Section 5 concludes.
                                             4


                                       II. THE DATABASE

The database builds upon earlier work by Demirgüç-Kunt, Karacaovali, and Laeven (2005). The
original dataset covered deposit insurance schemes through 2003. It was constructed through a
combination of country sources, as well as earlier studies by Garcia (1999), Kyei (1995), and
Talley and Mas (1990), among others.

This version updates the earlier database and extends it to 2013. Whenever possible, we relied on
official sources. Our starting point was a comprehensive survey on financial sector regulations
conducted by the World Bank in 2010. This survey asked national officials for information on
capital requirements, ownership and governance, activity restrictions, bank supervision, as well
as on the specifics of their deposit insurance arrangements. These data were combined with the
deposit insurance surveys conducted by the International Association of Deposit Insurers in
2008, 2010, and 2011, and in the case of European countries with detailed information on deposit
insurance arrangements obtained from the European Commission (2011). Discrepancies and data
gaps were checked against national sources, including deposit insurance laws and regulations,
and IMF staff reports. Information on government actions undertaken during the financial crisis
was collected from Laeven and Valencia (2012), FSB (2010, 2012), Schich (2008, 2009), Schich
and Kim (2011), and IMF staff reports.

Our focus is on deposit insurance for commercial banks. For countries with multiple DIS, the
data provided relate only to the national statutory scheme. This means that stated coverage levels
may understate actual coverage. For example, the complex voluntary DIS for commercial banks
in Germany provides insurance of up to 30 percent of bank capital per depositor, essentially
offering unlimited coverage for most depositors.

The full database, including information on arrangements other than the national statutory
scheme, is available in spreadsheet format as an online Appendix to this paper. The source of the
data is indicated in the appendix. The following section describes the variables used in the
remainder of the paper.

                                    A. Variable Definitions

Type of deposit insurance

We follow Demirgüç-Kunt, Kane, and Laeven (2006) in arguing that a country may be assumed
to offer implicit deposit insurance, given the strength of governmental pressures to provide relief
in the event of a widespread banking insolvency, unless the country has passed formal legislation
or regulation outlining explicit deposit coverage. Indeed, implicit coverage always exists,
regardless of the level of explicit coverage. Countries may have an explicit deposit insurance
scheme without specifying an institution or fund to carry out powers laid out in statutes or
regulation, but the issuance of temporary blanket guarantees by the government is not sufficient
to qualify as having explicit deposit insurance. Hence, we assume that any country that lacks an
                                             5


explicit deposit insurance scheme has implicit deposit insurance. Explicit takes a value of one if
the country has explicit deposit insurance, and zero if implicit. Table 1 lists all countries with
explicit deposit insurance.

Coverage

Explicit deposit insurance schemes typically insure deposits up to a statutory coverage limit.
Particularly during banking crises, countries often issue guarantees on top of pre-announced,
statutory limits. We provide information on both the statutory limits, and the limits taking into
account additional government guarantees. Coverage is the coverage limit in local currency. It
takes on a numerical value or “unlimited” if a full guarantee is in place. Coverage / GDP per
Capita is the ratio of the coverage limit to per capita GDP, expressed as a percentage, and based
on the statutory coverage limit. Table 2 reports these coverage limits both in reported (typically
local) currency and translated in US dollars (using end-of-year exchange rates). Data on GDP per
capita is taken from the April 2014 IMF WEO database, unless otherwise noted. Footnotes
accompanying Table 2 specify the coverage limits for individual countries. For countries with
coinsurance, coinsurance rules are also described.

Organization and administration

The organizational and administrative structures of DIS vary markedly, and this can have an
important bearing on its independence and efficacy. DIS can be organized as a separate legal
entity, or may be placed within a country’s supervisory structure or under the jurisdiction of the
national central bank, or other government ministry such as the Ministry of Finance or
Department of Treasury. These categories are mutually exclusive – any DIS must be legally
separate or located within the central bank, banking supervisor, or government ministry. Some
DIS are organized as separate legal entities but are hosted within and supported by the central
bank. We code such DIS as legally separate. . The variable Type is coded one if the DIS is
legally separate, and two if it is contained within the central bank, banking supervisor, or
government ministry.

Countries may choose an explicit DIS that is administered privately, publicly, or jointly through
some combination of the two. For example, Germany’s two statutory guarantee schemes have a
mixed private/public component where they are privately administered but established in law and
with public elements such as delegated public policy functions and oversight by the supervisory
agency. This choice is often based on country-specific experience with historical banking
failures and on whether private actors exist to potentially administer an explicit DIS (such as, for
example, bankers’ associations in Switzerland). Administration is coded one if the DIS is
administered privately, two if it is administered publicly, and three if it is administered jointly.
These categories are mutually exclusive.
                                            6


Role

While all explicit DIS must include a “paybox” function that provides payout to depositors in the
event of bank failure, countries may also decide to combine the DIS function with resolution
functions or that of banking supervisor or macro-prudential regulator, referred to as “paybox
plus.” Countries may also direct the DIS to minimize losses to the taxpayer, and provide it with
the legal means to do so by granting DIS managers authority to create bridge banks, replace
negligent bank managements, etc. Because the precise role of DIS schemes varies greatly
worldwide, we classify DIS as paybox only or alternatively as a “paybox plus”, including loss or
risk minimizer. These categories are mutually exclusive – DIS can either have a strict paybox
role or have responsibilities beyond the paybox function. Role is coded one if the role of the DIS
is paybox only, and two if it is a paybox plus, loss or risk minimizer.

Multiple systems

Some countries have multiple statutory deposit insurance schemes for different types of financial
institutions. These can be of a public or private nature, and in some cases mean that effective
coverage exceeds that stipulated under the national scheme. Multiple is coded one if multiple
schemes exist within a country, and zero if otherwise. The footnotes to Table 3 provide details on
the names of DIS active in the country, as well the institutions they cover when available. Our
focus is the remainder of the paper is on the main statutory scheme in the country applying to
private commercial banks.

Participation

In a world where finance has become increasingly globalized, differences in coverage among
domestic banks and foreign bank entities operating in the same country have become
increasingly important. For example, during the crisis in Iceland, deposits in foreign branches of
Icelandic banks, which according to EC Directive were to be covered by the Icelandic DIS up to
the statutory minimum of Euro 20,000, were initially not honored by Iceland. Domestic banks
are generally covered by the DIS, but country schemes vary as to whether the locally-chartered
subsidiaries or locally-domiciled branches of foreign banks are covered by the domestic DIS.
Domestic banks equals one if domestic banks are covered, and zero otherwise. For some
countries, such as the United States, the DIS does not base coverage on the home country of the
foreign institution. Elsewhere, such as in EEA (European Economic Area) countries, the DIS
extends coverage also to other countries but only within the EEA, with deposits in foreign
branches being covered by the home-country deposit protection scheme of the bank and deposits
in foreign subsidiaries being covered by the host-country deposit protection scheme. Deposits in
branches of non-EEA banks are generally not covered by the EEA schemes. The variables
Foreign subsidiaries and Foreign branches equal one if the local subsidiaries or, respectively,
local branches of any foreign banks are covered, and zero otherwise.
                                                    7


Types of deposits

The DIS typically does not extend the same coverage to all types of deposits. The variable
Foreign currency deposits takes the value one if the DIS covers deposits denominated in any
other currency than the official domestic currency, and zero otherwise. For some countries, this
may include all other currencies, while for others, a limited number of foreign currencies may be
covered. For example, while the DIS within the EU cover deposits in any of the currencies of EU
member states, not all cover deposits in currencies of non-EU member states. For example, the
DIS in Austria, Belgium, Germany, Lithuania, and Malta do not cover deposits in non-EU
currencies. Countries also may set different coverage limits for deposits in domestic or foreign
currencies. In most cases, payments on foreign currency bank deposits, if covered, are made in
local currency.

Coverage of interbank deposits is less common than that of retail deposits, as it is often assumed
that financial institutions are better equipped to monitor the riskiness of the institutions in which
they place deposits than small retail depositors. However, in times of financial market stress,
interbank deposits may be guaranteed to encourage the free flow of liquidity across banks. The
variable Interbank deposits is one if interbank deposits are covered, and zero otherwise.2

Funding

The primary function of a DIS is to prevent systemic bank runs. In order to do so, the DIS must
be able to credibly claim that it can and will pay depositors in the event of bank failure.
Countries can choose to fund potential payouts either ex ante or ex post. Most DIS with ex ante
funding collect premiums on a scheduled basis, while ex post schemes collect funds from
surviving institutions only when a covered bank fails and the available funds to cover depositors
prove insufficient. These categories are mutually exclusive. Funding equals one if funding is ex
ante and two if funding is ex post.

In addition to choosing between ex ante or ex post funding, DIS can also be funded by the
government, privately by covered institutions, or jointly between the government and private
actors. These categories are mutually exclusive. Countries such as Portugal with DIS primarily
funded by participating banks that have had government funding provided are classified as
funded jointly. Funding source is coded one if funding is by government, two if done privately,
and three if done jointly. Government funding refers both to start-up and ongoing funding. In the
case of ex post schemes, funding source refers to who pays the contributions to cover depositor
payouts (typically the surviving banks). Backstop funding is considered separately in what
follows. Depending upon a government’s ability to collect taxes or issue new debt, government-
funded schemes may credibly promise to address bank failures in a timely fashion, but they may

2
 In some countries, coverage could also exclude legal entities and central and local governments. We do not
consider these exceptions.
                                               8


face internal pressure to avoid paying out taxpayer funds in the event of a large failure. Privately-
funded schemes may encourage peer monitoring among institutions, but may more easily run
short of available funds to credibly pay out depositors in the event of systemic failures.

Government support

While the primary funding mechanism of a DIS may not be the government, some countries
provide contingency plans in the case of a shortfall of funds to cover deposits that include
government support. For some countries, this takes the form of pre-approved credit lines from
the Department of Treasury. For others, the DIS can issue bonds or receive loans guaranteed by
the government. Backstop is coded one if in legislation or regulation any such form of
government support in case of a shortfall of funds explicitly exists, and zero otherwise.
Government support includes only support from the central government, not support from the
central bank.

Risk-adjusted premiums

In addition to raising funds to cover future payouts, some DIS use differential premiums to curb
risk-taking by financial institutions. Procedures for assessing risk vary across countries. For
example, in Italy, banks are first grouped into six risk categories using four indicators of bank
risk and performance. Then, these risk categories are mapped into six different levels of risk-
adjusted premiums. In Greece, starting in January 2009, annual premiums are adjusted by a risk
coefficient that ranges between 0.9 and 1.1, as dictated by the bank’s placement into one of three
risk categories by the Bank of Greece. Risk assessment is based on measures of the bank’s
solvency, liquidity, and the efficiency of its internal control systems. Risk-adjusted premiums is
coded one if premiums are adjusted for risk, and zero otherwise.

Assessment

Countries can choose to assess premiums on a variety of balance-sheet items. Assessment base
denotes the base over which premiums are assessed. We classify the assessment base of
premiums into four mutually exclusive categories – covered deposits, eligible deposits, total
deposits, and total liabilities. Eligible deposits refers to deposits repayable by the deposit
insurance scheme, before the level of coverage is applied, while covered deposits are obtained
from eligible deposits when applying the level of coverage. The footnotes to Table 3 provide
greater detail on the assessment base. For example, as stipulated by the Dodd-Frank Act the US
FDIC changed the assessment base from total domestic deposits to average total assets minus
tangible equity (i.e., Tier 1 capital), as a way to shift the balance of the cost of deposit insurance
away from small banks to large banks that rely more on non-deposit wholesale funding.

Payouts

The most common form of DIS coverage is coverage at the “per depositor per institution” level.
However, some countries cover deposits per depositor, or per depositor account. Coverage per
                                                    9


depositor account is more generous than coverage per depositor per institution because it allows
depositors to increase their effective coverage by opening multiple accounts within the same
institution, while coverage per depositor per institution is more generous than coverage per
depositor because it allows depositors to increase their effective coverage by placing deposits in
multiple institutions. Some countries, such as the United States, have coverage per depositor per
institution for individuals, but treat joint accounts separately from individual accounts, such that
individual depositors with joint accounts can double their effective coverage (relative to the
statutory limit) within the same institution. Payouts to depositors is coded one if the coverage is
per depositor account, two if per depositor per institution, and three if per depositor. Table
footnotes provide further details for countries with a more complicated structure.

Sometimes DIS have insufficient funds or otherwise impose losses on depositors (in nominal
terms). We identify only three cases where substantial losses were imposed on insured deposits
(including losses in nominal terms) despite the existence of explicit deposit insurance –Argentina
(1989 and 2001), and Iceland (2008).3 Deposit losses is coded one for these countries, and zero
otherwise. Further details about each episode are provided in the footnotes to Table 3.

Banking crises

We also collect information on whether the country experienced a banking crisis between 2007
and 2012. Banking crisis date denotes the year that the country experienced a banking crisis.
Banking crisis dates for the period 2007-2011 are according to Laeven and Valencia (2012).
Cyprus is added to this list as of 2012.

Introduction of deposit guarantee scheme

During the financial crisis period, several countries introduced explicit deposit insurance
schemes (e.g., Australia and Singapore), or transitioned from unlimited government guarantees
already in place before the onset of the crisis into an explicit DIS with capped coverage limits
(e.g., Thailand). Introduction is coded one if the country introduced an explicit deposit insurance
scheme during the period 2008-2013, and zero otherwise.

Increase in statutory deposit coverage

Many countries raised coverage limits during the crisis. For some, raising coverage was a result
of ex ante decisions to index coverage limits to inflation-adjusted units, currency pegs, or
measures of income such as a multiple of the minimum wage. For other countries, coverage
limits were raised to discourage deposit outflows from the banking system. Within the EU in
particular, policies emphasizing convergence and harmonization in deposit insurance coverage

3
 We do not consider losses on uninsured deposits, including eligible deposits above the coverage limit. For
example, in March 2013, Cyprus imposed substantial haircuts on uninsured depositors in the country’s two largest
banks, which were assessed to be insolvent, and one of which was subsequently wound down.
                                            10


limits across countries resulted in large coverage increases. Other countries expanded the range
of accounts covered to include foreign currency or interbank deposits. Increase in coverage is
coded one if there was increase in coverage limits during the period 2008-2013, and zero
otherwise. Table 4 specifies all countries that introduced temporary increases in coverage during
the recent financial crisis.

Abolishment of co-insurance

In the pre-crisis period, co-insurance had gained popularity in some countries as a way to
preserve the financial stability benefits of an explicit DIS, while preserving some of the
monitoring incentives inherent in a system without formal coverage of deposits. With co-
insurance, depositors are insured for only a pre-specified portion of their funds (i.e., less than
100 percent of their insured deposits).For example, in a country with 20 percent co-insurance and
a maximum coverage limit of $100, depositors with less than $125 would receive 80 percent of
the money within their account. Depositors with any amount greater than $125 (where 80 percent
is the maximum of $100) would receive only $100. During the crisis, this disciplining
mechanism proved politically difficult to maintain. Sixteen countries had co-insurance in 2003 –
by 2010, only three remained. Coinsurance is coded one if co-insurance was abolished during
the period 2008-2013, and zero otherwise.

Government guarantee on deposits

Alongside increases in the statutory coverage of deposits, several countries instituted a
temporary unlimited guarantee on deposits. Government guarantee on deposits is coded one if a
(partial or full) government guarantee on deposits was put in place during the period 2008-2013,
and zero otherwise. Further details on specific deposit guarantees are provided in the footnotes to
Table 5.

We distinguish between whether the deposit guarantee covered only some deposits (Limited) or
all deposits (Full), and indicate the year when the guarantee was introduced (In place) and when
the guarantee expired (Expired).

Government guarantee on non-deposit liabilities

In addition to providing extended coverage for deposit accounts, many countries that
experienced a systemic banking crisis during the global financial crisis extended guarantees on
the non-deposit liabilities of financial institutions. For some countries, the guarantees were
limited to a small number of major institutions (Ireland). Other countries guaranteed specific
debt classes, or only new debt issuances (Republic of Korea, United States), while others
provided unlimited guarantees (Australia). Further details on the types of non-deposit guarantees
are provided in the footnotes to Table 5. Guarantee on non-deposit liabilities is coded one if
there were government guarantees applied to non-deposit liabilities during the period 2008-2013,
and zero otherwise.
                                                    11


Government guarantee on bank assets

In addition to guaranteeing bank deposits and other bank liabilities, some governments also
resorted to guaranteeing particular asset classes of banks’ balance sheets. For example, the
governments of the Netherlands and Switzerland guaranteed the asset values of some hard-to-
value assets on the balance sheets of ING and UBS, respectively. Guarantee on bank assets is
coded one if there were government guarantees on banking assets during the period 2008-2013,
and zero otherwise.

Significant nationalizations of banks

Government intervention during the financial crisis also included the government taking control
over financial institutions through nationalizations. Significant nationalization of banks is
coded one if there was significant nationalization of banks and other financial institutions since
2008. Nationalizations are defined broadly to include explicit nationalizations as well as cases
where the government takes control over financial firms through the acquisition of a majority
ownership stake or by placing government-sponsored enterprises into receivership.4 We identify
17 countries where a significant portion of the financial system was nationalized since 2008
(including, for example, Belgium, Iceland, Ireland, the Netherlands, the United Kingdom, and
the United States). While coverage limits may not have explicitly increased, nationalization
implies an implicit government backstop of all deposits within these institutions (and a reduction
in counterparty risk to these institutions for the rest of the financial system), as well as a
contingent future liability for these national governments.


         III. MAIN FEATURES OF DEPOSIT INSURANCE SCHEMES AROUND THE WORLD

The number of countries with explicit deposit insurance schemes has continued to increase. Out
of 189 countries covered, 112 countries (or 59 percent) had explicit deposit insurance by year-
end 2013, having increased from 84 countries (or 44 percent) in 2003. The 2008 global financial
crisis contributed to this trend, with 5 countries adopting deposit insurance in the year 2008
alone. Australia, long an advocate of implicit deposit insurance, was a notable example among
those countries that joined the ranks of those with explicit deposit insurance in 2008. Another
force has been the EU-driven harmonization process of deposit insurance, which spurred the
adoption of explicit deposit insurance throughout Central and Eastern Europe.

Deposit insurance is particularly widespread among high income countries. About 84 percent of
countries with high incomes had explicit deposit insurance by year-end 2013. Israel and San
Marino are notable exceptions among high income countries with implicit deposit insurance.

4
 For example, nationalizations of financial institutions in the United States include putting Fannie Mae and Freddie
Mac into receivership and the government acquiring a majority stake in AIG.
                                                   12


Explicit deposit insurance is less widespread among low income countries, at about 32 percent of
countries (see Figure 1).

Similarly, there is regional variation in the existence of explicit deposit insurance. In Europe,
almost all countries (or 96 percent of countries) have deposit insurance (the only two exceptions
are Israel and San Marino). Explicit deposit insurance is less widespread in other parts of the
world, with only 24 percent of countries in Africa having explicit deposit insurance (see Figure
2).

Deposit insurance schemes also vary markedly in how they are designed. Table 3 lists the main
features of existing deposit insurance schemes, with countries listed alphabetically.

Most explicit deposit insurance schemes are pre-funded, an arrangement that is commonly
described as an ex ante scheme, and contrasted with an ex post scheme. Ex ante schemes
maintain a fund that typically receives and accumulates contributions from covered banks. Ex
post schemes, on the other hand, collect premiums from surviving banks only if payouts from the
scheme occur, i.e., if a bank is declared insolvent and depositors need to be reimbursed. Of all
countries with explicit deposit insurance, 88 percent have an ex ante scheme (Figure 3). Ex post
schemes exist in about one-fourth of high income countries but are altogether absent in low
income and lower middle income countries. Notable examples are Austria, Chile, Italy, the
Netherlands, Switzerland, and the UK.5

The purpose of many deposit insurance funds is simply to reimburse insured depositors in the
event of bank insolvency. Such a fund is known as a paybox. Other funds have additional
responsibilities, varying from licensing of banks, supervisory authority, and ability to collect
information from banks. About 43 percent of all deposit insurance funds in ex ante schemes are a
paybox, while the remaining 57 percent of funds have extended powers or responsibilities,
including a responsibility to minimize losses or risks to the fund (Figure 4).

The majority of explicit schemes are legally separate from the central bank, banking supervisory
agency, or ministry of finance, even though they may be “housed” within such institutions; only
a minority of 14 percent of schemes is not legally separate from these government institutions
(Figure 5). This number varies by income level, and is slightly higher in low income countries
(27 percent).

Most deposit insurance schemes are administered publicly (about 66 percent of all schemes) but
there is wide variation across countries’ income levels. In low income countries, 82 percent of all
schemes are administered publicly. In high income countries, on the other hand, only 44 percent

5
 In 2011, the Netherlands adopted a plan to transform its ex post DIS into an ex ante funded scheme with risk-based
contributions. This transformation is scheduled to come into effect on July 1, 2015.
                                             13


of schemes are administered publicly, while 21 percent of schemes are administered privately
(by covered banks), while the remaining 35 percent of schemes are administered jointly between
the public and private sectors (Figure 6).

Funding of deposit insurance schemes derives primarily from contributions from the insured
banks, although some schemes are funded in part or in whole by their government. Joint funding
typically consists of start-up capital provided by the government with ongoing contributions
from participating banks. 77 percent of all schemes are funded privately, while 2 percent of
schemes are funded exclusively by the government, and the remaining 21 percent of schemes are
funded jointly. However, there is substantial variation across countries, with 91 percent of
schemes in high income countries being funded by the private sector (Figure 7).

Coverage limits also vary markedly across countries, both in absolute level and relative to per
capita income, especially when other government guarantees are accounted for (see Table 2 and
Figure 8). For example, statutory coverage limits range from a low of US$460 in Moldova to
highs of US$250,000 in the United States, US$327,172 in Norway, US$1,523,322 in Thailand
(where a blanket guarantee on deposits is being phased out), and full guarantees on deposits in
Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan.

Figure 8 shows that coverage increased sharply during the recent financial crisis (in part
reflecting the announcement of government guarantees on deposits) and was subsequently
reduced, although coverage levels on average remain above pre-crisis levels. By end-2013,
coverage limits on average amount to 5.3 times per capita income in high income countries, 6.3
times per capita income in upper middle income countries, 11.3 times per capital income in
lower middle income countries, and 5.0 times per capita income in low income countries.

Co-insurance, while relatively common prior to the recent financial crisis, has almost
disappeared as a feature of deposit insurance schemes, despite its loss-sharing appeal. The reason
is that co-insurance rules were not enforced during the crisis to avoid imposing any losses on
small depositors. It was feared that such losses might jeopardize depositor confidence and
financial stability generally. Once the crisis abated, these co-insurance rules – having lost
credibility – have not been reintroduced. While in 2003 a total of 16 deposit insurance schemes
had co-insurance, this number dwindled to 3 by the end of 2013 (Figure 9). The only three
remaining schemes with coinsurance are those of Bahrain, Chile, and Libya.

Adjusting deposit insurance premiums for risk, on the other hand, has been on the rise. By end-
2013, 31 percent of schemes adjusted premium contributions for risk (Figure 10). There is not
much variation across income levels in the use of risk adjustments. Risk assessment methods
varied widely across countries, though.

Many deposit insurance schemes (about 38 percent of all schemes) enjoy government backstops
in case of a shortfall in funds, mostly in the form of credit lines or guarantees on debt issuances
                                             14


from the Treasury (Figure 11). The presence of such backstops is slightly higher in high income
countries that tend to be in a better position to afford such guarantees (although this depends on
the size of the financial sector in these countries).

            IV. DEPOSITOR PROTECTION DURING THE GLOBAL FINANCIAL CRISIS

In an effort to contain the fallout from the global financial crisis, many countries expanded their
financial safety net, both by increasing coverage of deposit insurance and by extending
government guarantees to non-deposit liabilities (and in some cases on bank assets).

Figure 12 summarizes the increase in deposit protection since 2008, reporting the percentage of
countries that either introduced an explicit deposit insurance scheme or expanded deposit
protection in one of six ways: (a) increasing statutory coverage; (b) abolishing co-insurance; (c)
introducing a government guarantee on deposits (either limited or full); (d) introducing a
government guarantee on non-deposit liabilities; (e) introducing a government guarantee on bank
assets; or (f) undertaking significant nationalizations of banks. We report these actions separately
for crisis and non-crisis countries.

The expansion of the safety net was substantial, especially for crisis countries, and extended
beyond traditional deposit insurance. Fourteen countries introduced explicit deposit insurance
since 2008, and almost all countries with explicit deposit insurance that experienced a banking
crisis over this period increased the statutory coverage limit in their deposit insurance scheme
(96 percent of countries to be precise). Government guarantees on deposits were introduced in 32
percent of countries with deposit insurance and experiencing a banking crisis. 38 percent of these
deposit guarantees were blanket guarantees, guaranteeing deposits in full. Government
guarantees on bank liabilities were particularly widespread, especially among countries with
deposit insurance experiencing a banking crisis (72 percent of these countries extended
guarantees on bank liabilities). These guarantees varied from extending guarantees on debt
issuances to blanket guarantees on all debt liabilities. Government guarantees on bank assets
were used in 36 percent of countries with deposit insurance experiencing a banking crisis. Bank
nationalizations were also widespread, occurring in 64 percent of countries with deposit
insurance experiencing a banking crisis.

A number of insights can be gained from the crisis experience.

Together with central bank action in the form of extensive liquidity support and monetary easing,
deposit insurance schemes contributed to preventing open bank runs. For example, extensive
liquidity support to banks from the Federal Reserve combined with a credible fiscal backstop
from the US Treasury to the FDIC prevented a generalized run from FDIC-insured bank deposits
into currency. Federally uninsured savings in money market funds with reported a stable $1 net
asset value had a very different experience. Accounts in these funds became federally insured
temporarily when the crisis intensified in September 2008. Money market funds experienced
massive outflows (mainly into US banks) once it became publicly known (on September 16,
                                                     15


2008) that the Reserve Primary Fund was in trouble. And in Europe, despite diverging
macroeconomic fundamentals between the core and the periphery of the eurozone countries,
insured bank deposits remained remarkably stable in most countries, with the exception of (1)
isolated bank runs (Northern Rock in the UK and DSB Bank in the Netherlands) that were
quickly contained, (2) a slow moving “run” on deposits in Greece on the back of growing fears
of a euro breakup (total deposits declined by about 20 percent between 2010 and 2012), and (3) a
generalized run in Cyprus where authorities had declared that a tax on insured deposits could be
imposed (although this eventually did not materialize).

However, runs on uninsured deposits and non-deposit liabilities were widespread. For example,
there was a significant run on wholesale deposits and a repo run on broker dealers in the US.
These runs created severe stress in bank funding markets that had come to increasingly rely on
short-term wholesale funding. This interconnectivity between banks and markets implies that
funding shocks in capital markets can quickly spill over to banks and funding shocks to banks
can spill over into capital markets, threatening the stability of the financial system and the real
economy. The systemic risk that spillovers pose underscores the dangers of insuring wholesale
deposits and deposit-like instruments and extending the perimeter of the financial safety net to
nonbanks.

At the same time, many DIS were inadequately designed to stem the buildup of risk in the
banking system either by nurturing market discipline or by seeking compensation for the risks
being transferred to them. Co-insurance, a way to introduce market discipline, was largely
phased out by most countries prior to the crisis. Nor did DIS premiums adequately reflect tail
risk, effectively subsidizing potentially ruinous risk taking by banks.6 For example, about 97
percent of banks were assigned the lowest risk category in the US and were being charged a zero
percent explicit premium for deposit insurance during the run-up to the crisis. And the majority
of ex ante funds was small relative to the amount of insured deposits and was well below their
target sizes.

To maintain public confidence in the banking system during the crisis, many countries raised
deposit insurance coverage and introduced government guarantees on additional bank assets and
liabilities. These measures generally seem to have had the intended beneficial short-run effect,
although questions surfaced about the ability of some governments to honor their expanding
obligations. For example, within the EU, national deposit insurance schemes nominally cover a
minimum coverage limit determined at the EU level. Growing uncertainty emerged about the
ability of peripheral European countries with sovereign debt problems to honor these obligations,
causing some deposit flight to banks in countries with stronger sovereigns, such as Germany.


6
 The failure of DIS premiums to reflect tail risks does not necessarily reflect an inadequate design of DIS. It could
also simply be a result of a general failure to assess financial sector risks.
                                             16


The issue is much broader though than that faced in these troubled economies. Many DIS appear
underfunded, especially in countries with large financial systems. Table 5 highlights the
imbalances between the ability to pay and potential liabilities from deposit insurance. The table
contrasts the amount of coverage promised with the amounts of funds available (from bank
contributions) and the government debt-to-GDP ratio, which we use as an inverse proxy for the
ability of a government to expand its debt to backstop the DIS fund in individual countries. The
size of the DIS fund seldom exceeds the percentage of deposits covered by DIS, leading one to
wonder whether sufficient funds would be available to pay off depositors quickly in a large
failed bank without resorting to additional public funding (see also Figure 13). More generally,
the sizeable amounts of bank deposits relative to GDP combined with high levels of government
indebtedness in some countries raise doubts about the ability of governments in these countries
to backstop the financial safety net (Figure 14).

An additional complication that came to the fore during the crisis is the potentially different
treatment of foreign and domestic depositors. For example, Iceland chose not to honor its deposit
insurance obligations to foreign depositors when faced with a banking crisis at home. And in
Europe, there are growing concerns especially among large corporate depositors about being
“bailed in” during bank rescues.

To measure the generosity of the deposit insurance scheme and the existence of government
guarantees on bank assets and liabilities, we create a safety net index, similar to the moral hazard
index in Demirgüç-Kunt and Detragiache (2002).

The safety net index is computed using principal component analysis of standardized design
feature variables that each are increasing in moral hazard. Specifically, we use the following
design features: Coverage limit / GDP per capita and dummy variables for unlimited government
guarantees in place, coverage of foreign currency deposits, coverage of interbank deposits, no
co-insurance, payouts to depositors (per deposit account=2; per depositor per institution=1; per
depositor=0), no risk-adjusted premiums, ex ante fund, funded by government, backstop from
government, no losses imposed on uninsured deposits, government guarantees on bank deposits
(limited or full), government guarantees on non-deposit liabilities since 2008, and government
guarantees on bank assets since 2008. Each of these variables is constructed such that higher
values denote more generosity or greater government support and imply more moral hazard. This
set expands the set of deposit insurance variables used by Demirgüç-Kunt and Detragiache
(2002) by including information on government guarantees in the financial sector. As such, the
index captures moral hazard generated by the financial safety net at large, not deposit insurance
in a strict sense. The safety net index (SNI) is the sum of the first six principal components for
which the eigenvalues exceed 1.

Figure 16 reports the values of our SNI index, with higher values denoting more generosity, and
consequently more moral hazard. We observe much country variation in the SNI index. It ranges
from lows of -11.9 in Argentina and -10.5 in Iceland (which both have imposed losses on insured
                                                    17


depositors) to highs of 4.6 in Ireland and the United States (both of which issued temporary
guarantees on deposits and non-deposit liabilities during the recent crisis) and 4.5 in
Turkmenistan and 7.8 in Uzbekistan (both of which have blanket guarantees). Some of these
countries will be able to fund such generous safety nets promises, but the fairness and efficiency
of imposing such a burden on households and nonfinancial firms is questionable. And the moral
hazard it creates is hard to contain as evidenced in the difficulty of eliminating the too big to fail
problem.

Going forward, important questions remain about how to restore market discipline. The problem
is the perverse incentives generated by expectations that in future crises authorities will adopt the
same policies of increasing coverage and creatively expand the financial safety net even further.
Expectations that bailouts will again be the tool of choice in future crises complicate the role and
effectiveness of deposit insurance limitations.

Academic research prior to the crisis generally advocated a limited role for deposit insurance,
underscoring the moral hazard incentives associated with overly generous coverage. Concerns
about moral hazard led to policy recommendations for low coverage-to-income limits, co-
insurance schemes, and the exclusion of wholesale deposits (e.g., Demirgüç-Kunt and
Detragiache, 2002, and Demirgüç-Kunt and Huizinga, 2004).

Using data on deposit insurance design features before the recent global financial crisis, Anginer,
Demirgüç-Kunt, and Min (2014) examine the relation between deposit insurance, bank risk, and
systemic fragility across a large number of countries in the years leading to and during the crisis.
They show that generous financial safety nets increase bank risk and systemic fragility in the
years leading up to the crisis (the moral hazard effect), however during the crisis, bank risk is
lower and systemic stability is greater in countries with deposit insurance coverage (the
stabilization effect). Consistent with the earlier literature, they find that the overall effect of
deposit insurance over the full sample remains negative, suggesting that the destabilizing effect
due to moral hazard is greater in magnitude compared to its stabilizing effect during periods of
financial turbulence.

However, less attention was paid to the political economy problems that plague deposit insurance
at times of a crisis.7 When faced with a crisis, governments quickly rewrote existing statutes so
that DIS managers worldwide could increase coverage limits, abolish coinsurance, and extend
guarantees on non-deposit liabilities. Because this kind of support is funded as a contingent
liability, neither the DIS nor the national governments felt an immediate fiscal repercussion.
These actions could be performed easily and quickly in the name of financial stability. None of
these increases in potential liabilities passed through official government budgets. And because

7
  What Kane (1989) calls the “proliferation of hopelessly insolvent zombie institutions simultaneously gambling for
resurrection.”
                                            18


they were not accompanied by increased premiums or other measures to rein in risk-taking by
the insured (such as ex post levies on banks), the banks being rescued did not complain either.
The problem is that these political economy considerations are not symmetric. Once in place, it
is politically very hard to unwind guarantees and especially difficult to decrease DIS coverage,
when and as a crisis abates. And while premiums can be gradually increased on banks to recoup
part of the subsidy passed through the financial safety net from the bailout policies, the problem
is that it is never easy to recoup these costs only from surviving banks who often have even more
political clout than before the crisis occurred. Their clout helps to persuade authorities to hold
post-crisis premiums below actuarially fair levels, not only to lower the burden on the banks, but
to support credit growth and macroeconomic recovery.

Some would argue that a gradual move to bail-in policies to replace the bail-out of senior
uninsured debtholders and uninsured depositors would protect against contingent liabilities for
governments arising from the financial safety net. Indeed, several countries have made steps in
this direction by adopting rules that would impose losses on such private creditors in the event of
a bank failure. The problem with these rules is that they are time inconsistent: the temptation to
renege on bail-in policies in the midst of a systemic crisis, when creditor panic and contagion
risk rises to dangerous levels, will be too high for many governments.

The evidence also implies that it is difficult to use a DIS as a source of monitoring and market
discipline during a systemic banking crisis. In the years leading up to the financial crisis, many
countries had chosen prudently low levels of deposit coverage and/or introduced explicit
coinsurance in an attempt to encourage monitoring of financial institutions by retail depositors
and by one another. In 2003, many countries had co-insurance, but by 2013, only three countries
did. The evidence indicates that the explicit coverage limits that are set in normal times are not
time-consistent. This is particularly problematic in environments with weak frameworks for
resolving the affairs of insolvent financial firms. In such countries, regulators and supervisors
cannot readily ignore budgetary and political pressures to intervene in distressed banks. It is
therefore important for governments to monitor, assess, and report fiscal risks related to DIS. In
the wake of the crisis, the size of explicit government contingent liabilities imbedded in
government safety nets and the probability of these contingent liabilities materializing have both
increased.

                                  V. CONCLUDING REMARKS

Deposit insurance, long a topic for narrow specialists, became a hot policy topic during the
global financial crisis. Countries that could afford to do so broadened deposit insurance coverage
and enlarged their financial safety net to restore confidence in their financial system. Only a few
less fortunate countries broke their promises on insured deposits (as in the case of Iceland) or
imposed substantial losses on uninsured depositors (as in the case of Cyprus).
                                             19


This paper presents a comprehensive database of features of existing deposit insurance
arrangements and government guarantees on bank assets and liabilities, together with a
preliminary analysis of the effectiveness of these arrangements during the global financial crises.

This analysis suggests that deposit insurance arrangements were largely effective in preventing
large-scale depositor runs, but have never correctly priced risk. This underpricing of deposit
insurance is at least as likely to encourage potentially ruinous risk taking by banks in the future
as it has in the past. The expansion of the safety net during the crisis intensifies questions about
the ability of countries to honor their obligations and about moral hazard going forward.

At the same time, the increasing reliance on short-term wholesale funding for banks and their
links to securities, futures, and derivatives markets raise doubts about whether the government
should also protect deposit-like instruments to prevent runs on wholesale funding to spill over to
traditional banking markets. A generous safety net raises deep problems that must not be
ignored: concerns about moral hazard, distributional fairness, and ability to pay. These concerns
are apt to be particularly pressing in countries whose financial systems are large relative to the
size of their economy.

A gradual move to bail-in policies of uninsured depositors and debtholders would help ensure
that governments are able to honor payments out of generous DIS, though contagion concerns,
too big to fail considerations, and other political economy constraints may get in the way of
efforts to bail in such creditors during a systemic crisis.

A more comprehensive analysis of these issues is needed and we hope that publishing this
database will facilitate such research.
                                          20


                                        REFERENCES

Anginer, D., A. Demirgüç-Kunt, and M. Zhu, 2014, “How Does Deposit Insurance Affect Bank
      Risk? Evidence from the Recent Crisis,” Journal of Banking and Finance; also World
      Bank Policy Research Paper, WPS6289.

Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) and International Association of Deposit
       Insurers (IADI), 2009, “Core Principles for Effective Deposit Insurance Systems,”
       https://www.bis.org/publ/bcbs156.pdf

Blinder, A.S., and R.F. Wescott, 2001, “Reform of Deposit Insurance: A Report to the FDIC,”
       FDIC and Princeton University. Mimeo.
       http://www.fdic.gov/deposit/insurance/initiative/reform.html

Demirgüç-Kunt, A., and E. Detragiache, 2002, “Does Deposit Insurance Increase Banking
      System Stability? An Empirical Investigation,” Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 49,
      No. 7, pp. 1373-1406.

Demirgüç-Kunt, A., and H. Huizinga, 2004, “Market Discipline and Deposit Insurance,” Journal
      of Monetary Economics, Vol. 51, No. 2, pp.375-399.

Demirgüç-Kunt, A., B. Karacaovali, and L. Laeven, 2005, “Deposit Insurance around the World:
      A Comprehensive Database,” Policy Research Working Paper No. 3628 (Washington,
      DC: World Bank).

Demirgüç-Kunt, A., E.J. Kane, and L. Laeven, 2008a, “Determinants of Deposit-Insurance
      Adoption and Design,” Journal of Financial Intermediation, Vol. 17, No. 3, pp. 407-438.

Demirgüç-Kunt, A., E.J. Kane, and L. Laeven (Eds.), 2008b, Deposit Insurance around the
      World: Issues of Design and Implementation (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press).

European Commission, 2004, Report on minimum guarantee level of Deposit Guarantee
      Schemes Directive 94/19/EC,
      http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/bank/docs/guarantee/report_en.pdf. Annex available
      from: http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/bank/docs/guarantee/annexes_en.pdf

European Commission, 2010, Impact Assessment for Proposal on Deposit Guarantee Schemes,
      http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/bank/docs/guarantee/20100712_ia_en.pdf. Annex II
      available from: http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/bank/docs/guarantee/jrc-
      annex2_en.pdf

European Commission, 2011, JRC Report under Article 12 of Directive 94/19/EEC,
      http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/bank/docs/guarantee/jrc-rep_en.pdf. Annex I and II
                                          21


       available from: http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/bank/docs/guarantee/jrc-
       annex1_en.pdf and http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/bank/docs/guarantee/jrc-
       annex2_en.pdf.

European Federation of Deposit Insurance, 2006, Deposit Guarantee Systems: EFDI’s First
      Report,
      http://efdi.eu/fileadmin/user/publications/EFDI%20publications/Deposit%20Guarantee%
      20Systems%20EFDIs%20First%20Report%20%28Manuela%20De%20Cesare%202006
      %29.pdf

Financial Stability Board, 2012, Thematic Review on Deposit Insurance Systems,
       http://www.financialstabilityboard.org/publications/r_120208.pdf

Financial Stability Board, 2010, Update on Unwinding Temporary Deposit Insurance
       Arrangements, http://www.financialstabilityboard.org/publications/r_1006.pdf

Garcia, G., 2000, Deposit Insurance: Actual and Good Practices, IMF Occasional Paper No. 197
       (Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund).

International Association of Deposit Insurance, 2008, 2008 Annual Survey Results of Deposit
        Insurance, http://www.iadi.org/Research.aspx?id=58

International Association of Deposit Insurance, 2010, 2010 Annual Survey Results of Deposit
        Insurance, http://www.iadi.org/Research.aspx?id=58

International Association of Deposit Insurance, 2011, 2011 Annual Survey Results of Deposit
        Insurance, http://www.iadi.org/Research.aspx?id=58

Kane, E.J., 1989, The S&L Insurance Mess: How Did it Happen? (Washington, DC: The Urban
       Institute Press).

Laeven, L., 2013, European Union: Publication of Financial Sector Assessment Program
      Documentation—Technical Note on Deposit Insurance, IMF Country Report No. 13/66
      (Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund).
      http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/scr/2013/cr1366.pdf

Laeven, L., and F. Valencia, 2012, “Systemic Banking Crises Database: An Update,” IMF
      Working Paper no. 12/163 (Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund).
      http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/wp/2012/wp12163.pdf
                                           22


Schich, S., 2008, “Financial Crisis: Deposit Insurance and Related Safety Net Aspects,”
       Financial Market Trends, OECD. http://www.oecd.org/finance/financial-
       markets/41894959.pdf

Schich, S., 2009, “Expanded Guarantees for Banks: Benefits, Costs, and Exit Issues,” Financial
       Market Trends, OECD. http://www.oecd.org/finance/financial-markets/42779438.pdf

Schich, S., and B.-H. Kim, 2011, Guarantee Arrangements for Financial Promises: How Widely
       Should the Safety Net Be Cast? Financial Market Trends, OECD.
       http://www.oecd.org/finance/financial-markets/48297609.pdf

World Bank, 2003, Survey of Banking Supervision and Regulation,
      http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTRES/Resources/469232-
      1107449512766/Caprio_2003_banking_regulation_database.xls

World Bank, 2011, Survey of Banking Supervision and Regulation,
      http://siteresources.worldbank.org/EXTGLOBALFINREPORT/Resources/8816096-
      1346865433023/8827078-1347152290218/Bank_Regulation.xlsx
                                               23


Figure 1. Explicit Deposit Insurance by Income Group, 2013

 100%
  90%
  80%
  70%
  60%
  50%                                                     Implicit (%)
  40%                                                     Explicit since 2003 (%)
  30%
                                                          Explicit (%)
  20%
  10%
   0%
           High      Upper         Lower   Low income
         income     middle        middle
                    income        income


Figure 2. Explicit Deposit Insurance by Region, 2013

 100%

  90%

  80%

  70%

  60%

  50%                                                                    Implicit (%)

  40%                                                                    Explicit since 2003 (%)
                                                                         Explicit (%)
  30%

  20%

  10%

   0%
          Africa   Asia‐Pacific   Europe    Middle East Western
                                            and Central Hemisphere
                                               Asia
                                             24


Figure 3. Type of DI Scheme, 2013

 100%
  90%
  80%
  70%
  60%
  50%                                                            ex‐post scheme
  40%
                                                                 ex‐ante fund
  30%
  20%
  10%
   0%
        High income Upper middle Lower middle Low income
                      income       income


Figure 4. Objective of the DI Scheme, 2013

 100%
  90%
  80%
  70%
  60%                                                      paybox with extended
  50%                                                      powers, or loss or risk
                                                           minimizer
  40%
  30%                                                      paybox
  20%
  10%
   0%
           High      Upper      Lower Low income
         income     middle     middle
                    income     income
                                        25


Figure 5. Organization of the DI Scheme, 2013

 100%
  90%
  80%
  70%
  60%                                             organization of scheme:
  50%                                             central bank, supervisor,
                                                  or ministry
  40%
  30%                                             organization of scheme:
                                                  legally separate
  20%
  10%
   0%
          High    Upper    Lower      Low
        income   middle   middle    income
                 income   income


Figure 6. Administration of the DI Scheme, 2013

 100%
  90%
  80%
  70%
  60%                                           administration of scheme:
  50%                                           administered jointly

  40%                                           administration of scheme:
                                                administered publicly
  30%
  20%                                           administration of scheme:
                                                administered privately
  10%
   0%
          High    Upper    Lower     Low
        income   middle   middle   income
                 income   income
                                                 26


Figure 7. Funding of the DI Scheme, 2013

 100%
  90%
  80%
  70%
  60%
  50%                                                    funded jointly
  40%                                                    funded by government
  30%
                                                         funded privately
  20%
  10%
      0%
               High      Upper     Lower        Low
             income     middle    middle      income
                        income    income


Figure 8. Coverage Increased During Crisis and Remains Above Pre-Crisis Levels

 18
 16
 14
 12
                                                        Coverage limit / GDP per
 10                                                     capita, 2003
  8                                                     Coverage limit / GDP per
  6                                                     capita, 2010
  4                                                     Coverage limit / GDP per
  2                                                     capita, 2013

  0
             High      Upper      Lower    Low income
           income     middle     middle
                      income     income
                                                                          27


Figure 9. Decline of Coinsurance, 2003−2013

                                   14
  Number of DIS with coinsurance



                                   12

                                   10

                                    8
                                                                                                       2003
                                    6
                                                                                                       2013
                                    4

                                    2

                                    0
                                         High income   Upper middle Lower middle   Low income
                                                         income       income


Figure 10. Risk Adjustment of DI Premiums, 2013

 100%
  90%
  80%
  70%
  60%
  50%                                                                               no risk‐adjusted
                                                                                    premiums
  40%
  30%                                                                               risk‐adjusted premiums
  20%
  10%
        0%
                                          High    Upper      Lower      Low
                                        income   middle     middle    income
                                                 income     income
                                         28


Figure 11. Government Support of DI Schemes, 2013

 100%
  90%
  80%
  70%
  60%
  50%                                                no backstop from
                                                     government
  40%
  30%                                                backstop from
                                                     government
  20%
  10%
   0%
        High income    Upper    Lower   Low income
                      middle   middle
                      income   income


Figure 12. Increase in Depositor Protection, 2007−2013
              % of countries with explicit DIS
 100%


  80%


  60%
                                                                        Banking crisis
                                                                        between 2007
  40%                                                                   ‐ 2013

                                                                        No banking
  20%                                                                   crisis between
                                                                        2007 ‐ 2013


   0%
                                                    29


Figure 13. Potential Deposit Liabilities and Ability to Pay by the DIS Fund, end-2010 1/

   3

 2.5

   2

 1.5                                                            Size of DIS Fund /
                                                                Covered Deposits (%)
   1

 0.5

   0
             High income              Middle income


1/ Middle income includes lower and upper middle income countries. Insufficient data to report figures on low
income countries.



Figure 14. Total Deposits and Ability to Pay by the Government, end-2010 1/

 250


 200


 150
                                                             Total Deposits / GDP (%)
 100                                                         Public Debt / GDP (%)


  50


    0
             High income            Middle income


1/ Middle income includes lower and upper middle income countries. Insufficient data to report figures on low
income countries.
                                                             30


Figure 15. Size of DIS Fund Relative to Covered Deposits and Government Indebtedness

                                     7



                                     6



                                     5
  Size of Fund/Covered Deposits, %




                                     4



                                     3



                                     2



                                     1



                                     0
                                         0   50   100             150   200   250
                                                  Public Debt/GDP, %
                                                                                                                                                                             ‐5
                                                                                                                                                                                                           10




                                                                                                                                                                 ‐15
                                                                                                                                                                       ‐10
                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                                                                       5
                                                                                                                                                                                        Argentina
                                                                                                                                                                                            Iceland
                                                                                                                                                                                           Ecuador
                                                                                                                                                                                           Bahrain
                                                                                                                                                                                      Bangladesh
                                                                                                                                                                                        Nicaragua
                                                                                                                                                                                               Libya
                                                                                                                                                                                    Liechtenstein
                                                                                                                                                                                          Gibraltar
                                                                                                                                                                                          Lebanon
                                                                                                                                                                                          Tanzania
                                                                                                                                                                                             Oman
                                                                                                                                                                                         Morocco
                                                                                                                                                                                    Bahamas, The
                                                                                                                                                                                              Japan
                                                                                                                                                                                        Colombia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Figure 16. Safety Net Index, 2013 1/




                                                                                                                                                                                              Nepal
                                                                                                                                                                                       El Salvador
                                                                                                                                                                                             Sudan
                                                                                                                                                                                       Philippines
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       31




                                                                                                                                                                                           Norway
                                                                                                                                                                                          Malaysia
                                                                                                                                                                                              Brazil
                                                                                                                                                                                           Uganda
                                                                                                                                                                                               Chile




                                                                                                                                                                                  United Kingdom
                                                                                                                                                                                         Australia
                                                                                                                                                                                        Indonesia
                                                                                                                                                                                        Singapore
                                                                                                                                                                                         Romania
                                                                                                                                                                                            France




1/ Countries with safety net index (SNI) values between -1 and +1 are excluded from the chart.
                                                                                                                                                                                             Latvia
                                                                                                                                                                                          Portugal
                                                                                                                                                                                            Jordan
                                                                                                                                                                                          Hungary
                                                                                                                                                                                       Hong Kong
                                                                                                                                                                                        Mongolia
                                                                                                                                                                                             Kenya
                                                                                                                                                                                          Belgium
                                                                                                                                                                                           Belarus
                                                                                                                                                                                          Thailand
                                                                                                                                                                                  Slovak Republic
                                                                                                                                                                                           Austria
                                                                                                                                                                                         Germany
                                                                                                                                                                                         Denmark
                                                                                                                                                                                    Turkmenistan
                                                                                                                                                                                           Ireland
                                                                                                                                                                                    United States
                                                                                                                                                                                       Uzbekistan
Notes: The safety net index is a principal components index of DI design and other safety net features that is increasing in the generosity of the safety net.
                                                                       32


Table 1. Explicit Deposit Insurance Schemes Around the World, end-2013
As of 2013
                                   Countries with Explicit Deposit Insurance Schemes                              Countries Without Explicit Deposit Insurance Schemes

                  Cameroon (2011) 7/                                                                Angola                     Ghana                        Rwanda
                  Central African Rep. (2011) 7/                                                    Benin                      Guinea                       São T omé and Príncipe
                  Chad (2011) 7/                                                                    Botswana                   Guinea-Bissau                Senegal
                  Congo, Rep. (2011) 7/                                                             Burkina Faso               Lesotho                      Seychelles
                  Equatorial Guinea (2011) 7/                                                       Burundi                    Liberia                      Sierra Leone
                  Gabon (2011) 7/                                                                   Cape Verde                 Madagascar                   Somalia
Africa
                  Kenya                                                                             Comoros                    Malawi                       South Africa
                  Nigeria                                                                           Congo, Democratic Rep.     Mali                         Swaziland
                  T anzania                                                                         Côte d'Ivoire              Mauritius                    T ogo
                  Uganda                                                                            Eritrea                    Mozambique                   Zambia
                  Zimbabwe                                                                          Ethiopia                   Namibia
                                                                                                    Gambia, T he               Niger
                  Australia (2008) 1/           Korea, Rep. of              Philippines             Bhutan                     New Zealand 4/               T uvalu
                  Bangladesh                    Laos                        Singapore (2006) 1/     Cambodia                   Palau                        Vanuatu
                  Brunei Darussalam (2011) 1/   Malaysia (2005) /1          Sri Lanka (2012) 8/     China                      Papua New Guinea
Asia-Pacific 9/   Hong Kong (2004) 1/           Marshall Islands 2/         T hailand (2008) 1/     Fiji                       Samoa
                  India                         Micronesia 2/               Vietnam                 Kiribati                   Solomon Islands
                  Indonesia (2004) 1/           Mongolia (2013) 1/                                  Maldives                   T imor-Leste
                  Japan                         Nepal (2010) 1/                                     Myanmar 3/                 T onga
                  Albania                       Greece                      Norway                  Israel
                  Austria                       Hungary                     Poland                  San Marino
                  Belarus                       Iceland                     Portugal
                  Belgium                       Ireland                     Romania
                  Bosnia & Herzegovina          Italy                       Russian Federation
                  Bulgaria                      Kosovo (2012) 1/            Serbia
                  Croatia                       Latvia                      Slovak Republic
Europe            Cyprus                        Liechtenstein               Slovenia
                  Czech Republic                Lithuania                   Spain
                  Denmark                       Luxembourg                  Sweden
                  Estonia                       Macedonia, FYR              Switzerland
                  Finland                       Malta                       T urkey
                  France                        Moldova (2004) 1/           Ukraine
                  Germany                       Montenegro (2010)           United Kingdom
                  Gibraltar                     Netherlands
                  Afghanistan (2009)            Kazakhstan                  Oman                    Djibouti                   Pakistan
                  Algeria                       Kyrgyz Republic (2008) 1/   Sudan                   Egypt                      Qatar
Middle East and   Armenia (2005) 1/             Lebanon                     T ajikistan (2004) 1/   Georgia                    Saudi Arabia
Central Asia      Azerbaijan (2007) 1/          Libya (2010)                T urkmenistan           Iran                       Syrian Arab Republic
                  Bahrain                       Mauritania (2008) 1/ 10/    Uzbekistan              Iraq                       T unisia
                  Jordan                        Morocco                     Yemen (2008) 1/         Kuwait                     United Arab Emirates
                  Argentina                     Ecuador                     Paraguay                Antigua and Barbuda        Guyana
                  Bahamas, T he                 El Salvador                 Peru                    Belize                     Haiti
                  Barbados (2007) 1/            Guatemala                   T rinidad and T obago   Bolivia 5/                 Panama
Western
                  Brazil                        Honduras                    United States           Costa Rica                 St. Kitts and Nevis
Hemisphere
                  Canada                        Jamaica                     Uruguay                 Dominica                   St. Lucia
                  Chile                         Mexico                      Venezuela               Dominican Republic 6/      St. Vincent and the Grenadines
                  Colombia                      Nicaragua                                           Grenada                    Suriname
                                                                33

Notes:
1/ Explicit deposit insurance scheme introduced since previous release of the deposit insurance database in 2004.
2/ Covered by the deposit insurance scheme of the United States (FDIC).
3/ Insurance product tailored to small retail depositors provided to private banks by a state-run insurance company. Several large banks, including Kanbawza and Co-operative Bank, have participated as
of 2011.
4/ New Zealand introduced an opt-in retail deposit guarantee scheme in October 2008 and closed it in December 2010. Deposits held in New Zealand branches of Australian branches were covered
under the Australian deposit insurance scheme from 2008 - 2010, but current legislation will limit coverage to Australian dollar-denominated deposits only.
5/ Bolivia has a bank resolution fund with funding provided by member banks, but no explicit deposit insurance.
6/ The Dominican Republic has no deposit insurance for commercial banks, but there is a scheme (established in 1962) insuring the savings and term deposits in savings and loan associations. In the
past, the Central Bank has guaranteed deposits at Bancomercio (1996) and Baninter (2003) when these large banks failed.
7/ In 2009, Cameroon, Central African Rep., Chad, Congo (Rep), Equatorial Guinea, and Gabon, which share a regional central bank, established the Fonds de Garantie des Depots en Afrique Centrale
(FOGADAC), a regional deposit insurance scheme that became operational in 2011.
8/ The Sri Lanka Deposit Insurance Scheme (SLDIS) became effective on January 1, 2012, although member banks and finance companies participating in this scheme already started contributing on a
mandatory basis starting on October 1, 2010.
9/ Taiwan (ROC) has deposit insurance but is not an IMF member.
10/ A deposit guarantee fund (Fonds de Garantie des Dépôts) exists on the basis of the deposit guarantee law of 2008 but has not become operational yet as of end-2013.
Sources: World Bank Survey, IADI, Laeven and Valencia (2012), FSB (2010, 2012), IMF staff reports, and national deposit insurance agencies.
                                                                                                      34


Table 2. Coverage of Explicit Deposit Insurance Schemes Around the World, end-2013
                                                                                               S tatutory limit                                                         Coverage including government guarantees (US $)   Coverage limit / GDP per capita (in %)
Country                                                             Reported Currency                                                            US Dollars
                                     2003                                2010                                     2013                  2003        2010       2013        2003              2010              2013       2003           2010             2013
Afghanistan                              n.a,                            AF100,000                             AF100,000                 n.a.       2222       1767         n.a.             2222              1767        n.a.           412              260
                        100% of first LEK350,000; 85% of
Albania                next LEK411,765 (up to maximum of                LEK2,500,000                          LEK2,500,000              5796        24032     24498        5796              24032            24498       319            586              531
                                   LEK700,000)
Algeria                             DIN600,000                           DIN600,000                            DIN600,000               7752         8066       7678        7752             8066              7678       364            180              141
Argentina                           ARG30,000                           ARG120,000                            ARG120,000                10345       30769      18209       10345           30769              18209       303            336              155
Armenia                                  n.a.                          AM D4,000,000                         AM D4,000,000               n.a.       10705       9877         n.a.          10705               9877       n.a.           377              308
Australia                                n.a.                          AUD1,000,000                           AUD250,000                 n.a.      917431     221625         n.a.       UNLIM ITED 1/         221625      n.a.           1628             342
Austria                            EUR20,000 7/                          EUR100,000                            EUR100,000               22727      133333     137830       22727           133333             137830       73             296             282
Azerbaijan, Rep. of                      n.a.                            AZN30,000                             AZN30,000                 n.a.       37500      38217         n.a.           37500              38217      n.a.            638             484
Bahamas, The                        BAH50,000                            BAH50,000                             BAH50,000                50000       50000      50000       50000           50000              50000       223            218              213
                          75% of first BHD20,000 (up to   75% of first BHD20,000 (up to maximum 75% of first BHD20,000 (up to maximum
Bahrain                                                                                                                                 39474       39474     39894        39474             39474            39894       262            170              145
                             maximum of BHD15,000)                     of BHD15,000)                         of BHD15,000)
Bangladesh                          TAK60,000                           TAK100,000                            TAK100,000                1032         1425       1287        1032             1425              1287       271             203              142
Barbados                                 n.a.                            USD12,500                             USD12,500                 n.a.       12500      12500         n.a.           12500             12500       n.a.             78               81
Belarus                              USD1,000                             EUR5,000                              EUR5,000                1000         6667       6892        1000        UNLIM ITED 8/      UNLIM ITED      55             115               91
Belgium                             EUR20,000                            EUR100,000                            EUR100,000               22727      133333     137830       22727           133333            137830        76             306              304
Bosnia-Herzegovina                  BAM 5,000                            BAM 35,000                            BAM 35,000               2890        23649      24700        2890            23649             24700       131             547              537
Brazil                              BRR20,000                            BRR70,000                             BRR250,000               6536        39773     106211        6536            39773            106211       215             359              939
Brunei Darussalam                        n.a.                            BND50,000                             BND50,000                 n.a.       36765      39392         n.a.           36765             39392       n.a.            115              99
Bulgaria                            BGN15,000                           BGN196,000                            BGN196,000                8671       132432     137063        8671           132432            137063       328            2078             1870
Cameroon                                 n.a.                               n.a.                              XAF5,000,000               n.a.         n.a.     10480         n.a.             n.a.            10480       n.a.            n.a.            1031
Canada                              CAD60,000                           CAD100,000                            CAD100,000                42857      97087      93985        42857           97087              93985       157            8799             7394
Central African Rep.                     n.a.                               n.a.                              XAF5,000,000               n.a.         n.a.     10480         n.a.             n.a.            10480       n.a.            n.a.            3142
Chad                                     n.a.                               n.a.                              XAF5,000,000               n.a.         n.a.     10480         n.a.             n.a.            10480       n.a.            n.a.             860
                            90% of first UDF120 (up to    90% of first UDF120 (up to maximum of 90% of first UDF120 (up to maximum of
Chile                                                                                                                                   2643        4542       4710        2643              4542              4710        54             36               30
                             maximum of UDF108) 12/                     UDF108) 12/                           UDF108) 12/
                        75% of first COP26,666,667 (up to
Colombia                                                               COP20,000,000                         COP20,000,000              6954        10584     10403        6954              10584            10403       306            168              128
                           maximum of COP20,000,000)
Congo, Rep.                              n.a.                               n.a.                              XAF5,000,000               n.a.        n.a.      10480        n.a.              n.a.             10480      n.a.           n.a.              318
Croatia                            HKN100,000                           HKN400,000                           EUR100,000 14/             14925       72727     137830       14925             72727            137830      194            530              1016
                          90% of first EUR22,222 (up to
Cyprus                                                                   EUR100,000                            EUR100,000               22727      133333     137830       22727            133333            137830      123            485              557
                             maximum of EUR20,000)
                          90% of first EUR27,778 (up to
Czech Republic                                                           EUR100,000                            EUR100,000               28409      133333     137830       28409            133333            137830      304            703              731
                             maximum of EUR25,000)
Denmark                            DKK300,000                            EUR100,000                            EUR100,000               45524      133333     137830       45524            133333            137830      115            236              233
Ecuador                              USD7,416                            USD27,000                             USD31,000                7416       27000      31000        7416             27000             31000       339            583              519
El Salvador                          USD6,700                             USD9,000                              USD9,800                6700        9000       9800        6700              9000              9800       268            261              253
Equatorial Guinea                        n.a.                               n.a.                              XAF5,000,000               n.a.        n.a.      10480         n.a.             n.a.             10480      n.a.           n.a.              51
Estonia                            EKK100,000                            EUR100,000                            EUR100,000               7263       133333     137830        7263            133333            137830      100            936              724
Finland                             EUR25,000                            EUR100,000                            EUR100,000               28409      133333     137830       28409            133333            137830       90            302              292
France                              EUR70,000                            EUR100,000                            EUR100,000               79545      133333     137830       79545            133333            137830      276            326              321
Gabon                                    n.a.                               n.a.                              XAF5,000,000               n.a.        n.a.      10480         n.a.             n.a.             10480      n.a.           n.a.              85
                          90% of first EUR22,222 (up to
Germany                                                                  EUR100,000                            EUR100,000               22727      133333     137830       22727            133333            137830       77            329              306
                             maximum of EUR20,000)
Gibraltar                           EUR50,000                            EUR100,000                            EUR100,000               56818      133333     137830       56818            133333            137830      181            254              203
Greece                              EUR20,000                         EUR100,000                            EUR100,000                  22727      133333     137830       22727           133333             137830      130            506              631
Guatemala                          GTQ20,000                          GTQ20,000                             GTQ20,000                   2519        2481       2549        2519             2481               2549       139             86               73
Honduras                       USD9,632.92 16/                        USD9,632.92                           USD9,632.92                 9633        9633       9633        9633             9633               9633       784            467              415
Hong Kong                              n.a.                           HKD500000                             HKD500000                    n.a.      64350      64516         n.a.        UNLIM ITED 2/         64516       n.a.           198              171
                        90% of first HUF3,333,333 (up to
Hungary                                                               EUR100,000                             EUR100,000                 13374      133333     137830       13374            133333            137830      162            1047             1028
                          maximum of HUF3,000,000)
Iceland                           ISK2,091,000                       ISK3,425,000                            EUR20,887                  27259       28019      28789      27259              28019             28789       72              71               63
India                              INR100,000                         INR100000                              INR100000                  2147        2172       1613        2147               2172             1613       384             152              107
Indonesia                              n.a.                         IDR2000000000                          IDR2000000000                 n.a.      220072     162999   UNLIM ITED 3/        220072            162999      n.a.           7373             4644
                         90% of first EUR22,222 (up to
Ireland                                                               EUR100,000                             EUR100,000                 22727      133333     137830       22727            133333            137830       57            289              302
                           maximum of EUR20,000)
Italy                              EUR103,291                         EUR100,000                            EUR100,000                  117376     133333     137830      117376            133333            137830      446            383              397
Jamaica                           JM D300,000                         JM D600,000                           JM D600,000                  5196       6892       5661        5196              6892              5661       145            143              110
Japan                           JPY10,000,000                       JPY10,000,000                         JPY10,000,000                 86259      113921     94967        86259           113921             94967       256            265               247
Jordan                            JOD10,000                           JOD10,000                             JOD50,000                   14085      14085      70641        14085        UNLIM ITED 10/        70641       713            326              1365
Kazakhstan                       KZT400,000                          KZT5,000,000                          KZT5,000,000                 2676        33931     32550         2676            33931             32550       129            377               253
Kenya                            KES100,000                           KES100,000                            KES100,000                  1317        1258       1157         1317             1258              1157       299            160               114
Korea, Rep.                     KRW50,000,000                       KRW50,000,000                         KRW50,000,000                 41960      43250      47366        41960            43250             47366       312            211               195
Kosovo                               n.a.                                n.a.                                EUR3,000                    n.a.        n.a.      4135          n.a.             n.a.             4135       n.a.           n.a.              116
Kyrgyz Republic                      n.a.                             KGS100,000                            KGS100,000                   n.a.       2175       2031          n.a.            2175              2031       n.a.           249               159
Lao PDR                         KIP15,000,000                        KIP20,000,000                         KIP20,000,000                1426        2384       2498        1426              2384              2498       393             222             169
Latvia                            EUR4,600                            EUR100,000                            EUR100,000                  5227       133333     137830       5227             133333            137830      109            1173             906
Lebanon                         LBP5,000,000                         LBP5,000,000                          LBP5,000,000                 3317        3317       3320        3317              3317              3320        65             38               33
                                                                                                       35


Table 2. Coverage of Explicit Deposit Insurance Schemes Around the World, end-2013 (continued)
                                                                                                 S tatutory limit                                                                      Coverage including government guarantees (US $)      Coverage limit / GDP per capita (in %)
Country                                                              Reported Currency                                                                  US Dollars
                                    2003                                   2010                                      2013                    2003           2010          2013            2003              2010              2013          2003           2010             2013
                                                            100% of first LYD10,000, 50% for next 100% of first LYD10,000, 50% for next
                                                            LYD90,000, 25% of next LYD300,000,    LYD90,000, 25% of next LYD300,000,
Libya                                n.a.                  12.5% of next LYD600,000, and 10% for 12.5% of next LYD600,000, and 10% for        n.a.         197316        201873            n.a.            197316            201873         n.a.           1597             1828
                                                            amounts above LYD1,000,000, up to a    amounts above LYD1,000,000, up to a
                                                                  maximum of LYD250,000                 maximum of LYD250,000
Liechtenstein                      EUR20,000                              CHF100000                             CHF100000                   22727          96154         112170           22727            96154             112170          25             71               83
Lithuania              100% of first LTL10,000; 90% of                   EUR100,000                            EUR100,000                   14706          133333        137830           14706            133333            137830         273            1125             861
                         90% of first EUR22,222 (up to
Luxembourg                                                             EUR100,000                             EUR100,000                    22727          133333        137830           22727            133333            137830          35            130              125
                           maximum of EUR20,000)
                       100% of first EUR10,000; 90% of
M acedonia, FYR                                                         EUR30,000                              EUR30,000                    22727          40000         41349            22727             40000            41349          969            879              836
                               next EUR11,111
M alaysia                              n.a.                            M YR250,000                            M YR250,000                    n.a.          77640         75896        UNLIM ITED 4/         77640            75896          n.a.           897              720
                         90% of first EUR22,222 (up to
M alta                                                                 EUR100,000                             EUR100,000                    22727          133333        137830           22727            133333            137830         177            645              603
                           maximum of EUR20,000)
M arshall Islands                 USD100,000                            USD250,000                            USD250,000                    100000         250000        250000          100000          250000 13/          250000         4107           8114             7731
M exico                      10,000,000 UDI 18/                     10,000,000 UDI 18/                      400,000 UDI 18/                 2984865        146515        154876          2984865           146515            154876         1988           1594             1457
M icronesia                       USD100,000                            USD250,000                            USD250,000                    100000         250000        250000          100000          250000 13/          250000         4359           8734             7776
M oldova                               n.a.                              M DL6000                              M DL6,000                      n.a.            485           460             n.a.             485                460          n.a.           30                21
M ongolia                              n.a.                           M NT20,000,000                        M NT20,000,000                    n.a.          14841         12202             n.a.       UNLIM ITED 15/         12202          n.a.          660              307
M ontenegro                            n.a.                             EUR20,000                              EUR50,000                      n.a.          26667         68915             n.a.           26667              68915          n.a.           401              981
M orocco                          M AD50,000                            M AD80,000                            M AD80,000                      5225           9501          9790            5225             9501               9790         316            333              306
Nepal                                  n.a.                             NPR200,000                            NPR200,000                      n.a.          2683          2021              n.a.            2683              2021           n.a.          450              292
Netherlands                        EUR20,000                            EUR100,000                            EUR100,000                     22727         133333        137830           22727           133333             137830          69            285               289
Nicaragua                          USD10,000                            USD10,000                              USD10,000                     10000          10000         10000           10000            10000              10000          994            690              544
Nigeria                           NGN50,000                            NGN500,000                             NGN500,000                      387            3328          3118            387              3328               3118          76            224              184
Norway                          NOK2,000,000                          NOK2,000,000                           NOK2,000,000                   282486         331126        327172          282486           331126             327172         573            386              326
                        75% of first OM R26,667 (up to
Oman                                                                   OM R20,000                             OM R20,000                    52632          52632         52016            52632             52632            52016          571            225              206
                             maximum of 20,000)
Paraguay                     PYG72,930,975 19/                     PYG113,061,300 19/                     PYG124,367,400 19/                25000          27000         27034            25000             27000            27034          2556           842              648
Peru                               PNS68,474                           PNS85,793                            PNS92,625 20/                   19676          30316         33151            19676             30316            33151           863           582              497
Philippines                       PHP100,000                          PHP500,000                             PHP500,000                      1845          11084         11258             1845             11084            11258           181           514              403
                     100% of first EUR1,000; 90% of next
Poland                  EUR23,889 (up to maximum of                    EUR100,000                             EUR100,000                    25568          133333        137830           25568            133333            137830         451            1083             1029
                                  EUR22,500)
Portugal                           EUR25,000                           EUR100,000                             EUR100,000                    28409          133333        137830           28409           133333             137830         183             618              665
Romania                            EUR3,400                            EUR100,000                             EUR100,000                    3864           133333        137830           3864            133333             137830         141            1735             1547
Russian Federation               RUB100,000                            RUB700,000                             RUB700,000                    3257           23049         21388            3257            23049               21388         109             216              144
Serbia                             EUR3,000                             EUR50,000                              EUR50,000                     3409          66667         68915            3409            66667              68915          130            1325             1167
Singapore                              n.a.                            SGD20,000                               SGD50,000                      n.a.          14706         39392            n.a.        UNLIM ITED 5/         39392          n.a.            32               72
                         90% of first EUR22,222 (up to
Slovak Republic                                                        EUR100,000                             EUR100,000                    22727          133333        137830           22727        UNLIM ITED 9/         137830         267            827              778
                           maximum of EUR20,000)
Slovenia                           EUR18,500                            EUR100,000                            EUR100,000                    21023         133333       137830            21023            133333            137830          144         580               606
Spain                              EUR20,000                           EUR100,000                             EUR100,000                    22727         133333       137830            22727            133333            137830          108         447               473
Sri Lanka                              n.a.                                n.a.                                RS200,000                      n.a.           n.a.        1528              n.a.              n.a.             1528          n.a.        n.a.               48
Sudan                              SDG1,500                             SDG10,000                              SDG10,000                     575           4202          7921             575              4202              7921           119         257               388
Sweden                            SKK250,000                           EUR100,000                             EUR100,000                    30902         133333       137830            30902            133333            137830           88         271               238
Switzerland                        CHF30,000                            CHF100,000                            CHF100,000                    22222          96154        112170           22222             96154            112170           49         136               138
Tajikistan                             n.a.                              TJS7,000                               TJS7,000                      n.a.          1598         1446              n.a.             1598              1446          n.a.        216               138
Tanzania                          TZS250,000                           TZS1,500,000                           TZS1,500,000                    241           1122          944              241              1122              944            74         210               134
Thailand                               n.a.                           UNLIM ITED 6/                          THB50,000,000                   n.a.      UNLIM ITED 6/   1523322        UNLIM ITED 6/    UNLIM ITED 6/       1523322          n.a.    UNLIM ITED 6/        26846
Trinidad & Tobago                 TTD50,000                             TTD75,000                             TTD125,000                     7937          11774        19393             7937             11774             19393           92          76                94
Turkey                             TRY50,000                            TRY50,000                             TRY100,000                    33333          33333         46473           33333             33333             46473          730         333               430
Turkmenistan                     UNLIM ITED                            UNLIM ITED                             UNLIM ITED                  UNLIM ITED    UNLIM ITED   UNLIM ITED        UNLIM ITED       UNLIM ITED        UNLIM ITED     UNLIM ITED UNLIM ITED         UNLIM ITED
Uganda                          UGX3,000,000                          UGX3,000,000                           UGX3,000,000                    1593          1478          1188             1593             1478              1188           670         288               190
Ukraine                            UAH1,500                            UAH150,000                             UAH200,000                      281          18892        24242              281             18892             24242           27         634               619
                     100% of first GBP2,000; 90% of next
United Kingdom          GBP33,000 (up to maximum of                     GBP85,000                              GBP85,000                    51967          130769        139978           51967            130769            139978         167            354              354
                                  GBP31,700)
United States                     USD100,000                          USD250,000                             USD250,000                     100000        250000        250000           100000          250000 13/      250000             262          518            471
Uruguay                            USD27,000                           USD31,612                            UYU685,525 21/                  27000          31612         32050           27000             31612          32050             740          273            193
Uzbekistan                    UZS1,360,000 17/                       UNLIM ITED 11/                         UNLIM ITED 11/                   1389      UNLIM ITED 11/UNLIM ITED 11/       1389         UNLIM ITED 11/ UNLIM ITED 11/        354      UNLIM ITED 11/ UNLIM ITED 11/
Venezuela, RB                   BSF10,000                               BSF30,000                              BSF30,000                     6211           8696          4774            6211              8696              4774          191             84               38
Vietnam                       VND30,000,000                           VND50,000,000                          VND50,000,000                   1935           2614          2369            1935              2614              2369          394            202              125
Yemen, Rep.                        n.a.                                YER2,000,000                           YER2,000,000                    n.a.          9109          9298             n.a.             9109              9298          n.a.           716              633
Zimbabwe                         USD3,640                                USD150                                     USD500                   3640           150           500             3640               150              500           802             20               51

Notes: Coverage is all member countries with explicit deposit insurance schemes. Mauritania, Turkmenistan, and Uzbekistan are not included because of missing data. Marshall Islands and Micronesia
are covered by the United States.
                                                                36

1/ On October 12, 2008, Australia announced an unlimited guarantee scheme for deposits in excess of A$1 million, the Australian Government Guarantee Scheme for Large Deposits and Wholesale
Funding (the Guarantee Scheme). The Guarantee Scheme was to remain in place for a period of three years, and was voluntary and subject to a fee (for deposits exceeding A$ 1 million per person and
bank). The Scheme formally commenced on 28 November 2008, and closed for new liabilities at the end of March 2010. Large deposits and wholesale liabilities guaranteed under the Scheme as at 31
March 2010 remained guaranteed, for a fee, for the relevant term. Separate deposit insurance arrangements continued to apply for deposit balances totaling up to and including A$1 million per customer
per institution, and were lowered to A$250,000 from 1 February 2012 onwards. Such deposits are guaranteed without charge.
2/ Blanket guarantee introduced in 2008 expired at the end of 2010.
3/ Indonesia introduced explicit deposit insurance in 2004. The 2003 coverage limit refers to blanket guarantee in place.
4/ Malaysia introduced explicit deposit insurance in 2005. The 2003 coverage limit refers to blanket guarantee in place.
5/ Singapore announced on October 16, 2008 a blanket guarantee on deposits of individuals and non-bank customers of banks licensed in Singapore. The guarantee expired on December 31, 2010.
6/ An explicit guarantee system was introduced in August 2008 with the formation of the Deposit Protection Agency, replacing a blanket guarantee. The blanket guarantee is being gradually phased out
with a limit of Baht 50 mln from Aug 11, 2012 - 10 Aug 10, 2015; Baht 25 million from Aug 11, 2015 - Aug 10, 2016; and Baht 1 mln for the period Aug 11, 2016 - onwards.
7/ 10% coinsurance for non-private persons.
8/ State-owned banks Belarusbank and Belagroprombank benefit from a full government guarantee on all their deposits, and do not make contributions to the Guarantee Fund. By Presidential decree of
November 4, 2008. Belarus subsequently extended a full guarantee on all household deposits in all banks.
9/ On October 8, 2008, the Slovak government announced a blanket guarantee on deposits, which became effective as of November 1, 2009. Blanket guarantee expired at the end of 2010.
10/ Jordanian government issued a blanket guarantee on deposits in 2008, which expired end-2010.
11/ The President of the Republic of Uzbekistan issued a decree announcing a blanket guarantee on deposits on November 28, 2008. Blanket guarantee officially in place since October 12, 2009.
Guarantee replaced statutory limit of 250 times the minimum wage. Guarantee still in place.
12/ Coverage limit in Chile refers to coverage of time deposits. Demand deposits are covered in full. Maximum coverage is equivalent to a maximum of 1,827,360 pesos in 2003, 2,317,199 pesos in
2010, and 2,466,801 pesos in 2013.
13/ Full guarantee for noninterest-bearing transaction accounts until December 31, 2012.
14/ Deposit insurance coverage increased from HKN400,000 to EUR100,000 on July 1, 2013 when Croatia joined the EU.
15/ Blanket guarantee on deposits in Mongolia expired on November 2012.
16/ A blanket guarantee on deposits was in place in Honduras from 1999 until September 2003. It was reduced to 50% coverage for October-November 2003 and increased back to 100% for December-
September 2004, until the additioal guarantee was phased out in September 2004. Between April and September 2004 there was a guarantee ceiling of 5 million Lempiras.
17/ The equivalent of 250 times minimum wage, which equaled UZS5,440 at end-2003.
18/ Coverage limit in Mexico is equivalent to 33,520,000 pesos in 2003, 2,023,492.40 pesos in 2010, and 2,023,492.40 pesos in 2013.
19/ Equivalent of 75 times monthly minimum wage.
20/ Equivalent of 62000 FSD.
21/ Equivalent of 250,000 UI for domestic currency deposits; US$ 2500 for foreign currency deposits.
Sources: World Bank Survey, IADI, Laeven and Valencia (2012), FSB (2010, 2012), IMF staff reports, and national deposit insurance agencies.
                                                                                                                                                                              37


Table 3. Design of Explicit Deposit Insurance Schemes Around the World, end-2013




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Central African Rep.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Bosnia-Herzegovina
                                                                                                                           Azerbaijan, Rep. of




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Brunei Darussalam




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Equatorial Guinea




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Kyrgyz Republic
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Czech Republic




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Korea, Rep. of
                                                                                                                                                 Bahamas, The




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Congo, Rep.
                                             Afghanistan




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Hong Kong
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   El Salvador
                                                                                                                                                                          Bangladesh




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Kazakhstan
            As of 2013




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Guatemala
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Cameroon
                                                                               Argentina




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Honduras
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Colombia




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Indonesia
                                                                                                                                                                                       Barbados




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Denmark




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Germany
                                                                                                     Australia




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Gibraltar




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Hungary
                                                                                           Armenia




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Bulgaria




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Ecuador
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Belgium
                                                           Albania




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Jamaica
                                                                                                                                                                Bahrain




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Kosovo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Finland
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Belarus
                                                                     Algeria




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Canada




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Estonia




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Iceland
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Cyprus
                                                                                                                 Austria




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Croatia




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Ireland
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Greece
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         France
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Gabon




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Jordan


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Kenya
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Brazil




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Japan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Chile




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  India
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Chad




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Italy
Type of Deposit Insurance Scheme
     explicit                                  x            x         x          x          x          x          x          x                    x              x         x            x          x         x          x                    x                            x           x          x          x                   x       x         x          x             x         x          x               x         x         x              x                  x         x        x        x         x         x          x         x           x           x          x         x          x       x           x          x       x         x      x         x           x          x              x            x

     legally separate                          x            x         x          x          x                     x           x                   x              x                      x          x         x          x                    x         x                  x           x          x          x                   x                 x          x             x         x          x               x         x         x              x                  x         x        x        x         x         x          x                     x           x          x         x          x       x                      x       x         x      x         x                      x              x            x
     central bank, supervisor, or ministry                                                             x                                                                   x                       x                                                                                                                                    x                                                                                                                                                                                                  x                                                                           x                                                         x

     administered publicly                     x            x         x                                x                                          x                        x                       x                                                   x                              x          x          x                   x       x         x          x             x                                              x         x              x                                              x                                        x           x           x                               x       x           x                  x                                                x               x            x
     administered privately                                                      x                                x           x                                                         x                               x                    x                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  x                                                                                                                                                 x
     administered jointly                                                                   x                                                                    x                                           x                                                            x                                                                                                          x          x               x                                                     x                  x                  x         x          x                                            x         x                                                           x      x         x           x

     paybox only                               x            x         x                     x          x          x           x                                                                                                                        x                              x                     x                   x       x                    x                                  x               x         x                        x                  x         x                 x                   x          x         x                       x          x         x                              x                                                                                   x
     paybox plus, loss or risk minimizer                                         x                                                                x              x         x            x          x         x          x                    x                            x                      x                                                x                        x         x                                              x                                                    x                  x                                          x                                           x       x                      x       x         x      x         x           x          x                           x

     multiple schemes                                                                                            x 9/                                                                                                                      x 16/                                               x 17/                                            x 18/                               x 10/                                                                                                                 x 11/                                                                                                                 x 12/x 19/x 7/                                           x 8/

Participation and Coverage
      compulsory for domestic banks            x            x        x           x          x          x          x          x                    x             x          x            x          x        x           x                    x         x                  x           x          x          x                   x       x         x          x             x         x          x              x          x         x              x                 x          x        x        x        x          x          x         x           x           x         x          x          x       x           x          x       x         x      x         x           x         x               x            x
      local subsidiaries of foreign banks      x            x        x           x          x          x          x          x                    x             x          x            x          x        x           x                    x         x                  x           x          x          x                   x       x         x          x             x         x          x              x          x         x              x                 x          x        x        x        x          x          x         x           x           x         x          x          x       x           x          x       x         x      x         x           x         x               x            x
      local branches of foreign banks                       x        x           x          x                     x          x                    x             x          x            x                   x           x                                                 x           x                     x                   x       x         x          x                       x          x              x          x         x              x                 x          x        x        x        x          x          x         x           x           x         x                     x       x           x          x       x                x                     x         x                            x
      foreign currency deposits                x            x        x           x          x                     x          x                                                                     x        x           x                              x                              x                     x                   x       x                    x                       x          x              x                                   x                 x          x        x        x        x          x          x                     x           x         x                     x       x           x          x                        x         x                     x               x
      interbank deposits                                                                    x          x                                                         x         x                                                                                              x                      x                                                x                       x                                                         x                                                                                                                                                   x                  x                              x                x                     x                                      x

     coinsurance                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        x

Funding
    ex-ante fund                               x            x         x          x          x                                x                    x                        x            x          x         x          x                    x         x                  x           x          x          x                   x                 x          x             x         x          x               x                   x              x                  x         x        x        x         x                    x         x           x           x         x          x          x       x           x                  x         x      x         x           x         x               x            x
    ex-post scheme                                                                                     x          x                                              x                                                                                                                                                                      x                                                                                 x                                                                                           x                                                                                                           x

     funded by government                                                                              x                                                                                                                                                                                                                                x
     funded privately                          x            x        x           x          x                     x          x                    x             x          x            x                   x           x                    x         x                  x           x          x          x                   x                            x            x          x          x              x          x         x              x                 x          x        x        x        x          x          x                     x           x         x          x                              x          x       x         x      x         x           x         x               x
     funded jointly                                                                                                                                                                                x                                                                                                                                              x                                                                                                                                                                                        x                                                       x       x                                                                                                            x

     backstop 6/                                            x                                          x x 25/                                                                          x          x         x                                         x                  x                                                                                                x         x                          x                                                     x                                                                    x                                  x                  x 26/ x x 27/                            x                                      x                                      x

Contributions and Assessment Base
     risk-adjusted premiums                    x                                 x                                                                                         x                                                                                                                     x                                                x                                                                       x         x                                           x        x                                       x                                 x          x                                                   x                                  x                                     x
     assessment base 34/
           covered deposits                    x            x                    x          x                                 x                   x                                     x          x                                                   x                                         x                                                x                        x                                    x                                                               x                                                                      x           x                    x                                                           x      x         x                      x              x
           eligible deposits                                                                                                                                                                                 x          x                                                 x                                                                                                          x          x                                                                     x                  x                  x                    x                                           x                                                            x
           total deposits                                             x                                                                                                                                                                      x                                        x                     x                   x                            x                                                                      x              x                                              x                                        x                                                       x       x           x                                                         x                                  x 24/
           total liabilities                                                                           x          x                                              x                                                                                                                                                                      x                                                                                 x                                                                                           x                                                                                                           x

Payouts to Depositors
    per deposit account                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                x 32/                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     x
    per depositor per institution              x            x         x                     x          x          x          x                    x              x                      x                   x           x                    x         x                  x x                    x x                            x                 x x                     x          x          x              x                    x x                              x x 29/ x x                           x          x          x         x           x           x         x          x          x       x           x          x       x         x      x         x                     x               x            x
    per depositor                                                                x                                                                                         x                       x                                                                                                                                                                                                                      x
    deposit losses imposed 21/                                                   x                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      x
                                                                                                                                                             38


Table 3. Design of Explicit Deposit Insurance Schemes Around the World, end-2013 (continued)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Trinidad and Tobago




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Venezuela, Rep. Bol.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Montenegro, Rep. of




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Yemen, Republic of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Russian Federation
                                                                                                                         Macedonia, FYR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      United Kingdom
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Slovak Republic
                                                                                                                                                             Marshall Islands




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Turkmenistan
                                                                                Liechtenstein


                                                                                                            Luxembourg




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        United States
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Netherlands




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Switzerland
             As of 2013




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Philippines
                                                                                                                                                                                         Micronesia




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Uzbekistan




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Zimbabwe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Nicaragua




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Singapore
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Mongolia




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Sri Lanka




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Tajikistan
                                                                                                Lithuania




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Paraguay
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Moldova




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Tanzania
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Morocco




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Romania
                                                                                                                                          Malaysia
                                                              Lebanon




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Thailand




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Uruguay
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Slovenia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Portugal




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Vietnam
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Ukraine
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Norway




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Uganda
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Sweden
                                                                                                                                                                                Mexico




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Nigeria




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Turkey
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Poland
                                                     Latvia




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Serbia




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Sudan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Oman
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Nepal
                                                                        Libya




                                                                                                                                                     Malta




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Spain
                                              Laos




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Peru
 Type of Deposit Insurance Scheme
      explicit                                x       x        x         x       x                x           x            x               x         x         x                x         x            x         x             x                  x        x         x            x           x        x        x       x         x       x             x         x          x          x                  x          x           x                 x         x        x          x        x         x             x            x          x           x                   x          x            x         x           x                 x             x         x             x                     x          x                   x

      legally separate                        x                x         x       x                x           x            x               x         x         x                x         x            x         x             x                           x                      x           x        x                          x       x             x         x          x          x                  x          x           x                           x                   x                  x             x            x          x           x                   x          x                      x           x                 x             x         x             x                     x          x                   x
      central bank, supervisor, or ministry           x                                                                                                                                                                                           x                  x                                          x       x                                                                                                                           x                  x                  x 1/                                                                                                     x

      administered publicly                   x       x                  x       x                x                        x               x         x         x                x         x            x         x             x                  x        x         x            x           x                         x                 x             x         x                     x                  x          x                                                x          x        x                       x            x          x           x                   x          x                      x           x                 x             x         x              x                    x                              x
      administered privately                                                                                  x                                                                                                                                                                                        x                                                                                                                                            x         x                                      x
      administered jointly                                     x                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                x                 x                                          x                                                    x                                                                                                                                                                x                                                                                                              x

      paybox only                                              x         x                                                 x                         x                                                 x         x             x                  x                  x                                          x       x                                                                                             x           x                 x                  x                   x         x             x                                   x                              x
      paybox plus, loss or risk minimizer     x       x                          x                x           x                            x                   x                x         x                                                                x                      x           x        x                          x       x             x         x          x          x                  x                                                  x                   x                                             x          x                               x                       x         x x 35/ x                                   x         x             x                     x          x                   x

      multiple schemes                                                                                                                                         x                          x                                                                                                                                                            x 13x 14/                                                                                             x 15/                                                                                                                                                                     x 20/

 Participation and Coverage
       compulsory for domestic banks          x       x        x         x       x                x           x            x               x         x         x                x         x            x         x             x                  x        x         x            x           x        x        x       x         x       x             x         x          x          x                  x          x           x                 x         x        x          x        x         x             x            x          x           x                   x          x            x         x           x                 x             x         x              x                    x          x                   x
       local subsidiaries of foreign banks    x       x        x         x       x                x           x            x               x         x         x                x         x            x         x             x                  x        x         x            x           x        x        x       x         x       x             x         x          x          x                  x          x           x                 x         x        x          x        x         x             x            x          x           x                   x          x            x         x           x                 x             x         x              x                    x          x                   x
       local branches of foreign banks        x       x        x         x       x                x           x            x                         x                          x                                x                                x        x         x                        x                 x       x         x       x             x         x          x                                        x           x                 x         x        x          x                  x             x                       x           x                   x          x            x         x           x                               x                        x                    x          x
       foreign currency deposits              x       x                          x                x           x            x                         x         x                x         x                      x                                                   x                        x                                                         x         x          x          x                  x                      x                 x         x        x                   x         x             x                       x           x                   x                                             x                 x                       x                                              x
       interbank deposits                                      x                                                                           x                   x                          x            x                       x                  x                               x                    x        x                 x                                                                        x                                                                                                                    x          x           x                                                     x                             x             x                                                        x                   x

      coinsurance                                                        x

 Funding
     ex-ante fund                             x       x        x         x                        x                        x               x         x         x                x         x            x         x             x                  x        x                      x           x        x        x       x         x       x             x         x          x          x                  x          x           x                           x        x          x        x                       x            x          x           x                   x          x            x         x                             x             x         x             x                     x          x                   x
     ex-post scheme                                                              x                            x                                                                                                                                                      x                                                                                                                                                                              x                                                x                                                                                                                   x

      funded by government
      funded privately                                                           x                x           x                                      x         x                x         x                                    x                  x        x x3/ x                            x        x                          x                     x                    x                             x          x           x               x4/         x                   x        x         x             x            x          x                               x          x            x         x           x                 x             x         x              x                               x                   x
      funded jointly                          x       x        x         x                                                 x               x                                                           x         x                                                                                              x       x                 x                      x5/                    x                                                                              x                                                                               x                                                                                                                                               x

      backstop 6/                                     x                                                                    x                         x         x                          x            x                       x                                                                                        x         x                               x          x          x                  x                      x                 x                                                                                                                                                        x           x x 28/ x                                               x                     x                              x

 Contributions and Assessment Base
      risk-adjusted premiums                                                                                                               x                   x                x         x                      x                                                                x           x        x                          x                               x          x                                        x                                                x                   x                                                                               x                       x                                       x             x                                             x          x
      assessment base 34/
            covered deposits                                                                                                               x                                                           x                                          x        x                                           x                          x                                                     x                  x          x                                                                    x                       x                                   x                   x                                 x                                                                                         x
            eligible deposits                         x                                           x                                                  x                                                           x                                                                                                                                                x          x                                                    x                           x        x                                                                                                                                                 x
            total deposits                    x                x                                                           x                                   x                x         x                                    x                                                  x           x                 x       x                 x             x                                                                                                                         x                                             x          x                                          x            x                                                     x         x              x                               x                   x
            total liabilities                                                    x                            x                                                                                                                                                      x                                                                                                                                                                              x                                                x                                                                                                                                 x 33/

 Payouts to Depositors
     per deposit account
     per depositor per institution            x       x        x         x       x                x           x            x               x         x         x x 30 x                                x         x             x                  x        x         x                        x        x        x       x         x       x             x         x          x          x                  x          x           x                 x         x        x          x        x         x             x            x          x           x                   x          x            x         x           x x 31/ x                                 x             x                     x          x                   x
     per depositor                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                x
     deposit losses imposed 21/                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         22/                                    23/

Notes: Table excludes voluntary and contractual schemes other than the national statutory scheme. Coverage is for all countries with explicit deposit insurance schemes. Information is as of 2013.
1/ Swedish National Debt Office.
2/ In 2011, the Netherlands adopted a regulation to transform its ex-post DGS into an ex-ante funded scheme with risk-based contributions, to come into effect on July 1, 2013.
3/ The Dutch Central Bank administers the scheme and pays out the depositors. The costs of the scheme are transferred (including the administrative costs) ex post to the members of the DGS, subject to
an annual cap of 5% of own funds of each member. The ex post scheme will become an ex ante scheme on July 1, 2015.
4/ In case of a bank failure, the Bank of Slovenia temporarily assumes the obligation to pay the guaranteed deposits and then calls on other banks to contribute funds needed for the paying out of insured
deposits. To ensure banks have sufficient liquid assets to contribute such funds, all banks are required to invest a minimum of 2.5% of insured deposits in debt securities that are eligible for the
collateralization of Eurosystem receivables as defined by Bank of Slovenia.
                                                                      39

5/ Initial contribution to the DGS fund provided by Banco de Portugal.
6/ In the case of a shortfall of funds, the DGS can issue bonds/receive loans guaranteed by the government, or may access funding from the Central Bank or Ministry of Finance.
7/ Deposit Insurance Corporation of Japan and Agricultural and Fishery Cooperative Savings Insurance Corporation.
8/ Separate deposit insurance schemes exist for banks and cooperative financial institutions.
9/ Einlagensicherung der Banken & Bankiers GmbH (Deposit Protection Company of the Austrian Commercial Banks Ltd), HYPO Haftungs GmbH, Sparkassen-Haftungs AG, Österr. Raiffeisen-
Einlagensicherung reg GenmbH, and Schulze-Delitzsch-Haftungsgenossenschaft regGenmbH.
10/ Deposit Protection Scheme and the Deposit Protection Scheme for Co-operative Societies.
11/ Entschädigungseinrichtung des Bundesverbandes Öffentlicher Banken Deutschlands GmbH (Compensatory fund of the Association of German Public Sector Banks), Entschädigungseinrichtung
deutscher Banken GmbH (The German Private Commercial Banks Compensation Scheme for Depositors and Investors), Sicherungseinrichtung des Bundesverband der Deutschen Volksbanken und
Raiffeisenbanken (Protection Scheme of National Association of German Cooperative Banks), Haftungsverbund der Sparkassen-Finanzgruppe (Joint Liability Scheme of the Sparkassen-Finanzgruppe).
12/ Fondo Interbancario di Tutela dei Depositi (Interbank Deposit Protection Fund), Fondo di Garanzia dei Depositanti del Credito Cooperativo (Deposit Guarantee Fund of Cooperative Credit Banks).
13/ Bank Guarantee Fund and Polish Cooperative Savings and Credit Union Mutual Insurance Society.
14/ Fundo de Garantia de Depósitos (Deposit Guarantee Fund) and Fundo de Garantia do Crédito Agrícola Mútuo (Mutual Agricultural Credit Guarantee Fund).
15/ Fondo de Garantia de Depositos en Establecimientos Bancarios (Deposit Guarantee Fund For Banking Establishments), Fondo de Garantia de Depósitos en Cooperativas de Crédito (Deposit
Guarantee Funds for Credit Cooperative Banks Establishment), Fondo de Garantia de Depositos en Cajas de Ahorro (Deposit Guarantee Funds for Savings Banks Establishment).
16/ Fundo Garantidor de Crédito (FGC) cover deposits at banks, as well private deposit insurance schemes for credit unions.
17/ Canada Deposit Insurance Corporation, Autorité des Marchés Financiers, and provincial-level funds primarily for credit unions.
18/ Fondo de Guarantias de Instituciones Financieras and Fondo de Garantias de Entidades Cooperatives, for banks and cooperatives, respectively.
19/ Jamaica Deposit Insurance Corporation and Jamaica Co-operative Credit Union League.
20/ Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, National Credit Union Share Insurance Fund, and previously the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation for commercial banks, credit unions, and
savings and loans, respectively.
21/ We consider only cases of insured depositor losses where there was explicit deposit insurance. As defined, we identify only three cases. Argentina (1989): Losses were imposed on time deposits
when time deposits at BONEX were converted into long-term bonds at an exchange rate below the prevailing on the market. Argentina (2001): Dollar deposits were converted into domestic currency at
ARG$1.4, which was below the prevailing market rate. Iceland (2008): Losses imposed on depositors of foreign branches of the major Icelandic banks that failed (primarily in the Netherlands and UK),
even though these deposits were explicitly covered under EU directives.
22/ In 2008, uninsured depositors of IndyMac, which entered receivership, are likely to face losses because the asset value of the receivership is insufficient to cover all uninsured deposits; so far they
have received an advance dividend in the amount of 50% of their uninsured deposits from the FDIC.
23/ In 1994, depositors at Banco Latino with more than B 10m received long-term non-negotiable bonds with interest rate below market, for the amount exceeding the 10mln threshold.
24/ Total deposits without government deposits and interbank deposits.
25/ The difference to the maximum insured amount is always topped-up by the Federal Minister of Finance. Furthermore, the DIS can issued bonds with repayment guaranteed by the government.
26/ The DIS can borrow from the Reserve Bank of India.
27/ Banks are required to make up the shortfall but this is limited in any one year to the annual contribution. Any initial shortfall beyond this would be covered by the Government but would be
recouped from the banks in subsequent years.
28/ The FDIC has a significant line of credit with the U.S. Treasury Department. In addition, in order to replenish the Deposit Insurance Fund, the FDIC can order special assessments on insured banks
in addition to their regular assessments.
29/ The amalgamation of cooperative banks is considered to be a single institution.
30/ Deposit insurance coverage is calculated per depositor per institution and per ownership category. The ownership categories are: individual accounts, joint accounts, company/corporate accounts,
trust accounts, nominee accounts.
31/ Deposit insurance coverage is based on ownership rights and capacities at any given insured depository institution. For example, a depositor may have a Single Account, which is covered up to the
deposit insurance maximum and also a Joint Account, which also is covered up to the deposit insurance maximum per co-owner.
32/ Coverage of time deposits is per depositor and for demand deposits is per deposit account.
33/ Average total assets minus tangible equity (since April 1, 2011; prior to that, total domestic deposits).
34/ Total liabilities refers to the bank's total liabilities (i.e., deposits and other liabilities). Total deposits refers to the total deposits held by the bank. Eligible deposits refers to deposits repayable by the
deposit insurance scheme, before the level of coverage is applied. Covered deposits refers to deposits that are covered, obtained from eligible deposits when applying the level of coverage provided for
by the deposit insurance scheme.
35/ In addition to payout, the FSCS plays several roles in the special resolution regime, including informing decisions on the selection of tools, supporting the implementation of the bank insolvency
procedure, and making contributions towards the cost of resolution.
Sources: European Commission, International Association for Deposit Insurers, Financial Stability Board (2010, 2012), FDIC, Laeven and Valencia (2012), IMF staff reports, and national deposit
insurance agencies.
                                                                                                                 40


Table 4. Recent Changes to Depositor Protection, 2007−2013




                                                                                                                                                                   Bosnia and Herzegovina
                                                                                                                         Azerbaijan, Rep. of




                                                                                                                                                                                                     Brunei Darussalam




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Kyrgyz Republic
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Czech Republic
                                                                                                                         Bahamas, The
                                                              Afghanistan




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Hong Kong
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         El Salvador
                                                                                                                         Bangladesh




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Kazakhstan
                                As of 2013




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Guatemala
                                                                            Argentina




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Honduras
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Colombia




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Indonesia
                                                                                                                         Barbados




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Denmark




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Germany
                                                                                                   Australia




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Gibraltar




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Hungary
                                                                                        Armenia




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Bulgaria




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Ecuador
                                                                                                                                                         Belgium
                                                              Albania




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Jamaica
                                                                                                                         Bahrain




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Kosovo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Finland
                                                                                                                                               Belarus
                                                              Algeria




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Canada




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Estonia




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Iceland
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Cyprus
                                                                                                               Austria




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Croatia




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Ireland
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Greece
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           France




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Jordan


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Kenya




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Latvia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Korea
                                                                                                                                                                                            Brazil




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Japan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Chile




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                India




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Laos
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Italy
Experienced banking crisis between 2007 - 2013 1/                                                               x                                         x                                                                                                                x                          x                                                     x        x                     x                                 x         x                              x        x                            x                                                      x

Increase in deposit protection since 2008
      introduction of DIS                                                                            x                                   x                                                             x                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         x          x
      increase in statutory DIS coverage                      x x             x                                 x                                         x         x x 14/                                                x                 x 9/ x x                      x         x                x                  x 9/ x                   x         x        x x                   x                      x          x         x                  x           x x 10/                      x                    x 2/                                x      x
      government guarantee on deposits                                                               x          x                               x                                                                                                                                                     x                                                             x 3/                                          x          x         x                              x   5/                     x 17/
      abolished co-insurance                                      x                                                                                                                                                                                    x                   x         x                                                                               x                                                       x                                        x

Government guarantees on bank deposits since 2008
     limited                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        x 3/
     unlimited                                                                                    x 15/ x 22/                                  x 21/                                                                                                                                                  x                                                                                                        x 19/                                                 x 4/                        x 17/
     -- in place since                                                                            2008 2008                                    2008                                                                                                                                                 2008                                                                                                       2008                                                 2008                         2008
     -- expired in                                                                                2010 2009                                  in place                                                                                                                                               2010                                                                                                       2010                                                 2013                         2010

Government guarantees on non-deposit liabilities since 2008                                       x 8/                                                   x 8/                                                                                                                                       x 6/                                         x 8/ x 8/ x 8/                           x 8/                              x 8/                                    x 8/ x 8/                                           x 8/                                       x

Government guarantees on bank assets since 2008                                                                 x                                         x                                                                                                                                                                                                 x        x                                                                                                x

Significant nationalizations of banks since 2008                                                                x                                         x                                                                                                                                           x                                                              x                     x                                           x                              x                                    x                                                       x
                                                                                                                               41


Table 4. Recent Changes to Depositor Protection, 2007-2013 (continued)




                                                                                                                                                         Montenegro, Rep. of




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Venezuela, Rep. Bol.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Trinidad and Tobago




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Yemen, Republic of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Serbia, Republic of




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    United Kingdom
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Slovak Republic




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Turkmenistan




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     United States
                                                              Liechtenstein


                                                                                          Luxembourg




                                                                                                                                                                                                 Netherlands




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Switzerland
                                As of 2013




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Philippines
                                                                                                       Macedonia




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Uzbekistan
                                                                                                                              Mauritania




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Zimbabwe
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Nicaragua




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Singapore
                                                                                                                                              Mongolia




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Sri Lanka




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Tajikistan
                                                                              Lithuania




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Tanzania
                                                                                                                              Moldova




                                                                                                                                                                               Morocco




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Paraguay
                                                                                                                   Malaysia




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Romania
                                                              Lebanon




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Thailand
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Slovenia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Portugal




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Vietnam
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Uruguay
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ukraine
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Norway




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Uganda
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Sweden
                                                                                                                              Mexico




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Nigeria




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Turkey
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Poland




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Russia




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Sudan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Oman
                                                                                                                                                                                         Nepal
                                                              Libya




                                                                                                                              Malta




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Spain
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Peru
Experienced banking crisis between 2007 - 2013 1/                                          x                                                   x                                                   x                        x                                                                   x                   x                                                                x         x                      x      x                                                                                                x        x               x

Increase in deposit protection since 2008
      introduction of DIS                                          x x                                                            x            x                                          x                                                                                                                                                                                                            x                                                           x                                                                                                                                                     x
      increase in statutory DIS coverage                                        x x                      x                    x       x 9/                   x                                     x                        x                        x 11/ x 9/ x                      x        x          x        x            x                                x                 x          x                  x x        x                                                                                                x        x               x x 12/       x
      government guarantee on deposits                                                                             23/                         x                                                                                                                                                                                                      x         x 16/               x                                                                            23/                                                                                 x 7/      x 18/
      abolished co-insurance                                                               x             x                                                                                                                                    x                                        x                                                                          x

Government guarantees on bank deposits since 2008
     limited                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         x 7/
     unlimited                                                                                                     23/                       x 13/                                                                                                                                                                                                 x 20/ x 16/                                                                                                   23/                                                                                                             x 18/
     -- in place since                                                                                                                       2008                                                                                                                                                                                                  2008 2008 2008                                                                                                                                                                                                                2009
     -- expired in                                                                                                                           2012                                                                                                                                                                                                  2010 2010 2009                                                                                                                                                                                                              in place

Government guarantees on non-deposit liabilities since 2008                      x 8/ 24/                                                                                                        x 8/                                                                                 x 8/ x 8/                                                                                    x 8/ x 8/                        x 8/                                                                                                            x 8/               x

Government guarantees on bank assets since 2008                                                                                                                                                    x                                                                                                                                                                                                                         x                                                                                                         x               x

Significant nationalizations of banks since 2008                                           x                                                   x                                                   x                        x                                                                                                                                                                  x                                                                                                                              x        x               x

Notes: While they do not have explicit deposit insurance schemes, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, and the United Arab Emirates extended a government guarantee on deposits during the financial crisis.
1/ Banking crisis dates for the period 2007-2011 according to Laeven and Valencia (2012). Cyprus is added to this list as of 2012.
2/ Coverage extended to include foreign currency deposits.
3/ Covering only private savings accounts.
4/ On September 29, 2010, the Credit Institutions Financial Support Scheme 2008, which provided a blanket guarantee of bank liabilities and was introduced by the Minister on September 20, 2008,
expired. This blanket guarantee was succeeded by the Credit Institutions Eligible Liabilities Guarantee Scheme which was officially commenced on December 9, 2009 and which applied to 7 major Irish
credit institutions. The Eligible Liabilities Guarantee Scheme was due to expire at the end of 2012 but was extended and expired on March 28, 2013. Limited to almost all liabilities of seven major Irish
financial institutions.
5/ The government guaranteed insured deposits up to the existing coverage limit in full should the insurance fund run out of funds.
6/ Excluding subordinated debt. Expired on October 10, 2010.
7/ For checking accounts only.
8/ Government guarantee of new debt issuance by banks.
9/ Indexed to inflation, so coverage increases are automatic.
10/ When Italy joined the EU, the coverage was ITL 200 million. This translated into EUR103291. Since 2010, Italy's coverage has been reduced to EUR100000, in line with the harmonized level of
deposit insurance coverage as embodied in the 2009/14/EC directive.
11/ Indexed to minimum wage.
12/ Indexed.
13/ On November 25, 2008, the Government of Mongolia issued a blanket deposit guarantee under the Law of Mongolia on Issuing a Guarantee for Savings held at Banks ("Deposit Guarantee Law").
This blanket guarantee had been issued amidst the financial crisis in 2008. The Deposit Guarantee Law expired on 25 November 2012 and was replaced with the introduction of an explicit deposit
insurance scheme.
14/ In addition to expanding deposit insurance coverage, the National Monetary Council allowed banks to issue a special time deposit guaranteed by the deposit insurance agency (FGC) for the issuance
of securities.
15/ On October 12, 2008, Australia announced an unlimited guarantee scheme for deposits in excess of A$1 million (the Guarantee Scheme). The Scheme formally commenced on 28 November 2008,
and closed for new liabilities at the end of March 2010. Large deposits and wholesale liabilities guaranteed under the Scheme as at 31 March 2010 remained guaranteed, for a fee, for the relevant term.
Separate deposit insurance arrangements continued to apply for deposit balances totaling up to and including A$1 million per customer per institution, and were lowered to A$250,000 from 1 February
2012 onwards. Such deposits are guaranteed without charge.
16/ On October 8, 2008, the Slovak government announced a blanket guarantee on deposits, which became effective as of November 1, 2009. Blanket guarantee expired at the end of 2010.
17/ Jordanian government issued a blanket guarantee on deposits in 2008, which expired end-2010.
                                                               42

18/ The President of the Republic of Uzbekistan issued a decree announcing a blanket guarantee on deposits on November 28, 2008. Blanket guarantee officially in place since October 12, 2009.
Guarantee still in place.
19/ Blanket guarantee introduced in 2008 expired at the end of 2010.
20/ Singapore announced on October 16, 2008 a blanket guarantee on deposits of individuals and non-bank customers of banks licensed in Singapore. The guarantee expired on December 31, 2010.
21/ State-owned banks Belarusbank and Belagroprombank benefit from a full government guarantee on all their deposits, and do not make contributions to the Guarantee Fund. By Presidential decree of
November 4, 2008. Belarus subsequently extended a full guarantee on all household deposits in all banks.
22/ In October 2008, the Austrian government announced a blanket guarantee on retail deposits. The guarantee expired end-2009. In addition, as part of the Austrian Guarantee Scheme for Bank
Lending announced on October 13, 2008, the Austrian government issued a limited guarantee on new bond issues by banks.
23/ Full government guarantee on deposits already in place.
24/ ForDexia only.
Sources: European Commission, Laeven and Valencia (2012), and national deposit insurance agencies.
                                                                                    43


Table 5. Fund Size and Coverage of Existing DIS, 2010
                                                             Potential deposit liabilities, 2010                                                                                  Ability to pay, 2010
Country           T otal deposits (US$bn)   Eligible deposits (US$bn)        Covered deposits (US$bn)   Size of the DIS fund (US$bn)   Public debt (as % of GDP) 1/   GDP (US$bn)      T otal deposits / GDP   Size of DIS fund / Covered deposits
Argentina                   95                                                           27.6                      1.21                           49.2                   367.6                 25.8                             4.4
Australia                 1336                      1269.2                               815                         0                            20.5                  1247.2                107.1                              0
Austria                     25                                                           6.5                         0                            72.3                   378.4                 6.6                               0
Belgium                   704.1                       366                                                          1.18                           95.7                   472.5                149.0                           0.32 3/
Brazil                     933                       721.2                              205.3                      12.73                          65.0                  2142.9                 43.5                             6.2
Bulgaria                   31.9                       26.7                               17.3                      0.51                           14.9                   47.8                  66.7                            2.94
Canada                    1803                      1153.9                              631.1                      2.02                           83.1                  1614.1                111.7                            0.32
Cyprus                     42.4                       76.5                               32.6                      0.04                           61.3                   23.1                 183.5                            0.11
Czech Republic             129                       114.4                               65.9                      0.54                           37.9                   198.5                 65.0                            0.82
Denmark                   302.5                                                         100.9                      0.73                           42.7                   313.1                 96.6                            0.73
Estonia                    10.8                       8.1                                 5                         0.2                            6.7                   19.1                  56.5                             4.1
Finland                    142                       138.3                               60.3                      0.81                           48.7                   237.1                 59.9                            1.34
France                    1742                      1602.6                             1167.1                      2.45                           82.4                  2569.8                 67.8                            0.21
Germany                   3395                       1358                                                          5.09                           82.5                  3310.6                102.5                           0.37 2/
Greece                    371.4                      284.4                              177.8                      2.33                           148.3                  294.8                126.0                            1.31
Hong Kong                  877                       859.5                              175.4                      0.18                           35.5                   228.7                383.5                             0.1
Hungary                    88.4                       65.3                               34.3                      0.38                           82.1                   128.0                 69.1                            1.11
India                     1166                      1107.7                              384.8                      5.39                           67.5                  1711.0                 68.1                             1.4
Indonesia                  279                       251.1                              170.2                      2.04                           26.1                   709.5                 39.3                             1.2
Ireland                   268.7                                                                                    0.98                           91.2                   209.8                128.1
Italy                     2050                       922.5                              635.5                        0                            119.3                 2059.2                 99.6                              0
Japan                     11101                     9990.9                             7881.7                      3.15                           216.0                 5495.4                202.0                            0.04
Korea                      951                       646.7                              256.8                      4.13                           33.4                  1014.9                 93.7                            1.61
Latvia                     20.3                       16.5                               6.5                       0.18                           39.7                   24.1                  84.2                            2.82
Luxembourg                866.3                      130.9                               18.3                        0                            19.5                   53.0                 1634.5                             0
Malta                      58.3                       10.7                               8.5                       0.01                           66.0                    8.4                 694.0                            0.13
Mexico                     178                        178                               103.2                      0.52                           42.2                  1046.7                 17.0                             0.5
Netherlands               1202                       709.2                               577                         0                            63.4                   778.6                154.4                              0
Portugal                  272.1                      200.9                                                         1.99                           94.0                   229.4                118.6                           0.99 2/
Romania                    93.7                       41.6                               26.8                      0.33                           31.1                   164.8                 56.9                            1.23
Russia                     692                       325.2                              221.4                      3.99                           11.0                  1524.9                 45.4                             1.8
Singapore                  456                       319.2                               86.6                      0.11                           98.5                   231.7                196.8                            0.13
Slovak Republic            51.6                       26.5                               25.7                      0.04                           41.0                   87.4                  59.0                            0.14
Slovenia                   30.6                       24.4                               12.7                        0                            38.7                   47.1                  65.0                              0
Spain                     1963                       1276                               922.6                      3.41                           61.7                  1387.4                141.5                            0.37
Sweden                    587.7                      336.7                               86.3                      2.75                           39.4                   463.1                126.9                            3.18
Switzerland               1481                      1081.1                              355.4                        0                            48.5                   549.1                269.7                              0
T urkey                    399                       235.4                               99.8                       5.4                           42.3                   731.1                 54.6                            5.41
United Kingdom           3183.2                     1419.3                                                           0                            78.5                  2296.9                138.6                              0
United States             7888                       7888                              6231.5                      -7.48                          94.8                  14958.3                52.7                            -0.12
Notes: Total deposits refers to total deposits held by banks in the country. Eligible deposits refers to deposits repayable by the deposit insurance scheme, before the level of coverage is applied. Covered
deposits are obtained from eligible deposits when applying the level of coverage.
1/ General government gross debt (as % of GDP). Source: IMF World Economic Outlook April 2014.
2/ Size of DIS fund / Eligible deposits.
Sources: European Commission, International Association for Deposit Insurers, Financial Stability Board (2010, 2012), FDIC, Laeven and Valencia (2012), IFS, IMF staff reports, and national deposit
insurance agencies.
