                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         LONG-TERM UNEMPLOYMENT AND THE GREAT RECESSION:
THE ROLE OF COMPOSITION, DURATION DEPENDENCE, AND NON-PARTICIPATION

                                             Kory Kroft
                                            Fabian Lange
                                       Matthew J. Notowidigdo
                                         Lawrence F. Katz

                                        Working Paper 20273
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20273


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2014




We thank Barbara Petrongolo for extremely useful and thoughtful comments as a discussant and David
Card, Alex Mas, and Jim Poterba for helpful feedback, and we thank Mark He for excellent research
assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w20273.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Kory Kroft, Fabian Lange, Matthew J. Notowidigdo, and Lawrence F. Katz. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Long-Term Unemployment and the Great Recession: The Role of Composition, Duration
Dependence, and Non-Participation
Kory Kroft, Fabian Lange, Matthew J. Notowidigdo, and Lawrence F. Katz
NBER Working Paper No. 20273
June 2014
JEL No. E24,J64

                                           ABSTRACT

We explore the extent to which composition, duration dependence, and labor force non-participation
can account for the sharp increase in the incidence of long-term unemployment (LTU) during the Great
Recession. We first show that compositional shifts in demographics, occupation, industry, region,
and the reason for unemployment jointly account for very little of the observed increase in LTU. Next,
using panel data from the Current Population Survey for 2002-2007, we calibrate a matching model
that allows for duration dependence in the exit rate from unemployment and for transitions between
employment (E), unemployment (U), and non-participation (N). We model the job-finding rates for
the unemployed and non-participants, and we use observed vacancy rates and the transition rates from
E-to-U, E-to-N, N-to-U, and U-to-N as the exogenous "forcing variables'' of the model. The calibrated
model can account for almost all of the increase in the incidence of LTU and much of the observed
outward shift in the Beveridge curve between 2008 and 2013. Both negative duration dependence
in the job-finding rate for the unemployed and transitions to and from non-participation contribute
significantly to the ability of the model to match the data after 2008.


Kory Kroft                                        Matthew J. Notowidigdo
Department of Economics                           Northwestern University
University of Toronto                             Department of Economics
150 St. George Street                             2001 Sheridan Road
Toronto, ON M5S 3G7                               Evanston, IL 60208-2600
Canada                                            and NBER
and NBER                                          notowidigdo@gmail.com
kory.kroft@utoronto.ca
                                                  Lawrence F. Katz
Fabian Lange                                      Department of Economics
McGill University                                 Harvard University
Department of Economics                           Cambridge, MA 02138
855 Sherbrooke Street West                        and NBER
Montreal, Quebec, H3A 2T7                         lkatz@harvard.edu
fabolange@gmail.com
1     Introduction

This paper investigates whether a search and matching model can explain important features of the U.S.

labor market in the Great Recession and its aftermath. In particular, we ask whether such a model can

account for the rise in the unemployment rate and the increase in the incidence of long-term unemployment

(LTU) among the unemployed.2

    To motivate our analysis, we begin by decomposing the overall unemployment rate by unemployment

duration. Figure 1 plots the unemployment rate for the short-term unemployed (<15 weeks), the medium-

term unemployed (15-26 weeks) and the long-term unemployed (>26 weeks) from 1948 to 2013. The

short-term unemployed typically represent the vast majority of the unemployed with the short-term un-

employment rate around 4 percent in normal times. The medium- and long-term unemployed account

for much less of total unemployment, with rates typically near 1 percent. During the Great Recession,

unemployment rates increased across all duration groups. However, the long-term unemployment rate

reached record levels and remains historically high: unemployment rates for both the short-term and long-

term unemployed were around 3.5 percent in 2013. Although short-term and medium-term unemployment

rates were roughly back to their normal pre-recession levels by 2012, long-term unemployment remains

persistently high.

    Another way to see this is in Panel A of Figure 2, which shows the share of unemployed workers who are

long-term unemployed among prime-aged workers (aged 25-55 years). This share increased from around

20 percent in 2008 to roughly 45 percent in 2013. Panel B of Figure 2 shows that the Beveridge curve –the

relationship between unemployment and job vacancies –shifted outward during the Great Recession. This

paper attempts to account for these two facts – the rise in the LTU share and the shift in the Beveridge

curve –by exploring the role of shifts in the composition of the unemployed, duration dependence in job-

…nding rates for the unemployed, and transitions in and out of the labor force (between unemployment,

employment, and non-participation). To preview our main result, we …nd that an enriched matching model

–incorporating duration dependence and non-participation –can account for almost all of the increase in

the incidence of LTU and most of the outward shift in the Beveridge curve during the Great Recession.

By contrast, we do not …nd any evidence that compositional shifts play an important role.

    We begin our analysis by showing that between 2008 and 2013, compositional shifts towards groups with

traditionally longer unemployment durations account for very little of the overall rise in the incidence of

LTU documented in Figure 2. We show that LTU increased for virtually all groups and that compositional
   2 By “incidence of long-term unemployment”, we mean the share of total unemployed individuals at a point in time who

are currently experiencing long unemployment durations (typically de…ned as either above 26 weeks or 52 weeks).




                                                          1
shifts do not go very far in accounting for the rise in LTU. For this exercise, compositional shifts refer to

changes in observed characteristics of unemployed workers –speci…cally, variables in the Current Population

Survey (CPS) related to demographics, occupation, industry, region, and the reason for unemployment.

We emphasize that this analysis cannot account for changes in the composition of the unemployed along

unobserved characteristics.

   We next examine the extent to which a matching model along the lines of Mortensen and Pissarides

(1994) and Shimer (2005) can account for the observed increase in LTU and the observed shift in the

Beveridge curve. To do this, we enrich a standard matching model along three dimensions. First, we

allow for duration dependence in the job-…nding rate of the unemployed. Second, we allow for ‡ows

between employment (E), unemployment (U), and non-participation (N), instead of focusing exclusively

on ‡ows between E and U, as in a standard matching model. Third, we allow ‡ows from employment and

non-participation into unemployment to occur not just into short durations, but into long unemployment

durations, as well, consistent with observed ‡ows in the CPS.

   Our rationale for exploring duration dependence in the unemployed job-…nding rate is based on several

recent resume audit studies which show that callbacks from employers to set up an interview decline with

the current non-employment duration on a job applicant’s resume (Kroft, Lange, and Notowidigdo 2013;

Eriksson and Rooth 2013; Ghayad 2013). This form of employer discrimination could arise from human

capital depreciation or employer screening, whereby employers perceive the long-term unemployed to be

less productive employees. Negative duration dependence in the job-…nding rate could also be due to lower

search e¤ort among the unemployed at longer durations due to discouragement.

   Negative duration dependence in the exit rate from unemployment can potentially “amplify”the e¤ects

of a downturn in the labor market and increase LTU. According to a recent report by the Congressional

Budget O¢ ce (CBO), long-term unemployment may “produce a self-perpetuating cycle wherein protracted

spells of unemployment heighten employers’ reluctance to hire those individuals, which in turn leads to

even longer spells of joblessness”(CBO 2012). As a result, negative duration dependence in the job-…nding

rate from unemployment would appear to be a promising candidate explanation for understanding the

recent sharp rise increase in LTU. As more workers are pushed into longer unemployment spells, negative

duration dependence lowers the average job-…nding rate and thus increases the overall unemployment

rate. Therefore, duration dependence can potentially explain both the rise in LTU as well as the observed

outward shift in the Beveridge curve during the Great Recession, as documented in Elsby, Hobijn, and

Sahin (2010).

   Our rationale for exploring the non-participation margin is motivated by previous work demonstrating


                                                     2
the ‡uid boundary between non-participation and unemployment (Clark and Summers 1979; Flinn and

Heckman 1983; Card and Riddell 1993; Jones and Riddell 1999; Elsby, Hobijn and Sahin 2013) as well as

recent research on the e¤ects of unemployment insurance (UI) bene…t extensions on transitions between

unemployment, employment, and non-participation (Rothstein 2011; Farber and Valetta 2013). The recent

UI research …nds signi…cant e¤ects of extended UI in reducing the exit rate from unemployment to non-

participation. The substantial UI bene…t extensions during the Great Recession may therefore have induced

some jobless individuals to continue to report themselves as unemployed in the CPS, contributing to the

observed rise in LTU. Beyond this speci…c mechanism, we also observe large changes in transition rates to

and from non-participation since 2008.

   We calibrate our enriched matching model on monthly data in the years before the Great Recession

(2002-2007), and study how well the calibrated model …ts the data during the Great Recession, holding

…xed the calibrated parameters.3 In our analysis, we implement a two-step empirical approach. In the

…rst step, we measure transition rates between the di¤erent labor market states (E, U, and N) over the

entire 2002-2013 period and estimate duration dependence using data from 2002-2007. In the second step,

we calibrate the matching model parameters. By …rst measuring transition rates without imposing the

structure of the matching model, we obtain measured hazard rates (between unemployment, employment,

and non-participation) that are robust to model misspeci…cation.4 An alternative to our two-step approach

would be to estimate the hazard rates and the matching model parameters jointly in a single step. One

advantage of our two-step approach is that it clari…es when failures to match the evolution of the job-…nding

rates over this time period are due to shortcomings in the enriched matching model. Another advantage

is that it is straightforward to impose alternative assumptions about the magnitude of “true” duration

dependence to explore sensitivity of the results (since the second step takes the duration dependence

estimates from the …rst step as given, allowing alternative duration dependence estimates to be “plugged

in” at the second stage).

   In all of our analyses, we treat vacancies, transitions from employment to unemployment and non-

participation, and transitions between non-participation and unemployment as the exogenous “forcing

variables” of the model. By contrast, we allow the job-…nding rates (for both the unemployed and non-

participants), the labor market states, and the distribution of unemployment durations to all evolve endoge-

nously (holding constant the calibrated parameters from the 2002-2007 period). Clearly, a more complete

model of the economy would endogenize these variables. However, we treat these variables as exogenous
   3 The NBER’s Business Cycle Dating Committee dates the beginning of the Great Recession to be December 2007 and the

end to be June 2009.
   4 The assumptions required to estimate the transition rates are laid out in the Data Section and in Appendix B.




                                                          3
because endogenizing them would require a model of vacancy creation as well as a model of labor demand,

which is beyond the scope of this paper. In our sensitivity analysis, we manipulate the vacancy rates that

we use in our counterfactual experiments to examine how the model performs when the strength of labor

demand changes.5

   Summarizing our results, we …nd that our calibrated model does a very good job of accounting for the

increase in the incidence of long-term unemployment and can also account for much of the observed outward

shift in the Beveridge curve. These conclusions are fairly robust to a variety of alternative assumptions,

such as allowing duration dependence to vary over the business cycle, as suggested by the experimental

results in Kroft, Lange and Notowidigdo (2013). On the other hand, our model has di¢ culty matching the

observed relationship between vacancies and non-participation during the Great Recession. In particular,

it predicts a job-…nding rate for non-participants that is too high after 2008. Why N-to-E transitions fell

so much more than expected (and continue to remain so low through 2013) therefore remains an important

open question for future work.

   To understand the relative importance of duration dependence and changes in (N-to-U, U-to-N, and E-

to-N) transition rates in the model’s ability to account for the observed increase in LTU and the observed

outward shift in the Beveridge curve, we simulate the calibrated model “shutting down” each of these

features one-by-one.

   First, we shut down duration dependence by re-calibrating the model under the assumption that the

job-…nding rate is independent of unemployment duration.                In this scenario, we …nd that the model

accounts for much less of the rise in LTU and the observed outward shift in the Beveridge curve.                     We

interpret this as evidence that duration dependence plays an important role in accounting for both of these

phenomena.

   Second, we shut down the exogenous non-participation ‡ows by …xing these ‡ows at the values observed

at the end of 2007, and we …nd that the predicted LTU shares and unemployment rates both deviate

substantially from our baseline calibrations. In particular, the counterfactual predictions show much less

of an outward shift in Beveridge curve. The E-to-N ‡ows are not central to this result, but U-to-N ‡ows

and particularly N-to-U ‡ows play an important role. This closely relates to results in Elsby, Hobijn and

Sahin (2013) who …nd that the ‡ows from unemployment to non-participation explain close to one-third

of the cyclical variation in the unemployment rate. Overall, our analysis suggests that changes in the

‡ows from non-participation to unemployment (speci…cally, ‡ows into long-term unemployment) play an
   5 In other words, we can “force” di¤erent vacancy rates on the model and evaluate how it performs quantitatively. This

leads us to use the term “forcing variables” to describe the exogenous rates in our model.




                                                           4
important role in the increase in the incidence of LTU after 2008.

   One explanation for this …nding centers around the very large UI extensions that took place during

the Great Recession. Our results indicate that ‡ows from unemployment to non-participation declined

from about 20 percent monthly in 2008 to about 14 percent monthly in 2009 and only slowly recovered

after 2009. We conjecture that many unemployed individuals may have remained in unemployment longer

and are now classi…ed as LTU (rather than being classi…ed as non-participants). We also speculate that

UI extensions may have played a role in causing many UI recipients to continue to consider themselves

as labor force participants, even after many weeks of joblessness. This is consistent with the empirical

…ndings of Rothstein (2011) and Farber and Valletta (2013). Our counterfactual estimates suggest that a

large amount of the increase in unemployment with durations longer than 52 weeks might be attributable

to the decline in the rate at which the unemployed became non-participants.

   While our calibrated model can account for much of the outwards shift in the Beveridge curve, it does

not provide a complete accounting of the shift. Davis, Faberman and Haltiwanger (2013) o¤er a promising

explanation for the residual shift in the Beveridge curve not accounted for by our matching model, which

focuses on the vacancy rate rather than the unemployment rate in the Beveridge curve . They …nd a

reduction in “recruiting intensity” and in “e¤ective vacancies”, which may indicate continuing weak labor

demand since the Great Recession. According to their research, employers are listing vacancies but are

not recruiting workers as intensively to …ll them (as in the recent past), implicitly waiting around for the

“perfect” job candidates.

   Our work closely relates to Elsby et al. (2011), who provide a thorough empirical exploration of long-

term unemployment and non-participation in the Great Recession. An important di¤erence is that our

analysis is primarily based on a quantitative exploration of a calibrated matching model. One advantage of

our model-based approach is that we can more readily conduct counterfactual scenarios to assess the relative

importance of duration dependence and non-participation in accounting for the observed increase in long-

term unemployment and the observed outward shift of the Beveridge curve. Our paper is also similar to

subsequent research by Krueger, Cramer, and Cho (2014), who build on and extend our matching function

to allow for di¤erential e¤ects by unemployment duration within the matching function and also allow for

di¤erential labor force withdrawal (i.e., U-to-N transitions) for the short-term and long-term unemployed.

They evaluate whether the long-term unemployed exert di¤erential pressure on wage growth and in‡ation.

   Our work also relates to Barnichon and Figura (2013), who estimate a standard matching function over

the period 1967-2012 and …nd that the predicted job-…nding rate is much lower than the observed job-

…nding rate during the Great Recession. Barnichon and Figura consider a generalized matching function


                                                     5
incorporating worker heterogeneity (demographics, reason for unemployment and duration of unemploy-

ment) and labor market segmentation (geography and occupation group) and …nd that it matches observed

job-…nding rates during the Great Recession much more closely. While they consider a two-state model

of the labor market and focuses primarily on job-…nding rates, our paper considers a three-state model

adding non-participation and also focuses more on the incidence of long-term unemployment.

    Lastly, our paper is broadly related to an active literature in macroeconomics on the relative contribu-

tions of in‡ows into and out‡ows from unemployment to unemployment dynamics (Hall 2005; Shimer 2012;

Elsby, Michaels and Solon 2009; Fujita and Ramey 2009; Barnichon 2012; Elsby, Hobijn and Sahin 2013).

The emerging consensus from this literature is that the out‡ow contribution is at least 50 percent, but the

literature is agnostic as to the factors behind falling out‡ows from unemployment. Our paper contributes

to this literature by explicitly investigating two speci…c mechanisms behind the fall in the out‡ow rate:

duration dependence and transitions in and out of the labor force.6

    The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes the data. Section 3 investigates

the role of composition. Section 4 describes the matching function that we use to investigate the role of

duration dependence and non-participation. Section 5 describes the methodology for the model calibration.

Section 6 presents the results of the model calibration. Section 7 reports the counterfactual scenarios and

discusses alternative explanations. Section 8 concludes



2     Data

This section brie‡y describes our data sources. Appendix A provides more detail on the data used in our

analysis.

Current Population Survey (CPS). We use monthly CPS data between 2002 and 2013 (ending in April

2013), limiting the sample to individuals between the ages of 25 to 55. We focus on this prime-age sample

to enable us to ignore issues of delayed labor force entry of younger workers and changes in retirement

patterns of older workers. We use these CPS data in several ways. First, we use repeated cross-section data

when investigating the role of composition, limiting the sample to unemployed workers. Second, we use

both cross-section and panel data (merging individuals across months to build panel data) to investigate

the role of duration dependence and non-participation. For this exercise, we use data on all employed,
   6 A related paper that takes into account negative duration dependence in job-…nding rates is Hornstein (2012). Hornstein

extends the framework in Shimer (2012) to allow for two types of unemployed workers: those with high exit rates from unem-
ployment (the short-term unemployed) and those with low exit rates from unemployment (the long-term unemployed). The
generalized framework is better able to account for long-term unemployment during recessions, whereas Shimer’s framework
with a homogenous job-…nding rate signi…cantly understates it. The extended framework also increases the in‡ow contribution
to unemployment, relative to Shimer’s study.




                                                             6
unemployed, and non-participants. In the cross-section, we keep track of the total population of each

category to estimate the “stocks.” To create panel data, we match observations across successive months,

matching on household identi…er, line number, age, gender, and race. We use the matched panel data in

addition to the CPS cross-sectional estimates of the unemployed, the employed, and non-participants to

estimate the transition rates between unemployment, employment, and non-participation in each month.

We also compute overall (pre-2008) transition rates by unemployment duration (into both employment

and non-participation). Finally, we compute transition rates from employment and non-participation into

unemployment by unemployment duration.

Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey (JOLTS). We use monthly JOLTS data between 2002

and 2013 to compute the total number of vacancies. We use these vacancy data to calibrate the matching

model below during the pre-2008 period. We then use the post-2008 vacancy data as one of the exogenous

“forcing variables” for our counterfactual scenarios.




3     Long-term Unemployment and the Great Recession: Assessing
      the Role of Composition

Figure 1 shows that the share of the labor force that are long-term unemployed substantially increased

during the Great Recession and has remained elevated. We next examine the rise in the share of the cur-

rently unemployed with duration exceeding 26 weeks and investigate the role of composition in accounting

for this observed increase.

    Figure 2 (Panel A) illustrates the dramatic increase in LTU as a share of overall unemployment. The

long-term share increased from around 20 percent at the beginning of 2008 to roughly 45 percent in 2010.

Most of the increase occurred in 2009, a year after the recession began. Moreover, the share remained

elevated at around 45 percent well after the recession o¢ cially ended. By comparison, the recession which

began in 2001 saw this share increase from roughly 12 percent to 25 percent. Similar to the Great Recession,

the share increased roughly a year after the recession began and remained elevated for several years after

the recession o¢ cially ended. Nevertheless, the Great Recession was much deeper than the early 2000s

downturn, and it had a substantially larger impact on the structure of unemployment durations.

    In this section, we investigate the extent to which the increase in LTU during the Great Recession

can be accounted for by shifting composition in observable characteristics of the unemployed. We do

this by investigating the incidence of long-term unemployment, over time, for several demographic, indus-

try, occupation, geographic, and reason-for-unemployment groups, along with each group’s unemployment



                                                        7
share.

    Panel A of Figure 3 considers the education structure of the unemployed. It shows that the share of

LTU in total unemployment is fairly similar across all education groups. During the recession, long-term

unemployment uniformly increased across all education groups. Panel B of Figure 3 shows that high school

graduates are a larger share of the unemployed than college graduates. During the Great Recession, there

is a small increase in the share of college graduates among the unemployed. Despite this, since the rate of

long-term unemployment is fairly ‡at across all education groups, shifts in the education structure of the

unemployed cannot account for the changing unemployment duration dynamic during the Great Recession.

    Online Appendix Figures OA1 through OA7 consider di¤erent observable characteristics. The impact

of the Great Recession was widespread increasing the long-term unemployment share in all major demo-

graphic groups, industries, occupations, geographic regions, and reasons for unemployment. The long-term

unemployment share also increased in groups by reason for unemployment (job losers, those on temporary

layo¤, job leavers, new entrants, and re-entrants). To quantify how much compositional shifts overall could

have explained the rise in long-term unemployment, we hold …x the long-term unemployment rates for

each group in the pre-2008 period, and investigate how much observed shifts in group shares can explain

the overall rise in long-term unemployment. The aggregated evidence presented in Figure 4 shows that

compositional changes in the unemployed account for virtually none of the observed rise in long-term un-

employment. The rise in long-term unemployment is found for all major labor market groups and is not a

demographically-isolated phenomenon.

4     Matching Framework

    In this section, we outline our matching framework, which augments a standard matching model to

allow for duration dependence in unemployment and ‡ows to and from non-participation. We begin with

a standard matching model of the labor market (Pissarides 1985; Mortensen and Pissarides 1994), which

models ‡uctuations in the job-…nding probability through a reduced-form matching function. We enrich

this standard matching model to allow for duration dependence in unemployment and we allow a full set

of transitions between employment (E), unemployment (U), and non-participation (N).7

    Our goal is to calibrate this model using data from before the Great Recession and assess how well

it accounts for out‡ows from unemployment and non-participation into employment between 2008 and

2013. Throughout all of our analysis, we take the number of vacancies and in‡ows into unemployment and
   7 Recent research by Elsby et al. (2011) has highlighted the important role played by non-participants in understanding

the dynamics of long-term unemployment during the Great Recession.




                                                            8
non-participation as given. These are the exogenous “forcing variables” of the model. The endogenous

variables are the full distribution of unemployment durations, the population shares in each labor market

state, and the job-…nding rates of the unemployed and non-participants.

   To introduce the model, we begin with the following notation:

  1. Pt = population size (t is monthly calendar time), fEt ; Ut g = number of employed and unemployed
                                                Et            Ut
      individuals with associated rates fet =   Pt ; ut   =   Pt g.   Note that the unemployment rate is de…ned

      relative to the total population (rather than the labor force), which imposes symmetry with the

      non-participation rate de…ned below.

  2. Nt = Pt      Et   Ut = number of non-participants. Let the size of the labor force be denoted by
                                                                  Nt
      Lt = Et + Ut and the non-participation rate by nt =         Pt .


  3. Vt = total number of job vacancies. The number of job vacancies is an exogenous forcing variable

      during 2008-2013 in the counterfactual scenarios we describe below.

                                   EU                                            NU
  4. Flows to unemployment:        t    (employment ! unemployment),             t    (non-participation ! unem-

      ployment). Both of these transition rates are forcing variables during 2008-2013.

                                UE                                             NE
  5. Flows to employment:       t    (unemployment ! employment),              t    (non-participation ! employ-

      ment). These job-…nding rates are allowed to endogenously evolve during 2008-2013.

                                     EN                                               UN
  6. Flows to non-participation:     t    (employment ! non-participation),           t    (unemployment ! non-

      participation). Both of these transition rates are forcing variables during 2008-2013.


   The Appendix provides more detail on how each of these transition rates are computed.


4.1    Labor Market Flows During the Great Recession

We begin by presenting descriptive evidence on labor market ‡ows over time. Figure 5 plots the monthly

transition rates to and from employment, unemployment, and non-participation. The measured transition

rates are adjusted to be consistent with observed changes in stocks between months; Appendix B provides

the details of this procedure. We also account for seasonality by residualizing out month …xed e¤ects, and

we smooth the series by taking three-month moving averages.

   First, we see in Panel A that the monthly transition rates from unemployment to employment and

non-participation dropped signi…cantly during 2008. Starting in 2010, the ‡ows from unemployment into

non-participation began to recover and by the end of 2013 were close to their pre-recession levels. On



                                                          9
the other hand, the job-…nding rates of the unemployed (‡ows from unemployment to employment) have

remained low following the Great Recession.

   Second, Panel B shows that ‡ows from employment to non-participation remained relatively ‡at during

the Great Recession. Job losses leading to unemployment (employment to unemployment ‡ows) spiked up

in the Great Recession in 2008-9 and have slowly come back down in the recovery.

   Third, Panel C shows that job-…nding rates of non-participants (‡ows from non-participation to em-

ployment) dropped in 2008 and remained low through the end of 2013. While the job-…nding rate for the

unemployed declined sharply and bottomed out in 2009, the job-…nding rate for non-participants fell more

smoothly, and bottomed out in 2010. On the other hand, ‡ows from non-participation to unemployment

increased substantially in 2008 and remained high until the end of 2013. Interestingly, in the pre-Great

Recession period, the out‡ow rate from non-participation to employment always exceeded the out‡ow rate

to unemployment; however, during the Great Recession and at least through 2013, the opposite was true.

We show below that accounting for ‡ows from non-participation to unemployment during the Great Re-

cession is important for understanding the dynamics of the unemployment rate. In particular, we …nd that

ignoring changes in the N-to-U and U-to-N transition rates after 2008 results in a much smaller outward

shift in the Beveridge curve according to our calibrated model.8

   Flows from unemployment to employment are in part a¤ected by ‡ows from unemployment to non-

participation. For example, if more of the unemployed individuals were to withdraw from the labor force,

these individuals do not go from unemployment to employment at the same rate. To explore this issue, we

de…ne labor market ‡ows for “indomitable job seekers”(Clark and Summers 1979) to be the ratio of U-to-E

‡ows to the sum of U-to-E and U-to-U ‡ows. This conceptually corresponds to a hypothetical unemployed

job seeker who is unable to exit the labor force (and thus can only either transition to employment or

remain unemployed, perhaps inde…nitely). This “re-scaled”U-to-E transition rate is (mechanically) higher

for indomitable job seekers as illustrated in Panel D of Figure 5; however, we also see a similarly sharp

drop in the job-…nding rate for this group during the Great Recession.


4.2    Matching Function

We adapt the standard matching function to allow non-participants to …nd jobs. We assume that non-

participants and unemployed individuals meet job openings according to the function M (U + sN; V ) =
  8 Additionally, we discuss below how many individuals ‡owing from non-participation to unemployment report longer

unemployment durations after 2008.




                                                        10
m0 (U + sN ) V 1        .9   One may interpret s as the share of the non-participants that are “marginally

attached”or alternatively as the search e¢ ciency of non-participants relative to the unemployed, following

Jones and Riddell (1999, 2006). According to their estimates, sN is about 25-30 percent of the unemployed
                                                   UE                                         NE
population, and they also …nd that                 t    is roughly twice as large as          t  .

    We assume that the share of meetings with unemployed individuals is given by U=(U + sN ), while

the remaining share is with non-participants. In addition, we assume (for the unemployed) that the

probability that a meeting results in a hire depends on the duration of unemployment. In particular, A(d)

gives the relative hiring probability of an individual with unemployment duration d as compared to a newly

unemployed individual (with duration d = 0). These assumptions imply that the job-…nding rates for the

unemployed and non-participants are given, respectively, by the following expressions:


                                                     UE
                                                     t (xt ; d)        = A(d)m0 x1t                                             (1)
                                                        NE
                                                        t  (xt )       = sm0 x1t                                                (2)


                 Vt
where xt =    Ut +sNt   is a measure of labor market tightness and d is the duration of unemployment. The
                                      UE
parametric speci…cation for           t (d)       assumes that there is “true” duration dependence in job-…nding rates

out of unemployment; i.e., a genuine causal e¤ect of longer unemployment durations on the hazard rate of

exit out of unemployment (Heckman and Singer 1984).

    We propose a parametric speci…cation for A(d) and estimate this function in the pre-Great Recession

period, as we describe below. Let the probability density and distribution of ongoing unemployment

durations be given by        t (d)   and     t,   respectively. By integrating over the duration distribution, we get the

average job-…nding rate for the unemployed:

                                                                   Z
                                                  UE                    UE
                                                  t (xt )   =           t (xt ;    ) t ( )d
                                                                            Z
                                                  UE
                                                  t (xt )   = m0 x1t            A( ) t ( )d


    How does a recession a¤ect the unemployment job-…nding rate? In a recession, xt falls lowering
 UE                          UE                             UE                                                              UE
 t (xt ;   ) and hence       t (xt ).      The fall in      t (xt )    a¤ects     t(   ) which can feed back into a lower   t (xt )

through duration dependence, and consequently a higher unemployment rate.
   9 Note that this equation is to be interpreted as a meeting function, not a matching function. Job meetings are converted

into job matches according to equations (1) and (2) below.




                                                                       11
   Note that
                                                            UE
                                                            t        At
                                                            NE
                                                                 =
                                                            t
                                                                     s
               Z
where At =         A( ) t ( )d . With empirical estimates for At and the job-…nding rates, we can solve for
         NE
s = At   t
         UE   . The right-hand side varies with t, but we assume that s is time-invariant, so we can simply
         t

take the average of this expression in the 2002-2007 to produce an estimate of s to use in our calibrations.

Note that we also assume that both m0 and A(d) are time-invariant: there are no cyclical changes in

matching e¢ ciency or cyclical variation in the magnitude of duration dependence. We explore alternative

assumptions on how A(d) varies over the business cycle in sensitivity analysis below, while cyclical variation

in the matching e¢ ciency parameter is studied in detail in Sahin et al. (2014).


4.3      Labor Market Dynamics

Given the transition rates between employment, unemployment and non-participation, we can express the

dynamics of each of these populations as follows:


                       Nt+1     = Nt 1          NU      bN E + Et         EN
                                                                               + Ut   UN
                                                t        t                t           t

                                        EU    EU                      NU
                     Ut+1 (0)   = Et    t (0) t        + Nt t (0)     t                                               (3)

                Ut+1 (d + 1)    = Ut (d) 1       bU E (d)        UN
                                                                          + Et   EU    EU          NU
                                                                                                      (d) N U
                                                   t             t               t (d) t    + Nt   t      t           (4)

                       Et+1     = Pt     Ut+1        Nt+1


                                                                                  NE        UE
   In these dynamic equations, we have placed carets ("^") above bt                    and bt (d) to emphasize that these

rates are endogenous in our counterfactual simulations. When we construct the counterfactual scenarios,

we assume that if non-participants move to unemployment, they draw an unemployment duration from

the (empirical) distribution of unemployment durations estimated from observed N-to-U transitions (where

the empirical distribution is re-estimated each quarter for three unemployment categories: [0-6) months,

[6-12) months, and       12 months). Similarly, we also account for the fact that a share of entrants into

unemployment from employment report unemployment durations of 6 months or longer, so when employed

workers move into unemployment, they draw an unemployment duration from the empirical distribution

of unemployment durations (estimated analogously as for non-participants above). These two empirical
                     NU             EU
distributions are    t  (d)   and   t (d),   respectively. Since this share changes over time and increased during

the Great Recession, we estimate these distributions in each year-quarter, and we use this time-varying

distribution in our counterfactual simulations.


                                                             12
   In the next section, we examine the incidence of long-term unemployment and the Beveridge curve.

The share of unemployed individuals at calendar time t who have been out of work longer than                 weeks is

given by:                                                 X
                                                              Ut (d)
                                                          d
                                                LT Ut =
                                                              Ut

where Ut (d) is de…ned by equations (3) and (4). We use this as our measure of the share of unemployed

individuals who are long-term unemployed, and we focus on              = 26 weeks and          = 52 weeks.       When

we plot the Beveridge curve, we plot the the total unemployed individuals as predicted by our model

against the total observed number of job vacancies, normalizing both measures by the total population

(i.e., Ut =(Et + Ut + Nt ) and Vt =(Et + Ut + Nt )). Since our matching model focuses on capturing job-…nding

rates of both unemployed and non-participants, we include the total population rather than the total labor

force in the denominator.


4.4    Counterfactual Scenarios

The goal of our calibrations is to assess how far our enriched matching model can go in accounting for the rise

in long-term unemployment and the outward shift in the Beveridge curve during the Great Recession. We

also investigate the relationship between the non-participation rate and the vacancy rate. Our approach is

to estimate the model fundamentals during 2002-2007 on monthly CPS (panel and pooled cross-sectional)

data and then assess the model by comparing our counterfactual predictions to observed labor market

outcomes during 2008-2013. We estimate duration dependence in the job-…nding rate from unemployment
       UE
(how   t    varies with duration), the search e¤ectiveness of the marginally attached (s), and the overall

matching e¢ ciency m0 and matching technology parameter                . Our model uses as exogenous forcing
                                                                                              EU    EN
variables shifts in labor demand – where labor demand is proxied for by                Vt ;   t ;   t    – and shifts
                                                                           UN     NU
between unemployment and non-participation vs. unemployment,               t  ;   t      . Thus, we …x the pattern
                                                                                              UE            NE
of duration dependence, as re‡ected in A(d), and we allow the job-…nding rates                t (d)   and   t    – and

consequently the entire distribution of unemployment durations –to evolve endogenously during the Great

Recession. Our methodology follows Shimer (2005) by treating the separation rates of employed workers
                   EU         EN
from their jobs,   t    and   t  ,   as exogenous. Shimer also considers exogenous productivity shocks in his

model which a¤ects the equilibrium level of vacancies. We do not explicitly model the determination of

vacancies; rather, we take a more reduced-form approach and instead treat vacancies as exogenous. Finally,

we view ‡ows between non-participation and unemployment as being “outside the model” since they may




                                                        13
re‡ect factors such as the extension of UI bene…ts.

    In terms of predicting the incidence of long-term unemployment, we rely on the cross-sectional share of

workers with ongoing unemployment spells exceeding 26 and 52 weeks respectively. For predicting stocks

of unemployment, employment, and non-participation over time, we use the dynamic equations above to

simulate the model.



5     Calibration Methodology

We calibrate the model in the following steps:
                                  n        n                                             o                 o
                                               UN     UE       EN      EU    NE     NU
    1. We use data to estimate        t;       t  ;   t (d);   t  ;    t ;   t  ;   t        ; Vt ; Ut ; Nt .   The Appendix
                                                                ij
      describes how we estimate the transition rates            t     from the monthly CPS cross-sections and the

      (matched) panel data component of the CPS.

    2. An important issue is how we allocate ‡ows from non-participation to unemployment of various

      durations. Elsby et al. (2011) show that roughly 60 percent of the in‡ows into unemployment at

      reported durations longer than 1 month originate from non-participation. It appears that there are

      marginally attached workers that alternate between unemployment and non-participation and when

      these workers return to unemployment, they often report a duration which may include time since

      they separated from their last employer, as opposed to duration of unemployment spell since last

      leaving non-participation. Panel A of Figure 6 sheds light on this issue by plotting the share of

      ‡ows from non-participation to unemployment of a particular duration. We see that in the pre-

      recession period, roughly half of the ‡ows had durations less than or equal to one month; however,

      during the Great Recession, this share dropped substantially to around 30 percent. On the other

      hand, the share of ‡ows with durations longer than 12 months increased from roughly 20 percent

      to over 30 percent. In light of this, we collapse the 2002-2013 data quarterly and each quarter

      we estimate the empirical distribution of unemployment durations that non-participants transition

      into. Therefore, for our post-2008 counterfactuals, we use this empirical distribution for each N-to-U

      transition implied by the dynamic equations of the model and the observed unemployment durations

      that the non-participants are transitioning into.

    3. Another important issue is how we allocate ‡ows from employment to unemployment of various

      durations. Panel B of Figure 6 plots the share of E-to-U ‡ows going to a given unemployment

      duration. In interpreting the shares in this …gure, note that the scale of the left (right) axis is for


                                                          14
  durations less than or equal to (greater than) one month. We see that in the pre-recession period,

  roughly 80 to 85 percent of the transitions from employment to unemployment report durations less

  than or equal to one month. However, this share falls to 70 percent during the Great Recession. We

  follow analogous procedure as in previous step, estimating the empirical distribution of unemployment

  durations that employed workers transition into (for each quarter), and we use this distribution in

  our counterfactual scenarios for each E-to-U transition.

                                                                                UE
4. We use the measured relative job …nding rates at di¤erent durations (        t (d)   ) to estimate A(d). For
                                                                       UE                        UE
  2002-2007, we …t a curve through the empirical estimates of          t (d),   normalized by    t (0)   , using

  the following functional form: A(d) = (1     a1        a2 ) + a1 exp( b1   d) + a2 exp( b2     d). See panel
                                              b
  A of Figure 7 for our preferred estimate of A(d). The estimates reported in Table 1 are ab1 = 0:314;

  ab2 = 0:393, bb1 = 1:085 and bb2 = 0:055. We …nd that the job-…nding rate declines sharply for the

  …rst 8-10 months of unemployment and then declines much less steeply after that. The declining

  job-…nding rate with duration of unemployment can re‡ect “true” negative duration dependence in

  which the longer any individual is unemployed, the lower becomes the job-…nding rate. Alternatively,

  it could re‡ect heterogeneity among the unemployed with the remaining pool of the unemployed being

  more negatively selected at longer durations. To investigate this, we re-estimate A(d) controlling for a

  very rich set of observable characteristics available in the CPS: gender, …fth-degree polynomial in age,

  three race categories (white/black/other), …ve education groups (high school dropout, high school

  graduate, some college, college graduate, advanced degree), and gender interactions for all of the

  age, race, and education variables. When we control for these observable characteristics, we continue

  to …nd that the job-…nding rate (conditional on observables) declines sharply with unemployment

  duration; moreover, the estimated decline is very similar to the results from estimating A(d) without

  controls, as can be seen by comparing the solid line (with controls) to the dashed line (without

  controls) in Panel A of Figure 7.

       Of course, these results do not rule out existence of unobserved heterogeneity –such as di¤erences

  in recall rates to one’s previous job as documented by Katz (1986), Katz and Meyer (1990), and Fujita

  and Moscarini (2013), which could partially explain the apparent negative duration dependence after

  controlling for standard CPS observables. Additionally, declining employer perceptions of the quality

  of the unemployed at longer unemployment durations could also play an important role and would

  be consistent with recent resume audit studies …nding that job applications with longer employment

  gaps (longer duration of unemployment) get lower callback rates than those with implied shorter



                                                    15
      unemployment duration (Kroft, Lange, and Notowidigdo 2013; Eriksson and Rooth 2013; Ghayad

      2013). We note that the pattern of negative duration dependence after controlling for the observables

      in the CPS in panel A of Figure 7 is fairly similar to the results of declining employer callback rates

      with unemployment duration in the audit study of Kroft, Lange and Notowidigdo (2013), which we

      also use in alternative counterfactual scenarios below. In our main results, we use the estimates of

      A(d) which includes the large set of controls described above. The results of the alternative duration

      dependence estimates are reported in Table 2. Given the concerns about A(d) not representing the

      causal e¤ect of longer unemployment durations, we also make adjustments to A(d) assuming that,

      say, 50% of the observe duration dependence re‡ects a genuine causal e¤ect.

    5. Next, we estimate the parameters of the matching function by minimizing the distance between the

      observed job-…nding rates and the job-…nding rates implied by the matching functions using monthly

      CPS and JOLTS data for 2002 to 2007. The implied job-…nding rates for a given parameter vector

      (s; m0 ; ), taking estimated parameters of A(d) as given are the following:

                                                                                         1
                                         UE                                  Vt
                                         t    (s; m0 ; )      = m0 At
                                                                          Ut + sNt
                                                                                     1
                                         NE                                 Vt
                                         t    (s; m0 ; )      = m0 s
                                                                         Ut + sNt


      The minimum distance estimates are reported in Table 1 and are as follows: b = 0:753, m
                                                                                            c0 = 0:435,

      and sb = 0:218.
                         n                                o
                                 EU    EN     UN     NU
    6. Finally, we use    Vt ;   t ;   t  ;   t  ;   t                as the exogenous forcing variables to form our
                                                           t 1=2008
      counterfactual predictions below.



6     Calibration Results

6.1     Predicted Job-Finding Rates

During the Great Recession, average job …nding rates declined in part because average unemployment

durations increased. Panel B in Figure 7 shows what happened to average job-…nding rates due to the
                                      Z
increase in durations by plotting At = A( ) t ( )d from 2002 to 2013. At is a useful measure of the

duration structure of unemployment since is summarizes how the duration structure a¤ects the average

job …nding rate assuming that A(d) describes the e¤ect of unemployment duration on the job-…nding rate.




                                                              16
We use the estimated A(d) which controls for the rich set of observable characteristics available in the CPS

(gender, age, race, and education). To the extent that the recession shifted the unemployed towards longer

durations, this will lower At since A0 ( ) < 0.10

    We see that starting in 2008, there was a sharp drop in At from around 0:75 to roughly 0:63 (where

A(0) is normalized to 1 so that A(d) can be interpreted as the relative job …nding rate for high durations

compared to the newly unemployed). This …gure therefore shows that the indirect e¤ect of a drop in

market tightness on the average job-…nding rate is quantitatively important, and suggests the possibility

of a prominent role for negative duration dependence in the job-…nding rate out of unemployment in

accounting for changes in long-term unemployment share as well as outward shift in Beveridge curve.

    In panels A and B of Figure 8, we plot the predicted and observed job-…nding rates for the unemployed

and non-participants, respectively.11 These transition rates are the two key endogenous variables of the

model. By construction, the predicted rates match the observed rates in the pre-Great-Recession period.

During the Great Recession, we see that the model does a reasonable job of predicting the job-…nding

rate for the unemployed; however, non-participants were not …lling jobs at the rate they were predicted to

during this time period. This suggests that there was something fundamentally di¤erent about the Great

Recession in terms of its impact on individuals out of the labor force that is at odds with the behavior of

this group in the pre-recession period. We investigate this issue below.


6.2     Long-term Unemployment

Panel A in Figure 9 investigates how well our calibrated model matches the observed increase in incidence

of long-term unemployment. The calibrated model …ts the data by construction up to the …nal quarter of

2007. From 2008 onwards, we use the job-…nding rates for the unemployed and non-participants that are

predicted by our model. We label the data generated by model as “Counterfactual.” Panel A of Figure 9

shows that our model does very well in accounting for the observed increase in share of unemployed that

are long-term unemployed, when long-term unemployment is de…ned to be >26 weeks. In panel B of Figure

9, long-term unemployment is now de…ned to be >52 weeks. In this case, our model does not do quite as

well, although it still accounts for a large share of the actual increase in long-term unemployment. The

relatively poorer …t for LTU >52 weeks could be partly due to the fact that the estimated A(d) – which

controls how job-…nding probability falls with unemployment duration – declines sharply during the …rst
  1 0 Note that this variable does not include the direct e¤ect of market tightness on the average job-…nding rate through the

matching function; rather, it only includes the mechanical e¤ect of changes in duration distribution on average job-…nding
rates.
  1 1 We refer to the job-…nding rates estimated according to the method in Appendix B as “observed job …nding rates”

throughout the text.




                                                             17
several months and declines much less steeply after that.


6.3    Beveridge Curve

Panel C of Figure 9 plots the Beveridge curve using unemployment and vacancy rates, where the denom-

inator in each case is de…ned as total population between ages 25 and 55. We plot two curves in this

…gure. The solid curve, labeled “Observed”, plots the actual unemployment and vacancy rate in a given

quarter. Next, the dotted curve, labeled “Counterfactual”, plots the predicted unemployment along with

the observed vacancy rate for the quarters starting with 2008Q1. The …gure shows a signi…cant spike in

unemployment during the …rst quarter of 2008. At this point, vacancies were very low compared to the

2002-2007 period. However, even as vacancy rates recovered during 2010 and 2011, the number of unem-

ployed declined only very slowly. It seems as if the Beveridge curve has shifted out. This is a manifestation

of what has been dubbed the “jobless recovery.” Overall, we see that our model also predicts an outward

shift in the Beveridge curve during the Great Recession, although by not as much as observed. This is

because while our model accounts for the rise in the long-term unemployed share of total unemployment,

it somewhat under-predicts the overall unemployment rate.


6.4    Non-Participation and Vacancies

We next investigate the relationship between non-participation and vacancy rates. Panel D of Figure 9 is

identical to panel C of Figure 9, except that we consider rates of non-participation instead of unemployment

rates (where again the total population P = L + N = E + U + N is the denominator). Although our model

does a reasonably good job of describing the relationship between unemployment and vacancies, it does a

very poor job of …tting the relationship between vacancy and non-participation rates. In particular, the

model substantially under-predicts non-participation rates during the Great Recession. This is primarily

due to the fact that the predicted job-…nding rate for non-participants is too high.


6.5    Alternative Assumptions Regarding Duration Dependence

Our last sensitivity analysis examines whether our results are sensitive to using alternative estimates of

duration dependence. These results are reported in Figure 10 where we compare the predicted increase

in LTU de…ned as share of the unemployed with ongoing durations exceeding 26 weeks under several

scenarios. In Panel A, we report results which estimate A(d) from the CPS controlling for a rich set of

observables as well as results which impose the A(d) function which most closely matches the experimental




                                                     18
estimates in Kroft, Lange and Notowidigdo (2013). One of the scenarios uses the experimental estimates

from the overall sample, while another scenario allows A(d) to vary with the unemployment rate. In our

baseline calibration we assume that A(d) is stable over the business cycle, while Kroft et al. (2013) present

evidence which suggests that magnitude of duration dependence is smaller when the unemployment rate is

relatively high. We therefore allow A(d) to vary with the unemployment based on experimental estimates

and calibrate model with this alternative assumption on duration dependence.          Overall, we …nd that

the predictions are fairly similar across these scenarios, re‡ecting the fact that the estimate of duration

dependence in the CPS (with and without controls) is fairly similar to the experimental estimates in Kroft

et al. (2013).

    Next, in Panel B of Figure 10, we re-scale the CPS estimate of A(d) by assuming that only a …xed

percentage represents “true” duration dependence (i.e., a genuine causal e¤ect of unemployment duration

on job-…nding rate). When we assume that only 50% of observed duration dependence is causal, we still

…nd that our calibrated model can account for a large of the rise in LTU. This is because even in this

scenario the job-…nding rate still falls sharply over the …rst six months of unemployment.



7     Counterfactual Scenarios

7.1    Ignoring Duration Dependence

We next demonstrate that accounting for duration dependence in job-…nding rates is crucial for this success

in matching the data. To do this, we re-estimate the matching model setting A(d) = 1. The results of this

exercise are reported in Figure 11 where panels A and B report LTU shares and panels C and D report

the Beveridge curve and the curve relating non-participation rates to vacancy rates, respectively. Panels

A and B show that the predicted LTU from model calibration ignoring duration dependence is much lower

than the predicted LTU we get when accounting for negative duration dependence in the exit rate from

unemployment. Thus, duration dependence in job-…nding rates is empirically important in understanding

the historical increase in LTU during the Great Recession.

    Turning to the Beveridge curve in Panel C, we see that the model does worse when ignoring duration

dependence in terms of predicting the observed unemployment rate during the Great Recession. This is

clear visual evidence that a standard matching model – without negative duration dependence – under-

predicts unemployment. On the other hand, Panel D shows that the magnitude of duration dependence

does not substantially a¤ect predicted non-participation rates, although duration dependence does appear




                                                     19
to begin to matter for calibrations during the last few quarters of the sample period.12


7.2     Counterfactual Scenarios Ignoring Non-Participation

Figure 12 considers a counterfactual which holds all ‡ows to and from non-participation constant at their

2007 values (except for the N-to-E ‡ow, which is determined endogenously by the matching function). It

is evident from Panels A through C that ignoring the non-participation margin leads one to substantially

under-predict overall unemployment and the structure of unemployment during the Great Recession. We

also see in Panel D that rather than under-predicting non-participation rates as in baseline calibration, we

now substantially over-predict these rates. Intuitively, by ignoring the increase in N-to-U ‡ows and the

decrease in U-to-N ‡ows that occurred during the Great Recession, we instead predict non-participation

rates that are much too high. Therefore, accounting for non-participation ‡ows is crucial in understanding

the dynamics of unemployment during the Great Recession. This is related to (and consistent with) the

…ndings in Elsby, Hobijn and Sahin (2013) who report that the participation margin accounts for one-

third of the cyclical variation in the unemployment rate. We next consider ignoring ‡ows to and from

non-participation one-by-one.


7.2.1    Ignoring Changes in N-to-U

We saw in Figure 5 that transitions from non-participation to unemployment rose signi…cantly during the

Great Recession. Moreover, we know from research by Elsby et al. (2011) that some of the transitions

from non-participation to unemployment go to long durations. We next examine the importance of these

‡ows by holding N-to-U rates …xed at their values in December 2007. Panels A and B of Online Appendix

Figure OA8 show that the predicted long-term shares fall somewhat relative to the counterfactual which

does not …x these ‡ows. Additionally, when the N-to-U ‡ows are …xed at their 2007 values, the model

is less able to match the outward shift in the Beveridge curve. Overall, these transitions appear to be

somewhat important to understanding the rise in long-term and overall unemployment during the Great

Recession.13 Interestingly, the evidence in panel D suggests the alternative model is better able to explain

the dynamics of non-participation.
  1 2 We also explored a counterfactual scenario where the distribution of unemployment durations is …xed at the level prevailing

in December 2007. That is, we do not allow individuals to be pushed into longer durations by the recession, which would lower
the average job-…nding rate since the long-term unemployed have lower job-…nding rates than the short-term unemployed.
The results of this exercise are similar to those reported in Figure 11.
  1 3 It is worth emphasizing however, that if one were to form the counterfactuals by assuming that all transitions from

non-participation to unemployment go to 0 months of duration, the prediction would be very poor.




                                                               20
7.2.2    Ignoring Changes in U-to-N

Another fact about the Great Recession is that ‡ows from unemployment to non-participation signi…cantly

declined, at least from 2008-2010. Elsby, Hobijn and Sahin (2013) document the procyclicality of these

‡ows during recessions since 1970. They argue that in recessions, the composition of the unemployed shifts

to those who are more "attached" to the labor market and that this explains three-quarters of the drop

in the ‡ow rate from unemployment to non-participation.14 We examine the importance of this change

during the Great Recession by holding U-to-N rates …xed at their values in December 2007. The results

are reported in Online Appendix Figure OA9 and show that the model somewhat under-predicts long-term

unemployment and also the overall level of unemployment, at least until the end of 2010. Why are these

‡ows so important for understanding long-term unemployment and the movement of the Beveridge Curve?

Intuitively, if we assumed more transitions from unemployment to non-participation than was actually the

case, this would lower the stock of the unemployed and lead to a lower unemployment rate.


7.2.3    Ignoring Changes in E-to-N

Finally, Online Appendix Figure OA10 investigates the ‡ows from E-to-N, which were largely stable during

the Great Recession, according to the results in Figure 5. Therefore, it is not surprising to see that the

model predictions do not substantively change when we “shut down” changes in E-to-N ‡ows by holding

them at their December 2007 values.


7.3     Comparison to 1981 Recession

The 1981-82 recession generated double-digit unemployment similar to peak unemployment in the Great

Recession, but long-term unemployment did not rise nearly as much in the early 1980s downturn. It is

useful to consider what would have happened to long-term unemployment if vacancies had evolved as in

the early 1980s recession as opposed to the way they evolved during the Great Recession.15 Panel A of

Figure 13 shows the (relative) di¤erences in evolution of vacancies between the two recessions. The vacancy

data for the 1981 recession are …ltered data from Help Wanted Index from Elsby et al. (2011). Compared

to vacancies during the Great Recession, in the early 1980s vacancies fell by roughly the same order of

magnitude but rebounded much more quickly. Panel B in Figure 13 displays the model predictions for

LTU using vacancies in 1981 recession as the forcing variable in the model (in place of 2008 recession). We
  1 4 Their novel measure of labor market attachment is based on whether an individual was employed one year prior to the

CPS survey.
  1 5 We also ignore observed changes in N-to-U, U-to-N, and E-to-N ‡ows in this counterfactual exercise (i.e., …xing values of

the ‡ows at their 2007 values).




                                                              21
see that the predicted long-term unemployment share is much lower than the share predicted during the

Great Recession. Thus, our model is able to provide an explanation for why LTU rose much more sharply

in the Great Recession as compared to the 1981-82 recession, arising from a more sustained decline and

much weaker recovery in labor demand (as re‡ected in the vacancy rate).


7.4    The Beveridge Curve and Long-term Unemployment

Ghayad and Dickens (2012) consider the recent outward shift in the Beveridge curve and note that it

occurred over a period less than one year as compared to the roughly eight years it took for the Beveridge

curve to shift in the recession of the 1970s. They also note that if one constructs separate Beveridge

curves, for the short-term and long-term unemployed, all of the movement in the aggregate Beveridge

curve is relative to the long-term unemployment rate. This is mechanically related to the duration-speci…c

unemployment rates presented in Figure 1 above.

   Our …ndings can help account for these …ndings. First, we saw that long-term unemployment increased

rapidly over a short-period of time. This change, combined with negative duration dependence in job-

…nding rates, helps explain the fast shift in the Beveridge curve. To shed light on the second …nding, in

Online Appendix Figure OA11 we plot two separate Beveridge curves, one for the short-term unemployed

(Panel A) and one for the long-term unemployed (Panel B). Similar to Ghayad and Dickens (2012), we see

that the shift in the overall Beveridge curve is due to the shift in the Beveridge curve for the long-term

unemployed. We also see that our model is unable to completely account for this shifts in both curves. In

particular, it tends to predict too large a drop in unemployment for the later years of the Great Recession

for both curves. The next section provides some explanations for the di¢ culty of the model to fully explain

some of the stylized facts of the Great Recession.


7.5    Alternative Explanations

Our results indicate that our model can account for unemployment dynamics reasonably well but has a

harder time matching dynamics among non-participants. One possibility is that those who drop out of

the labor force during the Great Recession may be less marginally attached (less likely to be interested

in work) than those who drop out during normal times. In other words, it might be the case that s falls

during the Great Recession in a way that we are not accounting for in the matching framework and this

could explain some of the discrepancy.

   We examine this possibility in Panel A of Figure 14 which plots the share of non-participants who




                                                     22
are “discouraged” and the share of non-participants who report that they want a job. The …gure shows

that, starting in 2008, both increased sharply. This suggests that s actually increased during the Great

Recession, and that if we were to account for this change in our matching framework, then our model-

based predictions would likely be even worse. Panel B of Figure 14 plots the transition rates from non-

participation to employment – for those who report that they want to work. We see that for this group,

the job-…nding rate fell during the Great Recession. We are thus left with an incomplete understanding of

why non-participants did not …nd jobs at the rate predicted by our calibrated model.

    We conclude with several speculative thoughts regarding other possible explanations of the lower-

than-expected job-…nding rate of non-participants. First, our model does not capture the possibility of

negative duration dependence in job-…nding rates for non-participants; the model only allows for duration

dependence in unemployment. Recent work by Autor et al. (2013) reports strong evidence that additional

months out of the labor force has a negative causal e¤ect on probability of employment.16 Unfortunately, we

cannot readily estimate such duration dependence in the job-…nding rate of labor market non-participants

since the CPS does not record time spent out of the labor force. Second, our model ignores factors such

as the recent rise in SSDI applications and SSDI rolls in the Great Recession. Third, the dynamics of our

calibrated matching model may possibly obscure other changing features of the labor market during times

of weak aggregate demand. For example, models of “queuing” and “ranking” may feature discouraged

and/or marginally attached workers ending up at the end of the queue and this could lead to long-term

joblessness (Okun 1973; Blanchard and Diamond 1994). Finally, some adult workers may be returning

to school and/or job training and not looking for work (Barr and Turner 2012). This would represent

a compositional change that would reduce the job-…nding rate for non-participants in a way that could

potentially account for the residual decline not accounted for by our calibrated model.



8     Conclusion

Both short-term and long-term unemployment increased sharply in 2008-9 during the Great Recession. But

while short-term unemployment returned to normal levels by 2013, long-term unemployment remains at

historically high levels in the aftermath of the Great Recession. We showed that long-term unemployment

increased for virtually all groups, and shifts in observable characteristics of the unemployed do not go very

far in accounting for the rise in long-term unemployment.
  1 6 While this surely can account for some of the discrepancy, we showed that ignoring duration dependence for the unem-

ployed causes us to under-predict unemployment, but the gap between predicted and observed in this case is less than the
gap between predicted and observed for non-participants.




                                                           23
   By contrast, an enriched matching model that allows for duration dependence in unemployment and

transitions between employment (E), unemployment (U), and non-participation (N) can account for almost

all of the increase in the incidence of LTU and much of the observed outward shift in the Beveridge curve

between 2008 and 2013. We emphasize that duration dependence is not the primary force behind rising

LTU in the Great Recession per se; rather, duration dependence serves to reinforce and amplify the initial

labor demand shock which shifted the distribution of unemployment durations. Our results suggest that

both negative duration dependence in the job-…nding rate out of unemployment and transitions to (and

from) non-participation may play an important part in understanding both the rise in LTU as well as the

observed outward shift in the Beveridge curve.

   Much evidence suggests that there is sizeable causal negative duration dependence in the escape rate

from unemployment. The longer one has been unemployed, the less likely one is to get a callback from

an employer and job search e¤ort also is likely to decline. A strong negative labor demand shock like

from a major …nancial crisis and/or from consumer, …rm, and lender behaviors can build up the stock

of the long-term unemployed. Negative duration dependence means that the long-term unemployed are

less e¤ective job seekers than the short-term unemployed. Thus, the rise in long-term unemployment

itself can help explain much of the outward shift in the traditional Beveridge curve following the Great

Recession. Essentially, the overall matching e¢ ciency of labor market is reduced when the incidence of

long-term unemployment is high. This is not the whole story, however. Firms continue to worry about

demand conditions and have lowered their recruiting intensity for posted vacancies (Davis, Faberman, and

Haltiwanger 2013), further contributing to the outward Beveridge Curve shift and the persistence of the

low ‡ows from unemployment to employment in the aftermath of the Great Recession.




                                                   24
References
   Autor, David, Nicole Maestas, Kathleen Mullen and Alexander Strand (2013). “Does Delay Cause
Decay? The E¤ect of Administrative Decision Time on the Labor Force Participation and Earnings of
Disability Applicants,” Working Paper.
   Barnichon, Regis (2012). “Vacancy Posting, Job Separation, and Unemployment Fluctuations,”Journal
of Economic Dynamics and Control, 36(3): 315-330.
   Barnichon, Regis and Andrew Figura (2013). “Labor Market Heterogeneity and the Aggregate Matching
Function," Working Paper.
   Barr, Andrew and Sarah Turner (2012). “Down and Enrolled: An Examination of the Enrollment
Response to Cyclical Trends and Job Loss,” University of Virgina, December.
   Blanchard, Olivier J. and Peter Diamond (1994). “Ranking, Unemployment Duration, and Wages,”
Review of Economic Studies, 61(3), 417-434.
   Card, David and W. Craig Riddell (1993). “A Comparative Analysis of Unemployment in Canada
and the United States,” NBER Chapters, in: Small Di¤erences That Matter: Labor Markets and Income
Maintenance in Canada and the United States, 149-190.
   Clark, Kim B. and Lawrence H. Summers (1979). “Labor Market Dynamics and Unemployment: A
Reconsideration,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1: 13-60.
   Congressional Budget O¢ ce (2012). “Understanding and Responding to Persistently High Unemploy-
ment.” http://www.cbo.gov/publication/42989.
   Davis, Steven J., R. Jason Faberman, and John C. Haltiwanger (2013). “The Establishment-Level
Behavior of Vacancies and Hiring,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128(2): 581-622.
   Elsby, Michael W., Ryan Michaels, and Gary Solon (2009). “The Ins and Outs of Cyclical Unemploy-
ment,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 1(1): 84-110.
   Elsby, Michael W., Bart Hobijn, and Aysegul Sahin (2010). “The Labor Market in the Great Recession,”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring, 1-69.
   Elsby, Michael W., Bart Hobijn, Aysegul Sahin, and Robert G. Valletta (2011). “The Labor Market in
the Great Recession –An Update to September 2011,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 353-371.
   Elsby, Michael W., Bart Hobijn, and Aysegul Sahin (2013). “On the Importance of the Participation
Margin for Labor Market Fluctuations,” Working Paper.
   Eriksson, Stefan and Dan-Olof Rooth (2013). “Do Employers Use Unemployment as a Sorting Criterion
When Hiring? Evidence from a Field Experiment.” American Economic Review, forthcoming.
   Farber, Henry S. and Robert G. Valletta (2013). “Do Extended Unemployment Bene…ts Lengthen
Unemployment Spells? Evidence from Recent Cycles in the U.S. Labor Market,”Federal Reserve Working
Paper.
   Flinn, Christopher J. and James J. Heckman (1983). “Are Unemployment and Out of the Labor Force
Behaviorally Distinct Labor Force States?” Journal of Labor Economics, 1(1): 28-42.
   Fujita, Shigeru and Garey Ramey (2009). “The Cyclicality of Separation and Job Finding Rates,”
International Economic Review, 50(2): 414-430.
   Fujita, Shigeru and Giuseppe Moscarini (2013). “Recall and Unemployment.” http://conference.




                                                  25
nber.org/confer/2013/EFGs13/Fujita_Moscarini.pdf.
   Ghayad, Rand and William Dickens (2012). “What Can We Learn by Disaggregating the Unemployment-
Vacancy Relationship?” Federal Reserve Working Paper.
   Ghayad, Rand (2013). “Why is it so Hard for Job-Seekers With Valuable Experience to Find Work?
Evidence from a Field Experiment,” Northeastern Working Paper.
   Hall, Robert E. (2005). “Job Loss, Job Finding, and Unemployment in the U.S. Economy Over the
Past Fifty Years,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 20: 101-137.
   Heckman, James J. and Burton Singer (1984). “The Identi…ability of the Proportional Hazard Model,”
Review of Economic Studies, 51(2): 231-241.
   Hornstein, Andreas (2012). “Accounting for Unemployment: The Long and Short of it.”Federal Reserve
Working Paper.
   Jones, Stephen R. G. and W. Craig Riddell (1999). “The Measurement of Unemployment: An Empirical
Approach,” Econometrica, 67(1): 147-162.
   Jones, Stephen R. G. and W. Craig Riddell (2006). “Unemployment and Nonemployment: Hetero-
geneities in Labor Market States,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 88(2): 314-323.
   Katz, Lawrence F. (1986) “Layo¤s, Recall and the Duration of Unemployment”, NBER WP No. 1825.
   Katz, Lawrence F. and Bruce D. Meyer (1990). “Unemployment Insurance, Recall Expections, and
Unemployment Outcomes,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 105(4): 973-1002.
   Kroft, Kory, Fabian Lange and Matthew J. Notowidigdo (2013). “Duration Dependence and Labor
Market Conditions: Evidence from a Field Experiment,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128(3): 1123-
1167.
   Krueger, Alan B., Judd Cramer, and David Cho (2014). “Are the Long-Term Unemployed on the
Margins of the Labor Market?” Brookings Papers on Economics Activity, forthcoming.
   Mortensen, Dale T. and Christopher A. Pissarides (1994). “Job Creation and Job Destruction in the
Theory of Unemployment,” Review of Economic Studies, 61(3): 397-415.
   Okun, Arthur M. (1973). “Upward Mobility in a High-Pressure Economy,” Brookings Papers on Eco-
nomic Activity, 4(1): 207-262.
   Pissarides, Christopher A. (1985). “Short-run Equilibrium Dynamics of Unemployment, Vacancies, and
Real Wages,” American Economic Review, 75: 676-90.
   Rothstein, Jesse (2011). “Unemployment Insurance and Job Search in the Great Recession,”Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity, 43(2): 143-213.
   Sahin, Aysegul, Joseph Song, Giorgio Topa, and Giovanni L. Violante. “Mismatch Unemployment,”
American Economic Review, forthcoming.
   Shimer, Robert (2005). “The Cyclical Behavior of Equilibrium Unemployment and Vacancies,” Amer-
ican Economic Review, 95(1): 25-49.
   Shimer, Robert (2012). “Reassessing the Ins and Outs of Unemployment,” Review of Economic Dy-
namics, 15: 127-148.




                                                  26
Appendix A: Data Sources
These are the data sources used for both calibration (which only uses pre-1/2008 data) and counterfactual
estimation (which uses post-1/2008 data):

       t   (duration distribution): CPS monthly data from 1/2002-1/2013. We estimate the unemployment
     duration distribution monthly for all unemployed adults aged 25-55. We group all unemployment
     durations greater than or equal to 24 months together in a single category, and the rest of the
     durations are grouped by month.

     Vt (vacancies): JOLTS monthly data between 1/2002 and 1/2013. We use the seasonally unadjusted
     data released by the BLS and residualize out month …xed e¤ects to account for seasonality.

     Ut , Et , Nt (stocks of unemployed, employed, and non-participants): CPS monthly data between
     1/2002 and 1/2013. We use CPS survey weights to estimate stocks in each month for each group for
     our baseline sample of adults aged 25-55.
     n                                 o
       UE    UN
       t ; t    ; EU   EN
                   t ; t   ; N
                             t
                               E
                                 ; N
                                   t
                                     U
                                         (transition rates between E/U/N): CPS monthly data between
     1/2002 and 1/2013. See Appendix B below for more details on construction of these panel transition
     rates, which are based on matching individual across months as in Shimer (2012).

     A(d) (duration dependence function): We estimate A(d) in several ways. For main results, we use
     job-…nding rate for unemployed workers (by unemployment duration in months) pooling all monthly
     CPS data between 1/2002-12/2007. The job-…nding rate is de…ned as the monthly probability that
     a given unemployed job seeker reports employment in both of the following two months (the require-
     ment of two months follows Rothstein 2011; see references therein for discussion and justi…cation).
     For robustness, we also use estimates of A(d) from the experimental data in Kroft, Lange, and
     Notowidigdo (2013); see main text for more details.

   Using the data sources above, we calibrate    , m0 , s (matching function parameters using data from
before 1/2008. See main text for more details.


Appendix B: Identi…cation of Transition Rates from CPS
                                                                         n                                          o
                                                                             UE     UN     EU    EN     NE     NU
In this section, we will describe how we identify the transition rates       t ;    t  ;   t ;   t  ;   t  ;   t     .
The straightforward approach is to recover them from the CPS panel, however we found that these rates are
not consistent with the levels of unemployment, employment and non-participation in each period. Here
we describe a procedure which ensures consistency by brute force. The only requirement is the assumption
that the relative ‡ow rates from the CPS panel are correct. The steps of this procedure are as follows:

  1. Normalize the population so that Nt + Ut + Et = 1 in each period.

  2. Obtain the levels fNt ; Ut ; Et g and net ‡ows f Nt ; Ut ; Et g from the data. Note that           Nt + Ut +
       Et = 0 so without loss of generality, we will work with   Nt and      Et .



                                                    27
3. Obtain Ut+1 (d = 0), the (normalized) number of newly unemployed, as well as                                             t (d   = 0), from the
   data.
                                 n                                                          o
                                     UE       UN          EU      EN            NE     NU
4. Let the transition rates          t ;      t  ;        t ;     t  ;          t  ;   t        be unknown parameters.

5. We have by de…nition:

                                                       UN                  EN               NU         NE
                                     Nt       =        t  Ut     +         t  Et            t    +     t    Nt
                                                       UE                  NE               EU        EN
                                     Et       =        t Ut      +         t  Nt            t    +    t     Et
                                                                EU EU                                NU
                                Ut+1 (d =         0) =          t     (d            = 0)Et +         t  t (d   = 0)Nt


6. This leaves us with six unknown parameters in three equations.

7. To identify the parameters, we will impose three additional restrictions which require that the relative
   transition rates between states are identi…ed from the panel data. Let the observed relative transition
                                                                                 X
   rate for state X in time period t be denoted by                               t :

                                                                                       NU
                                                                   N                   t
                                                                   t            =      NE
                                                                                       t
                                                                                       EN
                                                                       E               t
                                                                       t        =      EU
                                                                                       t
                                                                                       UN
                                                                       U               t
                                                                       t        =      UE
                                                                                       t


   This leaves us with the following system of equations:
     0                                                                                           1     0          1     0                   1
                                                                                                            EN
           Et           0             Ut          0                        Nt           Nt                  t                        Nt
     B                                                                                           C     B          C B                       C
     B     Et           Et                0       Ut                   0                Nt       C     B    EU    C B       Et              C
     B                                                                                           C     B    t     C B                       C
     B           EU                                                                              C     B    UN    C B                       C
     B     0          (d = 0)Et           0       0             t (d   = 0)Nt           0        C     B          C B Ut+1 (d = 0)          C
     B                                                                                           C     B    t     C=B                       C
     B                                                                                      N    C     B    UE    C B                       C
     B     0            0                 0       0                    1                    t    C     B    t     C B       0               C
     B                                                                                           C     B          C B                       C
     B     0            0                 1           U
                                                                       0                0        C     B    NU    C B       0               C
     @                                                t                                          A     @    t     A @                       A
                            E                                                                               NE
           1                t             0       0                    0                0                   t               0


8. We recover A(d) from the panel data job-…nding rates for the unemployed.




                                                                           28
                               Table 1
                         Model-Based Estimates

                        Duration Dependence Parameters

a 1 (intercept parameter 1)                                            0.314

a 2 (intercept parameter 2)                                            0.393

b 1 (slope parameter 1)                                                1.085

b 2 (slope parameter 2)                                                0.055

    A (d ) = (1 − a 1 − a 2) + a 1exp(−b 1 × d ) + a 2exp(−b 2 × d )



                           Matching Model Parameters

α                                                                      0.753

m 0 (scale parameter)                                                  0.435

s     (relative search intensity of inactive)                          0.218

    M (U + sI , V ) = m 0(U + sI )α V 1 − α

Notes: This table reports the model-based estimates using monthly CPS
data and JOLTS data from 2002-2007. See main text for more details.
These parameter estimates are used to create the counterfactual predictions
reported in the figures.




                                         29
                             Table 2
           Alternative Duration Dependence Estimates
                  (Baseline) Duration Dependence Parameters
                     [CPS data; full demographic controls]
a 1 (intercept parameter 1)                                               0.314
a 2 (intercept parameter 2)                                               0.393
b 1 (slope parameter 1)                                                   1.085
b 2 (slope parameter 2)                                                   0.055
  A (d ) = (1 − a 1 − a 2) + a 1exp(−b 1 × d ) + a 2exp(−b 2 × d )

                 Alternative Duration Dependence Parameters
                           [CPS data; NO controls]
a 1 (intercept parameter 1)                                               0.307
a 2 (intercept parameter 2)                                               0.424
b 1 (slope parameter 1)                                                   1.104
b 2 (slope parameter 2)                                                   0.072
  A (d ) = (1 − a 1 − a 2) + a 1exp(−b 1 × d ) + a 2exp(−b 2 × d )

                 Alternative Duration Dependence Parameters
                        [Kroft et al. data; full sample]
a 1 (intercept parameter)                                                 0.425
b 1 (slope parameter)                                                     0.199
  A (d ) = a 1 + (1 − a 1)exp(−b 1 × d )

                Alternative Duration Dependence Parameters
            [Kroft et al. data; high unemployment rate sub-sample]
a 1 (intercept parameter)                                                 0.631
b 1 (slope parameter)                                                     0.098
  A (d ) = a 1 + (1 − a 1)exp(−b 1 × d )

Notes: This table reports the duration dependence estimates used in alternative
scenarios reported in main figures. In first two panels, the data used to estimate
parametric function listed in panel are monthly CPS data from 2002-2007. In
bottom panels, the data are from the resume audit study Kroft et al. (2013).




                                           30
        Figure 1: Short-term, Medium-term, and Long-term Unemployment in the U.S., 1948-2013




                                    .07
                                    .06
                          .02 .03 .04 .05
                            Unemployment rate
                                    .01
                                    0




                                                1948   1956    1964      1972      1980    1988    1996    2004     2012
                                                                                    Year

                                                          Short−term, <15 weeks              Medium−term, 15−26 weeks
                                                          Long−term, >26 weeks



Notes: This figure shows the unemployment rate decomposed into short-term unemployment (less than 15 weeks), medium-
term unemployment (15-26 weeks), and long-term unemployment (greater than 26 weeks). The data come from the BLS.




                                                                                  31
                         Figure 2: Long-Term Unemployment and the Beveridge Curve

                                              Panel A: Long-term Unemployment Share in the U.S., 2000-2013




                               .15 .2 .25 .3 .35 .4 .45 .5
                            Share of unemployed with duration > 26 weeks
                                                    .1




                                                                           2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013
                                                                                                            Year

                                                                                          Long−term unemployed share           Recessions



                                                                              Panel B: The Beveridge Curve in the U.S., 2000-2013
                                                 .03.035
                            Vacancies / Population
                                  .025              .02
                                                    .015




                                                                             .03         .04           .05            .06       .07         .08
                                                                                                    Unemployed / Population



Notes: This figure uses data from the CPS and from JOLTS. Panel A shows the share of unemployed workers aged 25-55 that
have unemployment durations of more than 26 weeks. The pooled, cross-sectional data come from monthly CPS surveys. In
this panel and in Figures 3 through 5, month fixed effects have been residualized out of the data to account for seasonality,
and the data are smoothed by taking a three-month average around each observation. Panel B shows the Beveridge curve,
the relationship between unemployment and vacancies, with both series normalized by the total population (i.e., labor force
plus non-participants). The arrow in panel B indicates the apparently outward movement of the Beveridge curve after 2008.




                                                                                                           32
                                                                          Figure 3: Long-term Unemployment by Education

                                                                                   Panel A: Long-term unemployment share




                                                                  .6
                       Share of unemployed with duration > 26 weeks
                       0      .1    .2     .3      .4      .5




                                                                       2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013
                                                                                                        Year

                                                                                    High School Dropouts          High School Graduates
                                                                                    Some College                  College Graduates



                                                                                    Panel B: Relative share of unemployed
                                               .4
                       Share of unemployed
                        .2             .3      .1




                                                                       2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013
                                                                                                        Year

                                                                                    High School Dropouts          High School Graduates
                                                                                    Some College                  College Graduates



Notes: These figures use data from the CPS. See notes to Figure 2 for more information.




                                                                                                       33
  Figure 4: Accounting for Long-term Unemployment Increase from Observable Compositional Shifts




                          .15 .2 .25 .3 .35 .4 .45 .5
                       Share of unemployed with duration > 26 weeks
                                               .1




                                                                      2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013
                                                                                                       Year

                                                                                   Actual           Predicted by Compositional Changes



Notes: This figure uses data from the CPS that are summarized in Figure 3 and Online Appendix Figures OA1 through
OA7 in order to estimate the role of composition. The predicted long-term unemployment share is calculated by multiplying
the pre-2008 average LTU share by demographic group by the change in the share of unemployed with that characteristic.
This procedure is repeated for each observable characteristic (e.g., education, age, gender, etc.) described in Figures 3 and
OA1-OA7 to construct the prediction shown in this figure.




                                                                                                    34
                                          Figure 5: Transition Rates Between Employment, Unemployment, and Non-Participation




                                              Panel A: Transitions from Unemployment                                                                                      Panel B: Transitions from Employment




                                                                                                                                                 .025
                     .4




                                                                                                                                                             .02
   Monthly transition probability




                                                                                                                                 Monthly transition probability
                             .3




                                                                                                                                                  .015
                .2




                                                                                                                                        .01
    .1




                                                                                                                               .005              0
                     0




                                       2002    2003   2004   2005   2006   2007 2008   2009   2010   2011   2012   2013                                            2002   2003   2004   2005    2006   2007 2008   2009   2010   2011   2012   2013
                                                                              Year                                                                                                                        Year

                                                                           U−>E           U−>N                                                                                                         E−>U           E−>N




                                         Panel C: Transitions from Non-Participation                                                 Panel D: Comparing U → E to “Indomitable Worker”
                                                                                                                                                 .4
                     .1          .08
     Monthly transition probability




                                                                                                                               Monthly transition probability
                                                                                                                                                         .3
                       .06




                                                                                                                                            .2
            .04




                                                                                                                                .1
   .02               0




                                                                                                                                                 0




                                       2002    2003   2004   2005   2006   2007 2008   2009   2010   2011   2012   2013                                            2002   2003   2004   2005    2006   2007 2008   2009   2010   2011   2012   2013
                                                                              Year                                                                                                                        Year

                                                                           N−>U           N−>E                                                                                                 U−>E/(U−>E+U−>U)              U−>E




Notes: These figures use data from the CPS. See notes to Figure 2 for more information on the sample construction.




                                                                                                                          35
                                             Figure 6: “Incoming” Unemployment Duration Distributions

                                                                     Panel A: Transitions from Non-Participation




                                             .6
                                             .5
                       Share of N−>U flows
                                             .4
                                             .3
                                             .2
                                             .1
                                             0




                                                       2002   2003    2004   2005 2006   2007 2008   2009 2010     2011   2012               2013
                                                                                            Year

                                                                 <=1 mo.            2−5 mos.         6−11 mos.            >=12 mos.



                                                                       Panel B: Transitions from Employment




                                                                                                                                 .4
                                             .9




                                                                                                                                                              .35
                         .6 .65 .7 .75 .8 .85
                       Share of E−>U flows (<=1 mo.)




                                                                                                                                 Share of E−>U flows (>1 mo.)
                                                                                                                                  .1    .15   .2   .25   .3
                                             .55




                                                                                                                                 .05
                                             .5




                                                                                                                                 0




                                                       2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013
                                                                                   Year

                                                                <=1 mo.          2−5 mos.       6−11 mos.          >=12 mos.



Notes: These figures report the share of individuals transitioning into unemployment from either non-participation (Panel
A) or employment (Panel B). The figures show the share of workers transitioning into unemployment by unemployment
duration. This reveals the extent to which unemployed individuals who did not report being unemployed in previous month
report unemployment durations that are inconsistent with being a newly unemployed worker. We report annual averages in
this figure but use quarterly averages in the counterfactual simulations (and group [0,6) months together).




                                                                                         36
          Figure 7: Duration Dependence and Predicted Unemployment Job Finding Probability

                                                                                        Panel A: Estimated Duration Dependence (A(d) function)




                                                          1 .8
                             Job finding rate relative to d=0
                            .2         .4         .6      0




                                                                                        0    2     4      6      8    10    12     14    16     18     20     22     24
                                                                                                              Unemployment duration (in months)

                                                                                                 weighted NLLS, no X’s                weighted NLLS, full controls



       Panel B: Predicted Job Finding Probability, Ā, Based on Distribution of Unemployment Durations and A(d)
                                                                                   .8
                             Average job finding rate (relative to newly unemployed)
                            .6           .65             .7           .75




                                                                           2002m1                2004m1       2006m1      2008m1       2010m1        2012m1        2014m1
                                                                                                                            date



Notes: In Panel A, the figure uses data from the CPS and estimates (via NLLS) the negative exponential relationship between
monthly job finding probability and unemployment duration. The NLLS uses CPS sample weights. The following functional
form is used to estimate duration dependence: A(d) = (1 − a1 − a2 ) + a1 exp(−b1 × d) + a2 exp(−b2 × d). The fitted
values from the estimates with controls (solid line) are used to construct the counterfactuals shown in Figures 7 through
10. The controls used are the following: gender, fifth-degree polynomial in age, three race dummies (white/black/other),
five education category dummies (high school dropout, high school graduate, some college, college graduate, and other), and
gender interactions for all of the age, race, and education variables. Only monthly cell means with at least 30 observations
are shown. In Panel B, the figure is generated by using estimates of how job finding probability varies with unemployment
duration interacted with observed distribution of unemployment durations. Thus, the line in this figure shows the extent to
which we would predict changes in job finding probability based solely on observed changes in distribution of unemployment
duration. The y-axis scale is normalized so that a value of 1 indicates average job finding probability for a newly unemployed
worker.



                                                                                                                         37
        Figure 8: Model Predictions for Job-Finding Rates for Unemployed and Non-Participants

                                            Panel A: Job-Finding Rates for Unemployed




                               .3
                               .25
                               .2
                               .15




                                     2002   2003   2004   2005   2006   2007 2008   2009   2010   2011    2012   2013
                                                                           Year

                                                           U-to-E observed             U-to-E predicted




                                        Panel B: Job-Finding Rates for Non-Participants
                               .08
                               .07
                               .06
                               .05
                               .04




                                     2002   2003   2004   2005   2006   2007 2008   2009   2010   2011    2012   2013
                                                                           Year

                                                           N-to-E observed             N-to-E predicted




Notes: These figures report the model-generated predicted job-finding rates for unemployed workers and non-participants,
where the predictions are based on model estimates calibrated to match 1/2002-12/2007 time period. See main text for more
details.




                                                                         38
                                        Figure 9: Model Predictions for Long-Term Unemployment and Beveridge Curve




                            Panel A: Long-Term Unemployment (> 26 weeks)                                                              Panel B: Long-Term Unemployment (> 52 weeks)
                  .6




                                                                                                                            .4
   Long-Term Unemployment Share




                                                                                                             Long-Term Unemployment Share
                           .5




                                                                                                                                    .3
                 .4




                                                                                                                          .2
        .3




                                                                                                                .1
                  .2




                                                                                                                            0
                          2002m1        2004m1    2006m1      2008m1     2010m1       2012m1   2014m1                               2002m1         2004m1    2006m1          2008m1       2010m1        2012m1    2014m1
                                                               Date                                                                                                           Date

                                                   Observed              Counterfactual                                                                           Observed                Counterfactual




                                            Panel C: Beveridge Curve                                                                        Panel D: Model Predictions for N − V Curve
                  .035




                                                                                                                            .035
                       .03




                                                                                                                                 .03
   Vacancies / Population




                                                                                                             Vacancies / Population
          .025




                                                                                                                    .025
                  .02




                                                                                                                            .02
                  .015




                                                                                                                            .015




                                  .03       .04         .05            .06            .07       .08                                          .15            .16                .17                .18            .19
                                                     Unemployed / Population                                                                                      Non-Participants / Population

                                                   Observed              Counterfactual                                                                           Observed                Counterfactual




Notes: These figures use data from the CPS and JOLTS. See main text for more details on model calibration.




                                                                                                        39
           Figure 10: Model Predictions Using Alternative Estimates of Duration Dependence

                                                Panel A: Comparing to Kroft et al. (2013) experimental estimates




                                       .6
                         Long-term unemployment share
                               .3      .4
                                       .2     .5




                                                        2002   2003     2004   2005   2006    2007 2008     2009    2010      2011   2012   2013
                                                                                                 Year

                                                                      Observed LTU share
                                                                      A(d) from CPS with rich controls
                                                                      A(d) from experimental data
                                                                      A(d) from experimental data, separate estimate for high/low unemp.



                                                        Panel B: Aternative assumptions of “true” duration dependence
                                         .6
                         Long-term unemployment share
                               .3      .4.2   .5




                                                        2002   2003     2004   2005    2006   2007 2008     2009    2010      2011   2012   2013
                                                                                                 Year

                                                                                  Observed LTU share
                                                                                  A(d) from CPS with rich controls
                                                                                  Assume 'true' A(d) is 0.75 * CPS estimate
                                                                                  Assume 'true' A(d) is 0.5 * CPS estimate



Notes: In Panel A, the figure shows robustness of baseline calibration (long dashed line) to alternative assumptions about
magnitude of duration dependence. The medium dashed line shows calibration results based on estimated A(d) function
based on the full sample of experimental data from Kroft et al. (2013). The short dashed line allows A(d) to vary with
labor market conditions as found in Kroft et al. (2013); specifically, A(d) is flatter than average when unemployment rate
exceeds 8.8 percent (in April 2009), and steeper before that point. In Panel B, the figure shows robustness to assuming
that estimated A(d) function recovers a mixture of “true” duration dependence and unobserved heterogeneity. By making
assumptions on share of unobserved heterogeneity captured by function, the A(d) can be re-scaled to be a measure of “true”
duration dependence.




                                                                                               40
                                                         Figure 11: Model Predictions Ignoring Duration Dependence




                             Panel A: Long-Term Unemployment (> 26 weeks)                                                                           Panel B: Long-Term Unemployment (> 52 weeks)
                 .6




                                                                                                                                        .4
   Long-Term Unemployment Share




                                                                                                                          Long-Term Unemployment Share
                          .5




                                                                                                                                                .3
                 .4




                                                                                                                                       .2
        .3




                                                                                                                             .1
                 .2




                                                                                                                                        0
                          2002m1        2004m1      2006m1        2008m1     2010m1          2012m1       2014m1                                 2002m1        2004m1      2006m1        2008m1       2010m1       2012m1       2014m1
                                                                   Date                                                                                                                   Date

                                        Observed                                   Counterfactual (Baseline)                                                   Observed                                  Counterfactual (Baseline)
                                        Counterfactual (Alternative)                                                                                           Counterfactual (Alternative)




                                             Panel C: Beveridge Curve                                                                                     Panel D: Model Predictions for N − V Curve
                 .035




                                                                                                                                        .035
     Vacancies / Population




                                                                                                                            Vacancies / Population
                        .03




                                                                                                                                               .03
            .025




                                                                                                                                   .025
   .02




                                                                                                                          .02
                 .015




                                                                                                                                        .015




                                  .03        .04            .05            .06               .07               .08                                       .14      .15           .16               .17           .18            .19
                                                         Unemployed / Population                                                                                              Non-Participants / Population

                                        Observed                                   Counterfactual (Baseline)                                                   Observed                                  Counterfactual (Baseline)
                                        Counterfactual (Alternative)                                                                                           Counterfactual (Alternative)




Notes: These figures use data from the CPS and JOLTS. See main text for more details on model calibration.




                                                                                                                     41
                                          Figure 12: Model Predictions Ignoring Changes in N → U , U → N , and E → N




                             Panel A: Long-Term Unemployment (> 26 weeks)                                                                           Panel B: Long-Term Unemployment (> 52 weeks)
                 .6




                                                                                                                                        .4
   Long-Term Unemployment Share




                                                                                                                          Long-Term Unemployment Share
                          .5




                                                                                                                                                .3
                 .4




                                                                                                                                       .2
        .3




                                                                                                                             .1
                 .2




                                                                                                                                        0
                          2002m1        2004m1      2006m1        2008m1     2010m1          2012m1       2014m1                                 2002m1        2004m1         2006m1      2008m1        2010m1        2012m1      2014m1
                                                                   Date                                                                                                                    Date

                                        Observed                                   Counterfactual (Baseline)                                                   Observed                                    Counterfactual (Baseline)
                                        Counterfactual (Alternative)                                                                                           Counterfactual (Alternative)




                                             Panel C: Beveridge Curve                                                                                     Panel D: Model Predictions for N − V Curve
                 .035




                                                                                                                                        .035
     Vacancies / Population




                                                                                                                            Vacancies / Population
                        .03




                                                                                                                                               .03
            .025




                                                                                                                                   .025
   .02




                                                                                                                          .02
                 .015




                                                                                                                                        .015




                                  .03        .04            .05            .06               .07               .08                                       .14            .16                 .18                  .2                    .22
                                                         Unemployed / Population                                                                                                Non-Participants / Population

                                        Observed                                   Counterfactual (Baseline)                                                   Observed                                    Counterfactual (Baseline)
                                        Counterfactual (Alternative)                                                                                           Counterfactual (Alternative)




Notes: These figures use data from the CPS and JOLTS. See main text for more details on model calibration.




                                                                                                                     42
Figure 13: Model Predictions Using Vacancy Series During 1981 Recession (Instead of 2008 Recession)
                        And Ignoring Changes in N → U , U → N , and E → N




                                  Panel A: Dynamics of Vacancies in 1981 Recession and 2008 Recession




                                                                   1.1
                        Vacancies (relative to start of recession)
                           .6      .7      .8    .5 .9       1




                                                                         0    6       12      18    24       30        36      42     48      54        60
                                                                                                Months since start of recession

                                                                                            1981 Recession                  2008 Recession




                                                                             Panel B: Long-Term Unemployment (> 26 weeks)
                                               .6
                        Long-Term Unemployment Share
                             .3       .4       .5
                                               .2




                                                            2002m1                2004m1         2006m1            2008m1     2010m1         2012m1
                                                                                                                 Date

                                                                                  Observed                                  Counterfactual (Baseline)
                                                                                  Counterfactual (Alternative)




Notes: In Panel A, vacancy data for 2008 Recession come from JOLTS, while vacancy data for 1981 recession are filtered
data from Help Wanted Index from Elsby et al. (2011). In Panel B, figure uses data from the CPS. See main text for more
details on model calibration in these panels.



                                                                                                           43
                     Figure 14: Changing Composition of Labor Force Non-Participants

                       Panel A: Share of Non-Participants Reporting “Discouraged” or “Want Job”




                                                                                                                                          .13
                                          .06




                                                                                                                                          .12
                                          .05




                                                                                                                                                          .11
                                      .04
                        N(discouraged)/N




                                                                                                                                             N(want job)/N
                               .03




                                                                                                                                                  .1
                       .02




                                                                                                                                          .09
                                          .01




                                                                                                                                          .08
                                                                                                                                          .07
                                          0




                                                              2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013
                                                                                          Year

                                                                                   N(discouraged)/N            N(want job))/N



                                        Panel B: Job-Finding Rates for Non-Participants Reporting “Want Job”
                                          .3            .25
                          Monthly transition probability
                       .05    .1      .15 0     .2




                                                              2002   2003   2004    2005   2006   2007 2008   2009   2010   2011   2012       2013
                                                                                                     Year

                                                                                   U−>E                N−>E          N(want job)−>E



Notes: These figures report statistics from the CPS on the share of non-participants who report either being “discouraged”
or saying that they “want a job.” In Panel B, the monthly job-finding rates for unemployed, non-participants (overall), and
non-participants (who are in “want a job” category) are displayed between 2002 and 2013.




                                                                                                      44
