                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES



WHO BENEFITS FROM STATE CORPORATE TAX CUTS? A LOCAL LABOR MARKETS
                APPROACH WITH HETEROGENEOUS FIRMS

                                   Juan Carlos Suárez Serrato
                                          Owen Zidar

                                       Working Paper 20289
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w20289


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138


We are very grateful for guidance and support from our advisors: Alan Auerbach, Yuriy
Gorodnichenko, Patrick Kline, and Emmanuel Saez. We would like to thank the Editor Luigi
Pistaferri and three anonymous referees for their helpful comments. We are also indebted to
David Albouy, Dominick Bartelme, Alex Bartik, Pat Bayer, Michael Boskin, Eric Budish, David
Card, Jeffrey Clemens, Robert Chirinko, Rebecca Diamond, Jonathan Dingel, Pascaline Dupas,
Matt Gentzkow, Gopi Goda, Marc Hafstead, Jim Hines, Caroline Hoxby, Erik Hurst, Koichiro
Ito, Matt Leister, Attila Lindner, Neale Mahoney, John McClelland, David Molitor, Enrico
Moretti, Pascal Noel, Matt Notowidigdo, Alexandre Poirier, Jim Poterba, Andrés Rodríguez-
Clare, Jesse Rothstein, Greg Rosston, Florian Scheuer, John Shoven, Orie Shelef, Reed Walker,
Dan Wilson, Danny Yagan, Shuang Zhang, and Eric Zwick for helpful comments and
suggestions. We are especially thankful to Nathan Seegert, Dan Wilson and Robert Chirinko, and
Jamie Bernthal, Dana Gavrila, Katie Schumacher, Shane Spencer, and Katherine Sydor for
generously providing us with tax data. Tim Anderson, Anastasia Bogdanova, Pawel Charasz,
Stephen Lamb, Matt Panhans, Prab Upadrashta, John Wieselthier, and Victor Ye provided
excellent research assistance. All errors remain our own. This work is supported by the Kauffman
Foundation and the Kathryn and Grant Swick Faculty Research Fund at the University of
Chicago Booth School of Business. We declare that we have no relevant or material financial
interests that relate to the research described in this paper. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2014 by Juan Carlos Suárez Serrato and Owen Zidar. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Who Benefits from State Corporate Tax Cuts? A Local Labor Markets Approach with Heterogeneous
Firms
Juan Carlos Suárez Serrato and Owen Zidar
NBER Working Paper No. 20289
July 2014, Revised August 2016
JEL No. F22,F23,H2,H22,H25,H32,H71,J23,J3,R23,R30,R58

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper estimates the incidence of state corporate taxes on the welfare of workers, landowners,
and firm owners using variation in state corporate tax rates and apportionment rules. We develop a
spatial equilibrium model with imperfectly mobile firms and workers. Firm owners may earn profits
and be inframarginal in their location choices due to differences in location-specific productivities.
We use the reduced-form effects of tax changes to identify and estimate incidence as well as the structural
parameters governing these impacts. In contrast to standard open economy models, firm owners bear
roughly 40% of the incidence, while workers and landowners bear 30-35% and 25-30%, respectively.


Juan Carlos Suárez Serrato
Department of Economics
Duke University
213 Social Sciences Building
Box 90097
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
jc@jcsuarez.com

Owen Zidar
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
owen.zidar@chicagobooth.edu
    This paper evaluates the welfare e↵ects of corporate income tax cuts on business owners, workers,
and landowners. The conventional wisdom among economists and policymakers is that corporate tax-
ation in an open economy is unattractive on both efficiency and equity grounds: it distorts the location
and scale of economic activity and falls on the shoulders of workers.1 We revisit this conventional
wisdom both empirically and theoretically.
    We begin by developing a spatial equilibrium model in which firm productivity and profitability
can di↵er across locations.2 Standard models without these features have a difficult time explaining
how California, with corporate tax rates of nearly 10%, is home to one out of nine establishments in
the United States, especially when neighboring Nevada has no corporate tax. Our modeling approach
acknowledges that if California were to increase corporate tax rates modestly, many new and existing
technology firms would continue to find Silicon Valley to be the most profitable location in the world.
The presence of such inframarginal firms changes the nature of the equity and efficiency tradeo↵ by
allowing firms (and their shareholders) to bear some of the incidence associated with corporate taxes.3
    We implement this model empirically to provide a new assessment of the welfare e↵ects of local
corporate tax cuts. The welfare e↵ects are point identified by the reduced-form impacts of changes in
business taxes on four outcomes: wages, rental costs, the location decisions of establishments, and the
location decisions of workers. We estimate these impacts using variation in state corporate tax rates
and rules and establish their validity through a number of tests. These reduced-form impacts enable
us to estimate the welfare e↵ects of state corporate tax cuts as well as the structural parameters
that rationalize these e↵ects. The structural parameters are similar to existing estimates from the
literature, to the extent these estimates exist.
    We have two main results. First, we unambiguously reject the conventional view of 100% inci-
dence on workers and 0% on firm owners based on a variety of approaches: reduced-form estimates,
structural estimates, and calibrations using existing estimates from the local labor markets literature.
Second, our baseline estimates place approximately 40% of the burden on firm owners, 25-30% on
landowners and 30-35% on workers. The result that firm owners may bear the incidence of local poli-
cies starkly contrasts with existing results in the corporate tax literature (e.g., Fullerton and Metcalf
(2002)) and is a novel result in the local labor markets literature (e.g., Moretti (2011)).
    We establish these results in three steps. In the first part of the paper, we construct the model
to allow for the possibility that firm owners, workers, and landowners can bear incidence. The
incidence on these three groups depends on the equilibrium impacts on profits, real wages, and
housing costs, respectively. A tax cut mechanically reduces the tax liability and the cost of capital
of local establishments, attracts establishments, and increases local labor demand. This increase in
labor demand leads firms to o↵er higher wages, encourages migration of workers, and increases the
   1
     See for instance, Gordon and Hines (2002). Gravelle and Smetters (2006) and Arulampalam, Devereux and Maffini
(2012) show how imperfect product substitution and wage bargaining, respectively, can alter this conclusion, and Desai,
Foley and Hines Jr. (2007) find that labor bears the majority but not all of the burden internationally. Note that we
frequently use “tax cuts” as shorthand for “tax changes” since our main specifications use keep-rates.
   2
     While many papers have documented large and persistent productivity di↵erences across countries (Hall and Jones,
1999), sectors (Levchenko and Zhang, 2012), businesses (Syverson, 2011), and local labor markets (Moretti, 2011),
the corporate tax literature has not accounted for the role that heterogeneous productivities may have in determining
equilibrium incidence. Some research on the incidence of local corporate tax cuts exists – for instance, Fuest, Peichl and
Siegloch (2013) use employer-firm linked data to assess the e↵ects of corporate taxes on wages in Germany – but to our
knowledge, there are no empirical analyses that incorporate local equilibrium e↵ects of these tax changes. Interestingly,
they also find similar results for the incidence on workers in their full sample specification.
   3
     Existing and new firms can be inframarginal due to heterogeneous productivities. This idea is conceptually distinct
from the taxation of “old” capital as discussed by Auerbach (2006). See Liu and Altshuler (2013) and Cronin et al.
(2013) for incidence papers that allow for imperfect competition and supernormal economic profits, respectively.


                                                            1
cost of housing. Our model characterizes the new spatial equilibrium following a business tax cut and
relates the changes in wages, rents, and profits to a few key parameters governing labor, housing, and
product markets. In particular, the incidence on wages depends on the degree to which establishment
location decisions respond to tax changes, an e↵ective labor supply elasticity that is dependent on
housing market conditions, and a macro labor demand elasticity that depends on location and scale
decisions of establishments. Having determined the incidence on wages, the incidence on profits
is straightforward; it combines the mechanical e↵ects of lower corporate taxes and the impact of
higher wages on production costs and scale decisions. Finally, we show that the equilibrium incidence
formulae on worker welfare, firm profits, and landowners’ rents are identified by reduced-form e↵ects
of corporate taxes as well as by structural parameters of the model.
    In the second part of the paper, the empirical analysis quantifies the responsiveness of local
economic activity to local business tax changes. The variation in our empirical analysis comes from
changes to state corporate tax rates and apportionment rules, which are state-specific rules that
govern how national profits of multi-state firms are allocated for tax purposes.4 We implement these
state corporate tax system rules using matched firm-establishment data and construct a measure of
the average tax rate that businesses pay in a local area. This approach not only closely approximates
actual taxes paid by businesses, but it also provides multiple sources of identifying variation from
changes in state tax rates, apportionment formulae, and the rate and rule changes of other states.
    We find that a 1% cut in local business taxes increases the number of local establishments by 3 to
4% over a ten-year period. This estimate is unrelated to other changes in policy that would otherwise
bias our results, including changes in per-capita government spending and changes in the corporate
tax base such as investment tax credits. To rule out the possibility that business tax changes occur in
response to abnormal economic conditions, we analyze the typical dynamics of establishment growth
in the years before and after business tax cuts. We also directly control for a common measure of
changes in local labor demand from Bartik (1991). Finally, we estimate the e↵ects of external tax
changes of other locations on local establishment growth and find symmetric e↵ects of business tax
changes on establishment growth. These symmetric e↵ects corroborate the robustness of our reduced-
form results of business tax changes. We also provide estimates of the e↵ects of corporate tax cuts
on local population, wages, and rental costs.
    In the third part of the paper, we use these reduced-form results to estimate the incidence of busi-
ness tax changes. We first apply the incidence expressions that transparently map four reduced-form
e↵ects – on business and worker location, wages, and rental costs – to the welfare e↵ects on workers,
landowners, and firm owners. We then estimate the structural parameters governing incidence by
minimizing the distance between the four reduced-form e↵ects and their theoretical counterparts. We
test over-identifying restrictions of the model and find that they are satisfied. The structural elastic-
ities are precisely estimated. These elasticities help reinforce the validity of our overall estimates for
two reasons. First, our estimated elasticities align with existing estimates from the literature. Second,
they enable us to use estimates from Suárez Serrato and Wingender (2011) to show that our results
are robust and, if anything, modestly strengthened when accounting for the welfare e↵ects of changes
in government spending that result from changes in tax revenue. Government service reductions
disproportionately hurt workers and infrastructure reductions hurt both firms and workers; lower
   4
     Previous studies have focused on the theoretical distortions that apportionment formulae have on the geographical
location of capital and labor (see, e.g., McLure Jr. (1982) and Gordon and Wilson (1986)). Empirically, several studies
have used variation in apportionment rules (e.g., Goolsbee and Maydew (2000)). Hines (2009) and Devereux and Loretz
(2007) have analyzed how these tax distortions a↵ect the location of economic activity internationally.



                                                          2
infrastructure reduces productivity and thus wages. The magnitudes of these adjustments depend on
the magnitude of tax revenue changes, which can be small in practice due to low tax revenue shares
from corporate taxes and fiscal externalities on sales and individual income tax bases.
    In the last section of the paper, we analyze the efficiency costs of state corporate income taxes and
discuss the implications of our results for tax revenues and the revenue-maximizing tax rate. Although
business mobility is an often-cited justification in proposals to lower states’ corporate tax rates,
business location distortions per se do not lead to a low revenue-maximizing rate. Based solely on
the responsiveness of establishment location to tax changes, corporate tax revenue-maximizing rates
would be nearly 32%. This rate greatly exceeds average state corporate tax rates, which were 7% on
average in 2010. However, corporate tax cuts have large fiscal externalities by distorting the location
of individuals. This additional consideration implies substantially lower revenue-maximizing state
corporate tax rates than 32%. The revenue-maximizing tax rate also depends on state apportionment
rules. By apportioning on the basis of sales activity, policymakers can decrease the importance of
firms’ location decisions in the determination of their tax liabilities and thus lower the distortionary
e↵ects of corporate taxes. Overall, accounting for fiscal externalities and apportionment results in
revenue-maximizing rates that are close to actual statutory rates on average.
    This paper contributes a new assessment of the incidence of corporate taxation. The existing
corporate tax literature provides a wide range of conclusions about the corporate tax burden. In
the seminal paper of this literature, Harberger (1962) finds that under reasonable parameter values,
capital bears the burden of a tax in a closed economy model in which all the adjustment has to
be through factor prices. However, di↵erent capital mobility assumptions can completely reverse
Harberger’s conclusion (Kotliko↵ and Summers, 1987). Gravelle (2010) shows how conclusions from
various studies hinge on their modeling assumptions, while Fullerton and Metcalf (2002) note that
“few of the standard assumptions about tax incidence have been tested and confirmed.” Gravelle
(2011) and Clausing (2013) critically review some of the existing empirical work on corporate tax
incidence. We contribute to both the theoretical and empirical corporate tax literature by developing
a new theoretical approach, which can accommodate the conventional view for hypothetical values of
the four reduced-form e↵ects, and by connecting this theory directly to the data. Doing so not only
allows the data to govern the relative mobility of firms and workers, but also enables us to conduct
inference on the resulting incidence calculations.
    This paper also contributes to the recent local labor markets literature, which has focused on
the importance of linking workers and locations (Kline, 2010; Moretti, 2011; Suárez Serrato and
Wingender, 2011; Diamond, 2012; Busso, Gregory and Kline, 2013; Notowidigdo, 2013; Kline and
Moretti, 2013). This literature and benchmark models (Rosen, 1979; Roback, 1982; Glaeser, 2008)
have representative and perfectly competitive firms with no link between firms and location. Our work
links firms and locations by incorporating features popular in the trade literature (Krugman, 1979;
Hopenhayn, 1992; Melitz, 2003). Developing the demand side of local labor markets is important
because it allows for the possibility that firm owners can bear some of the incidence of local economic
development policies or local productivity shocks—a feature that was previously absent in models
of local labor markets.5 In addition, estimating labor demand functions in models of local labor
   5
     One finding from the set of papers linking workers to locations that di↵erentiates them from previous work is the
possibility that workers may be inframarginal in their location decisions, which allows workers to bear the benefit or cost
of local policies. Our paper allows firms to be inframarginal in their location decisions. In addition, the possibility that
firm owners can bear incidence implies that wage and property value responses alone are not sufficient for evaluating the
incidence of productivity shocks and can alter the interpretation of existing work (e.g., Greenstone and Moretti (2004)).



                                                             3
markets has been limited by the lack of plausibly exogenous labor supply shocks that may trace
the slope of the demand function. Our framework exploits firm location decisions and the empirical
tradeo↵ firms make among productivity, corporate taxes, and factor prices to provide a novel link
between firm location choices and labor demand that can be used to recover the parameters governing
labor demand (and the incidence on firm profits). Finally, this paper relates to the literature on local
public finance and business location literatures.6 We contribute by providing a framework to interpret
existing estimates and by implementing the state corporate tax system, which provides novel variation.
    We make several simplifying assumptions that may limit some of our analysis. First, we abstract
from issues of endogenous agglomerations or externalities that may result from changes in corporate
taxes. Second, we do not allow firms to bear the cost of rising real estate costs. This feature could
be added in a model with a real estate market that integrates the residential and commercial sectors.
However, given that firms’ cost shares on real estate are small, this addition would likely not change
our main result and would come at the cost of additional complexity. Third, our model abstracts
from the entrepreneurship margin (Gentry and Hubbard, 2000; Scheuer, 2014). Abstracting from
this margin is unlikely to a↵ect our incidence calculations to the extent that the entrepreneurship
margin is small. The magnitude of this margin depends on the e↵ect of one state’s tax changes on
the total number of businesses in the United States. Fourth, we compare steady states that assume
labor market clearing over a ten year period. Adding the possibility of unemployment during the
transition period could alter some of our conclusions about incidence.7 Fifth, many of the factors
in our incidence formulae are likely to be geographically heterogeneous. A more general model that
accounts for di↵erences in housing markets, sectoral compositions, and skill-group compositions as
well as non-linear housing supply functions may result in a better approximation to the incidence
in specific locations and in specific contexts. Sixth, while our cross-sectional approach provides
substantial variation, cross-sectional estimates necessarily abstract from general equilibrium e↵ects
that may a↵ect outcomes in all states.8 Finally, due to data limitations, we proxy for the benefit to
landowners using data on housing rents.
    We proceed as follows. We develop the model in Section 1, derive simple expressions for incidence
in Section 2, and show how to estimate them in Section 3. Section 4 describes the data and U.S. state
corporate tax apportionment rules. Sections 5 and 6 provide reduced-form and structural results,
respectively. Section 7 discusses additional policy implications and Section 8 concludes.
   6
     Important contributions include Gyourko and Tracy (1989); Bartik (1991); Haughwout and Inman (2001); Feldstein
and Vaillant (1998); Carlton (1983); Duranton, Gobillon and Overman (2011); Glaeser (2012); Hines (1997); Newman
(1983); Bartik (1985); Helms (1985); Papke (1987, 1991); Goolsbee and Maydew (2000); Holmes (1998); Rothenberg
(2012); Rathelot and Sillard (2008); Chirinko and Wilson (2008); Devereux and Griffith (1998); Siegloch (2014); Hassett
and Mathur (2015).
   7
     More generally, we abstract from transition dynamics, which can have important incidence implications (Auerbach,
2006). Interestingly, the benefits to firm owners are likely front-loaded as the mechanical e↵ects of tax cuts occur
immediately while the increases in wages and rental costs follow a gradual adjustment as establishments relocate.
However, introducing unemployment into the model makes the welfare impacts during the transition harder to sign.
   8
     If, for example, a tax change in Rhode Island a↵ects all wages nation-wide, our estimate would only report the
di↵erential e↵ect on Rhode Island versus other states and would subsume the aggregate e↵ect in the year fixed-e↵ect.
However, to the extent that a single state’s taxes do not a↵ect the national level of wages, profits, and rental costs, our
estimates will provide the general equilibrium incidence.




                                                            4
1        A Spatial Equilibrium Model with Heterogeneous Firms
         You have to start this conversation with the philosophy that businesses have more choices than they
         ever have before. And if you don’t believe that, you say taxes don’t matter. But if you do believe that,
         which I do, it’s one of those things, along with quality of life, quality of education, quality of
         infrastructure, cost of labor, it’s one of those things that matter.
                                                           —Delaware Governor Jack Markell (11/3/2013)

The model characterizes the incidence on wages, rents, and profits as functions of estimable parameters
governing the supply and demand sides of the housing, labor, and product markets. In particular, the
main incidence results will be functions of three key objects: the e↵ective elasticity of labor supply
"LS , the macro elasticity of labor demand "LD , and the increase in labor demand following a business
                 ln LD
tax change @ @ln(1   c
                     ⌧cb )
                           .
     We consider a similar environment to Kline (2010) and Moretti (2011) in terms of worker location,
and develop the demand side of the local labor market by characterizing the location decisions of
heterogeneous firms. Specifically, we consider a small location c in an open economy with many other
locations. There are three types of agents: workers, establishment owners, and landowners. Units are
chosen so that the total number of workers N = 1 and establishments E = 1, and Nc and Ec denote
the share of workers and establishments in location c. The model is static and assumes no population
growth or establishment entry at the national level. Workers choose their location to maximize
utility, establishments choose location and scale to maximize after-tax profits, and landowners supply
housing units to maximize rental profits. In terms of market structure, capital and goods markets are
global and labor and housing markets are local. The equilibrium in location c is characterized by Nc
households earning wage wc and paying housing costs rc , Ec establishments earning after-tax profits
⇡c , and a representative landowner earning rents rc . We compare outcomes in spatial equilibrium
before and after a corporate tax cut and do not model the transition between pre-tax and post-tax
equilibria.

1.1        Household Problem
In location c with amenities A, households maximize Cobb-Douglas utility over housing h and a
composite X of non-housing goods xj while facing a wage w, rent r, and non-housing good prices pj :

                                                                                                           0                      1     "P D
                                                                                                                                       "P D +1
                                                                  Z                                            Z      "P D +1
                                                                                                 B                      PD         C
max ln A + ↵ ln h + (1                ↵) ln X s.t. rh +                  pj xj dj = w, where X = @                   xj "       dj A             ,
h,X
                                                                 j2J                                           j2J


"P D < 1 is the product demand elasticity, and P is an elasticity of substitution (CES) price index
that is normalized to 1.9 Workers inelastically provide one unit of labor.
                                                                              !     1
                                                   R                              1+"P D
    9                                                           1+"P D
        The price index is defined as P =               (pj )            dj                = 1. Demand from each household for variety j,
                                                  j2J
                      PD
xj = (1      ↵)wp"j        , depends on the non-housing expenditure, the price of variety j, and the product demand elasticity.




                                                                              5
1.1.1    Household Location Choice

Wages, rental costs, and amenities vary across locations. The indirect utility of household n from
their choice of location c is then
                                       W
                                      Vnc = a0 + ln wc        ↵ ln rc + ln Anc ,
where a0 is a constant. Households maximize their indirect utility across locations, accounting for the
value of location-specific amenities ln Anc , which are comprised of a common location-specific term
Āc and location-specific idiosyncratic preference ⇠nc :10
                                      max a0 + ln wc ↵ ln rc + Āc +⇠nc .
                                       c  |         {z           }
                                                        ⌘uc

The presence of the household-specific-component allows for workers to be inframarginal in their
location choices and, in turn, allows for workers to bear part of the incidence of local shocks (Kline
and Moretti, 2013). Households will locate in location c if their indirect utility there is higher than
in any other location c0 . Assuming ⇠nc
                                      0 s are i.i.d. type I extreme value, the share of households for

whom that is true determines local population Nc :
                                     ✓                       ◆
                                         W            W
                                                                  exp uWc
                             Nc = P Vnc = max      {V nc 0 }   = P       u c0 ,                      (1)
                                                c0                 c0 exp W

where W is the dispersion of the location-specific idiosyncratic preference ⇠nc . This equation defines
the local labor supply as a function that is increasing in wages wc , decreasing in rents rc , and increasing
in log amenities Āc . If workers have similar tastes for cities, then W will be low and local labor
supply will be fairly responsive to real wage and amenity changes.

1.2     Housing Market
Local housing demand follows from the household problem and is given by: HcD = Ncr↵w            c
                                                                                                  c
                                                                                                    . The
                               S            H
local supply of housing, Hc = G(rc ; Bc ), is upward-sloping in both the rental price rc , which al-
lows landowners to benefit from higher rental prices, and exogenous local housing productivity BcH .
The marginal landowner supplies housing at cost rc = G 1 (HcS ; BcH ). For tractability, we assume
G(rc ; BcH ) ⌘ (BcH rc )⌘c , where the local housing supply elasticity ⌘c > 0 governs the strength of the
price response to changes in demand and productivity.11 The housing market clearing condition,
HcS = HcD , determines the rents rc in location c and is given in log-form by the following expression:
                                        1              1                  ⌘c
                            ln rc =          ln Nc +        ln wc             B H + a1 ,                         (2)
                                      1 + ⌘c         1 + ⌘c             1 + ⌘c c
where a1 is a constant. Substituting this expression into Equation 1 yields an expression for labor
supply that does not depend on rc but that incorporates the housing market feedback into the e↵ective
labor supply. This substitution yields the first key elasticity – the e↵ective elasticity of labor supply.
                                           ✓                   ◆
                                @ ln LSc         1 + ⌘c ↵
                                         =      W (1 + ⌘ ) + ↵
                                                                  ⌘ "LS
                                 @ ln wc                c
  10
     Note that location preferences and heterogenous mobility costs, which some prior work (e.g., Topel (1986)) has
included, are observationally equivalent here. We assume fixed amenities for simplicity. See Diamond (2012) for an
analysis with endogenous amenities and Suárez Serrato and Wingender (2011) for an analysis where government services
responds to local population. We use estimates from Suárez Serrato and Wingender (2011) to quantify how our results
change if government amenities are a↵ected in Appendix Section F.
  11
     Note that we abstract from asymmetric housing supply; Notowidigdo (2013) discusses the incidence implications of
non-linear housing supply as in Glaeser and Gyourko (2005).


                                                         6
1.3     Establishment Problem
The standard local labor markets and corporate tax models do not incorporate individual estab-
lishment location decisions. We add establishment location decisions for two main reasons. Firms’
location decisions enable us to identify the e↵ects of local tax changes on the prices and after-tax
profits of firm owners. They also provide a micro-foundation for the local labor demand elasticity
based on firms’ location and scale decisions.
    Establishments j are monopolistically competitive and have productivity Bjc that varies across
locations.12 Establishments combine labor ljc , capital kjc , and a bundle of intermediate goods Mjc
to produce output yjc with the following technology:
                                                                             1
                                                          yjc = Bjc ljc kjc Mjc                    ,                                           (3)

                                                   !    "P D
                    R               "P D +1            "P D +1
where Mjc ⌘              (xv,jc )    "P D     dv                 is establishment j’s bundle of goods of varieties v. Goods
                   v2J
of all varieties can serve as either final goods for household consumption or as intermediate inputs
for establishment production. We incorporate intermediate inputs since they represent a consider-
able portion of gross output and are important to consider when evaluating production technology
parameter values empirically. In a given location c, establishments maximize profits over inputs and
prices pjc while facing a local wage wc , national rental rates ⇢, national prices pv of each variety v,
and local business taxes ⌧cb subject to the production technology in Equation 3:
                                             0                                1
                                                               Z
                ⇡jc =     max       (1 ⌧cb ) @pjc yjc wc ljc      pv xv,jc dv A ⇢kjc ,               (4)
                         ljc ,kjc ,xv,jc ,pjc
                                                                                              v2J

where the local business tax is the e↵ective tax from locating in location c. An important feature
of the establishment problem is the tax treatment of the returns to equity holders. Since returns
to equity holders are not tax deductible, the corporate tax a↵ects the cost of capital (Auerbach,
2002).13 After solving this establishment problem (see Appendix B.1 and Appendix B.2), we can
express economic profits in terms of local taxes, factor prices, and local productivity:
                                                                       P D +1)           P D +1)        ("P D +1)
                                      ⇡jc = (1            ⌧cb )wc ("             ⇢c ("             Bc               ,                         (5)
                                                                                                                ⇢
where the local tax rate is ⌧cb , local factor prices are wc and ⇢c =                                          1 ⌧cb
                                                                                                                     ,   the establishment’s local
productivity is Bc , and  is a constant term across locations.

1.3.1    Establishment Location Choice

When choosing location, firm owners maximize after tax profits ⇡jc . The log of establishment j’s
productivity Bjc in location c equals B̄c + ⇣jc where B̄c is a common location-specific level of produc-
tivity and ⇣jc is an idiosyncratic establishment and location-specific term that is i.i.d. type I extreme
value. Establishments may be idiosyncratically more productive for a variety of reasons, including
   12
      To simplify exposition, we describe the case in which firms are single-plant establishments in the main text, but
fully characterize the more general firm problem and its complex interaction with apportionment rules in Appendix B.
   13
      Establishments are equity financed in the model, which we view as a reasonable characterization given non-tax costs
of debt and firm optimization. See Heider and Ljungqvist (2014) for evidence on the e↵ects of taxes on capital structure.



                                                                           7
match-quality, sensitivity to transportation costs, factor or input market requirements, sector-specific
concentration, and agglomeration.14
   Define an establishment j’s value function VjcF in location c:

                                     ln(1 ⌧cb )                                       ln 1
                        VjcF =                   + B̄c         ln wc     ln ⇢c +               +⇣jc .                       (6)
                                      ("P D + 1)                                    ("P D + 1)
                                 |                                {z                         }
                                                                ⌘vc

This value function is a positive monotonic transformation of log profits.15 Similar to the household
location problem, establishments will locate in location c if their value function there is higher there
than in any other location c0 . The share of establishments for which that is true determines local
establishment share Ec :
                                     ✓                  ◆
                                                                exp vFc
                              Ec = P Vjc = max    {Vjc } = P
                                                      0                 v c0                         (7)
                                               c0                c0 exp F

where     F   is the dispersion of the location-specific idiosyncratic establishment productivity ⇣jc .

1.3.2     Local Labor Demand

Local labor demand depends on the share of establishments that choose to locate in c as well as the
average employment of local firms and is given by the following expression:16
                               
                D                ⇤
               Lc = Ec ⇥ E⇣ ljc    (⇣jc )|c = argmax{Vjc0 }
                                                  c0
                     ✓           ⇣    ⌘ ◆                              ⇣                 ⌘
                        1          vc             PD          P D)         B̄c ( "P D 1)
                  =        exp F           ⇥ wc( " + 1) ⇢(1+"
                                                          c         0   e                 zc , (8)
                       C⇡¯                   |                   {z                         }
                     |        {z         }
                              Extensive margin                           Intensive margin

                                        P       v
where C is the number of cities, ⇡¯ ⌘ C1 c0 exp( cF0 ) is closely related to average profits in all other
locations, 0 is a common term across locations, and zc is a term increasing in the idiosyncratic
productivity draw ⇣jc . From this equation we obtain a key object of interest for incidence – the
macro elasticity of local labor demand:

                                 @ ln LD
                                       c
                                         =           1       + "P D                     ⌘ "LD ,                             (9)
                                 @ ln wc        | {z }        | {z }           F
                                                                             |{z}
                                              Substitution      Scale
                                                                        Firm Location

where is the output elasticity of labor, ✏P D is the product demand elasticity, and F is the dispersion
of idiosyncratic productivity. This expression is labeled the macro elasticity of labor demand because
  14
     Allowing for endogenous agglomeration, i.e., making Bjc a function of local population, is beyond the scope of this
paper. See Kline and Moretti (2014) for a related model of agglomeration with a representative firm and Diamond
(2012) for amenity-related agglomerations. We use estimates from Suárez Serrato and Wingender (2011) to quantify
how our results change if government infrastructure (and thus productivity) is a↵ected in Appendix Section F.
  15
     The transformation divides log profits by ("P D + 1) 1, where log profits are the non-tax shifting portion of log
profits, i.e., ln ⇡jc = ln(1 ⌧iA )+ ("P D +1) ln wc + ("P D +1) ln ⇢c ("P D +1) ln B̄c +ln 1 , which closely approximates the
exact expression for log profits as shown in Appendix B.2.2. Note that ("P D + 1) 1 = µ 1, which is the net-markup.
  16
     Given a large number of cities C, we can follow✓ Hopenhayn
                                                            ◆        (1992) and use the law of large numbers to simplify the
                                                      exp vF
                                                           c
denominator of Ec and express the share Ec =             C⇡
                                                          ¯
                                                                 as a function of average location-specific profits in all other
                 P        vc0
          ¯ ⌘ C1
locations ⇡        c0 exp( F ).



                                                                 8
it combines the average firm’s elasticity plus the e↵ect of firm entry on labor demand. In addition,
this equation also yields our last key object of interest: the e↵ect of a business tax change on local
labor demand, which is given by:

                             @ ln LD
                                   c        @ ln Ec                                1               µ       1
                                     b
                                       =              =                                        =               ,
                          @ ln(1 ⌧c )    @ ln(1 ⌧cb )                  ("P D        + 1)   F           F


where the last equation uses the definition of the net-markup: µ                           1.


2     The Incidence of Local Corporate Tax Cuts
We characterize the incidence of corporate taxes on wages, rents, and profits and relate these e↵ects
to the welfare of workers, landowners, and firms. We focus on the welfare of local residents as the
policies we study are determined by policymakers with the objective of maximizing local welfare.

2.1     Local Incidence on Prices and Profits
Assuming full labor force participation, i.e., LSc = Nc , clearing in the housing, labor, capital, and
goods markets gives the following labor market equilibrium:

                                Nc (wc , rc ; Āc , ⌘c ) = LD       ¯ ; ⇢c , ⌧cb , B̄c , zc ).
                                                            c (wc , ⇡

                                                                       d ln wc
This expression implicitly defines equilibrium wages wc . Let ẇc = d ln(1   ⌧cb )
                                                                                   and define ṙc analogously.
The e↵ect of a local corporate tax cut on local wages and rents are given by the following expressions:
                          ⇣      D
                                    ⌘
                               @ ln Lc                                     (µ 1)
                             @ ln(1 ⌧cb )                                      F
                 ẇc =                        =⇣                   ⌘                                               , and   (10)
                            "LS "LD                    1+⌘c ↵
                                                                               "P D + 1            1
                                                                                                       +1
                                                      W (1+⌘ )+↵                                   F
                                                            c
                           ✓             ◆
                               1+  "LS
                  ṙc =                      ẇc .                                                                         (11)
                               1 + ⌘c


                                ⇡˙ c = 1             ("P D + 1)        +       ("P D + 1)ẇc ,                             (12)
                                               |       {z     }            |        {z     }
                                           Reducing Capital Wedge          Higher Labor Costs

where ⇡˙ c is the percentage change in after-tax profits, is the output elasticity of capital, "P D is
the product demand elasticity, is the output elasticity of labor, and ẇc is the percentage change in
wages following a corporate tax cut.

2.1.1    Discussion

The expression for wage growth in Equation 10 has an intuitive economic interpretation that translates
the forces in our spatial equilibrium model to those in a basic supply and demand diagram, as in
Figure 1. The numerator captures the shift in labor demand following the tax cut: (µ F1) . Since this
shift in demand is due to establishment entry, the numerator is a function of the location decisions of
establishments. Profit taxes matter more for location decisions when markups (and thus profits) are
large, but matter less when productivity is more heterogeneous across locations. The denominator is
the di↵erence between an e↵ective labor⇣supply elasticity
                                                     ⌘    and a macro labor demand elasticity. The
                                     LS     1+⌘c ↵
e↵ective elasticity of labor supply " = W (1+⌘c )+↵ incorporates indirect housing market impacts.

                                                              9
       LS
As @"@⌘c > 0, the e↵ect of corporate taxes on wages will be smaller, the larger the elasticity of housing
supply. A simple intuition for this is that if ⌘ is large, workers do not need to be compensated as
much to be willing to live there. As shown in Equation 9, the elasticity of labor demand depends on
both location and scale decisions of firms.
    In the expression for rental costs in Equation 11, the quantity 1+"LS captures the e↵ects of higher
wages on housing consumption through both a direct e↵ect of higher income and an indirect e↵ect
on the location of workers. The magnitude of the rent increase depends on the elasticity of housing
supply ⌘c and the strength of the inflow of establishments through its e↵ect on ẇc as in Equation 10.
    Equation 12 shows that establishment profits mechanically increase by one percent following a
corporate tax cut of one percent. They are also a↵ected by e↵ects on factor prices. The middle term
reflects increased profitability due to a reduction in the e↵ective cost of capital. The last term shows
that, as firms enter the local labor market, wages rise and thus compete away profits.

2.2     Local Incidence on Welfare
Having derived the incidence of corporate taxes on local prices and profits, we now explore how these
price changes a↵ect the welfare of workers, landowners, and firm owners. We define the welfare of
workers as V W ⌘ E[max{uc + ⇠nc }]. Since the distribution of idiosyncratic preferences is type I
                       c
extreme value, the welfare of workers can be written as:
                                                                 !
                                                 X        ⇣u ⌘
                                   W      W                  c
                                  V =       log      exp W         ,
                                                         c

as in McFadden (1978) and Kline and Moretti (2013). It then follows that the e↵ect of a tax cut in
location c on the welfare of workers is given by:

                                            dV W
                                                     = Nc (ẇc      ↵ṙc ).                                 (13)
                                        d ln(1 ⌧cc )

That is, the e↵ect of a tax cut on welfare is simply a transfer to workers in location c equivalent to a
percentage change in the real wage given by (ẇc ↵ṙc ). One very useful aspect of this formula is that
it does not depend on the e↵ect of tax changes on the location decisions of workers in the sense that
there are no Ṅc terms in this expression (Busso, Gregory and Kline, 2013). This expression assumes
   dV W           dVcW
d ln(1 ⌧cb )
             = d ln(1 ⌧cb )
                            , that is, tax changes in location c have no e↵ect on wages and rental costs in
other locations, consistent with the perspective of a local official.
     Similarly, defining the welfare of firm owners as:17

                                   V F ⌘ E[max{vc + ⇣jc }] ⇥       ("P D + 1)
                                              c

yields an analogous expression for the e↵ect of corporate taxes on domestic firm owner welfare:

                                                 dV F
                                                          = Ec ⇡˙ c .                                       (14)
                                             d ln(1 ⌧cc )

    Finally, consider the e↵ect on landowner welfare in location c. Landowner welfare in each location
is the di↵erence between housing expenditures and the costs associated with supplying that level of
  17
    The firm owner term is multiplied by ("P D + 1) > 0 to undo the monotonic transformation in definition of the
                               F
establishment value function Vjc . Firm owners and landlords are distinct from workers for conceptual clarity.


                                                       10
housing. This di↵erence can be expressed as follows:18
                                              Nc ↵w
                                                 Z c /rc
                                L                              1                       1
                               V = Nc ↵wc                G         (q; Zch )dq =            Nc ↵wc ,
                                                                                     1 + ⌘c
                                                 0

and is proportional to housing expenditures. The e↵ect of a corporate tax cut on the welfare of
domestic landowners is then given by:
                                                 dV L       Ṅc + ẇc
                                                          =           .                                              (15)
                                             d ln(1 ⌧cc )    1 + ⌘c

3        Empirical Implementation and Identification
This section describes how we connect the theory to the data to implement the incidence formulae
from the previous section. We write the key equations of the spatial equilibrium model from Sec-
tion 1 as a simultaneous equations model and show that there is an associated exact reduced-form
that relates equilibrium changes in the number of households, firms, wages, and rental prices to the
structural parameters of the model. We then show that the incidence formulae are identified by sim-
ple combinations of these equilibrium responses, which can also be used to recover the key structural
parameters of the model.

3.1      Exact Reduced-Form E↵ects of Business Tax Changes
The simultaneous equation model is given by the log-labor supply equation (Equation 1), the log-
value of equilibrium rents (Equation 2), the log of the establishment location equation (Equation 7),
and the log-labor demand equation (Equation 8). To economize on the number of parameters, we set
⌘c = ⌘ 8c. Stacking these equations yields the structural form:

                                               AYc,t = BZc,t + ec,t ,                                                (16)

where Yc,t is a vector of the four endogenous variables (wage growth, population growth, rental cost
                                            ⇥           b )
                                                            ⇤
growth, and establishment growth), Zc,t =       ln(1 ⌧c,t     is a vector of tax shocks, A is a matrix
that characterizes the inter-dependence among the endogenous variables, B is a matrix that measures
the direct e↵ects of the tax shocks on each endogenous variable, and ec,t is a structural error term.
Explicitly, these elements are given by:

                           2            3      2 1                             3   2                            3
                                                                        ↵                              0
                               ln wc,t             W           1        W    0
                           6                                  1                    6                   1        7
                               ln Nc,t 7       6 1                      0    077,B=6  LD          F ("P D +1)   7
                 Yc,t     =6
                           4
                                        7, A = 6 1           "LD                   6"                           7.
                                ln rc,t 5      4
                                                 1+⌘
                                                              1
                                                             1+⌘        1    05    4                   0        5
                                                                                                       1
                               ln Ec,t            F            0        0    1                   F ("P D +1)


Pre-multiplying by the inverse of the matrix of structural coefficients A gives the reduced form:
                                                        1                        1
                                        Yc,t =       A
                                                     | {z B}        Zc,t + A         ec,t                            (17)
                                                     Business Tax
                                                 ⌘

           Business Tax
where                     is a vector of reduced-form e↵ects of business tax changes:
    18
    Note that, in contrast to workers and firm owners, this formulation of the utility of the representative landlord
assumes constant marginal utility of income. In addition, rising rents may reflect increases in wages that do not accrue
directly to landowners. Direct data on land values (e.g., Albouy and Ehrlich (2012)) could improve this measurement.


                                                             11
                                                       2       3       2                            3
                                                           W                      ẇ
                                                6          N7 6                 ẇ"LS               7
                                Business Tax
                                               =6           7=6
                                                              6                1+"LS
                                                                                                    7
                                                                                                    7.
                                                4          R5
                                                              4                 1+⌘ ẇ              5
                                                           E               µ 1
                                                                               F           F   ẇ
The expressions in the exact reduced form have insightful intuitive economic interpretations. The
observed equilibrium change in wages and rents, W and R , are given by the incidence Equations 10
and 11. The equilibrium change in employment, N , is given by the change in wage multiplied by the
e↵ective elasticity of labor supply. The change in the number of establishments, E , is determined by
two forces. The first, µ F1 , is the increase in the number of establishments that would occur if wages
did not change. The second component accounts for the equilibrium change in wages. Higher wages
decrease the number of establishments by          F ẇ.



3.2   Identification of Parameters and Incidence Formulae
                                                                                ⇥ W N R E ⇤0
This section shows that these four reduced-form moments, Business Tax =              ,    , ,     , are
sufficient to identify the incidence on the welfare of each of our agents, up to the calibration of
expenditure share ↵ and output elasticity ratio / . Table 1 reproduces the incidence formulae for
the welfare of each of our agents. The direct e↵ects of taxes on disposable income ( W ↵ R ) and
on rents R identify the impacts on workers and landowners, respectively. The expression for firm
owners depends on the equilibrium e↵ect on profits, which are not directly observed empirically.
    Table 1 shows that the formula for the incidence on after-tax profits includes the term ("P D + 1).
This term measures the decrease in profits from a one-percent increase in wages normalized by the
firm’s net-markup. Intuitively, the amount firms care about wage changes depends on how much wage
changes impact their costs, which is governed , and how much firms have to scale back production
when costs are higher, which is governed by the product demand elasticity. We identify ("P D + 1)
by inverting the wage incidence equation. We recover the elasticity of labor supply, which is identified
by the ratio of the first two rows of Equation 17 so that "LS = N / W . Similarly, the shift in labor
demand is given by rearranging the establishment location in the last row of Equation 17:
                                          µ        1           E               W
                                               F
                                                       =           +       F
                                                                                   .

This equation states that the shift in labor demand is given by the observed change in the number of
establishments, E , plus the number of establishments that would have entered had wages not risen,
as given by F W . Expressing the wage incidence formula as a function of reduced-form parameters
yields:
                                                           E    +              W
                                  W                                    F
                                      =                ✓                               ◆            .    (18)
                                          N                    PD                  1
                                          W                "        +1             F
                                                                                           +1
                                                   |                 {z                     }
                                                                       "LD

Solving equation 18 for ("P D + 1) shows that it is identified by the following combination of reduced-
form moments:                                     ✓               ◆N           E
                                      ("P D + 1) =                     W
                                                                                   +1 .

  The intuition behind this derivation is that, given estimates of the equilibrium change in wages,
employment, and the slope of labor supply, we can decompose the elasticity of labor demand into the

                                                           12
            Table 1: Identification of Local Incidence on Welfare and Structural Parameters

                                              Panel (a) Local Incidence
       Stakeholder (Benefit)                     Incidence                                                            Identified By
       Workers                                    ẇ ↵ṙ                                                                 W    ↵ R
       (Disposable Income)

       Landowners                                        ṙ                                                                    R

       (Housing Costs)
                                                                                                              ⇣   N        E
                                                                                                                                 ⌘
       Firm Owners                       1 + ("P D + 1)(ẇc                  )                    1+                   W       +1 (   W       )
       (After-tax Profit)


                                          Panel (b) Structural Parameters
        Worker Mobility                  Firm
                                            ⇣ Mobility      ⌘ Housing Supply                                               Product Demand
                   W   ↵   R              W                                                  N+ W                                  N+ W       E
                                                     1
           W   =       N         F   =   E      E    N        W        1     ⌘=               R                   1     "P D =            W




                                                              Business Tax
                                                                                 ⇥   W        N       R
                                                                                                               ⇤
                                                                                                              E 0
Notes: This table shows how reduced-form estimates                           =           ,        ,       ,            map to the incidence on welfare
of workers, landowners, and firm-owners at the local level. Note that we calibrate the housing expenditure share (↵)
and the ratio of the capita to labor output elasticities ( / ).


extensive component, using the equilibrium change in establishments, and the remaining intensive
margin ("P D + 1) 1. This micro-elasticity of labor demand also reveals the e↵ect of a wage increase
on profits, which determines the incidence on firm owners.
    A few remarks are worth highlighting about this identification argument. First, given ↵ and / ,
the welfare e↵ects are point identified even though we cannot identify all seven model parameters
with four moments. In particular, even though we cannot separately identify and "P D , identifying
the product ("P D +1) is sufficient to characterize the e↵ect of a corporate tax cut on profits. Second,
we can further identify additional primitives of the model including W and ⌘c by manipulating the
identification of the elasticity of labor supply and the incidence on rents. Table 1 presents formulae
for each of the structural parameters we estimate as functions of the four reduced-form moments
and calibrated parameters ↵ and . Third, this identification argument highlights the relationship
between the model and reduced-form estimates, providing a transparent way to evaluate how sensitive
our ultimate incidence estimates are to changes in the four reduced-form estimates. Finally, in some
specifications we augment this model to include the e↵ects of personal income taxes on housing supply
and worker location as well as the e↵ects of observable productivity shocks due to Bartik (1991) on
the local labor market equilibrium.19 For brevity, we relegate discussion of the exact reduced-from
expressions to Appendix E.5. However, note that the reduced-form identification argument above is
not a↵ected by the inclusion of additional sources of variation.
  19
    In particular, the location decision of workers is modified by replacing w with after tax income w(1 ⌧ i ) and the
                                                  H
supply of housing now becomes HcS = (1 ⌧ i ) (BcH rc )⌘c , where the parameter H is estimated in the cases where
we estimate the system using the variation from all shocks. Note that, additionally, one could also incorporate local
property taxes by including property taxes in the cost of housing in the worker location equation.


                                                                  13
4        Data and Institutional Details of State Corporate Taxes
We use annual county-level data from 1980-2012 for over 3,000 counties and decadal individual-level
data to create a panel of outcome and tax changes for 490 county-groups. Ruggles et al. (2010)
developed and named these country-groups “consistent public-use micro-data areas (PUMAs).” This
level of aggregation is the smallest geographical level that can be consistently identified in Census
and American Community Survey (ACS) datasets and provides several benefits (see Appendix A.1).

4.1      Data on Economic Outcomes
We aggregate the number of establishments in a given county to the PUMA county-groups using data
from the Census Bureau’s County Business Patterns (CBP). We analogously calculate population
changes using Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) data.
    Data on local wages and housing costs are available less frequently. We use individual-level data
from the 1980, 1990, and 2000 U.S. censuses and the 2009 ACS to create a balanced panel of 490
county groups with indices of wages, rental costs, and housing values.
    When comparing wages and housing values, it is important that our comparisons refer to workers
and housing units with similar characteristics. As is standard in the literature on local labor markets,
we create indices of changes in wage rates and rental rates that are adjusted to eliminate the e↵ects
of changes in the compositions of workers and housing units in any given area. We create these
composition-adjusted values as follows. First, we limit our sample to the non-farm, non-institutional
population of adults between the ages of 18 and 64. Second, we partial out the observable character-
istics of workers and housing units from wages and rental costs to create a constant reference group
across locations and years. We do this adjustment to ensure that changes in the prices we analyze are
not driven by changes in the composition of observable characteristics of workers and housing units.
Additional details regarding our sample selection and the creation of composition-adjusted outcomes
are available in Appendix A.2. Finally, we construct a “Bartik” local labor demand shock that we
use to supplement our tax change measure and enhance the precision of labor supply parameters.20

4.2      Tax Data
Businesses pay two types of income taxes. C-corporations pay state corporate taxes and many other
types of businesses, such as S-corporations and partnerships, pay individual income taxes. We combine
these measures to calculate an average business tax rate for each local area from 1980 to 2010.

4.2.1     State Corporate Tax Data and Institutional Details

The tax rate we aim to obtain in this subsection is the e↵ective average tax rate paid by establishments
of C-corporations in a given location from 1980 to 2010. Firms can generate earnings from activity
    20
    This approach weights national industry-level employment shocks by the initial industrial composition of each local
area to construct a measure of local labor demand shocks:
                                             X
                                 Bartikc,t ⌘    EmpShareInd,t 10,c ⇥ EmpInd,t,US ,
                                             Ind

where EmpShareInd,t 10,c is the share of employment in a given industry at the start of the decade and EmpInd,t,US
is the national percentage change in employment in that industry. We calculate national employment changes as well
as employment shares for each county group using micro-data from the 1980, 1990, and 2000 Censuses and the 2009
ACS. We use a consistent industry variable based on the 1990 Census that is updated to account for changes in industry
definitions as well as new industries.


                                                          14
in many states. State authorities have to determine how much activity occurred in state s for every
firm i. They often use a weighted average of payroll, property, and sales activity. The weights ✓ s ,
called apportionment weights, determine the relative importance tax authorities place on these three
measures of in-state activity.21 From the perspective of the firm i, the firm-specific “apportioned”
tax rate is a weighted average of state corporate tax rates:
                                                  X
                                            ⌧iA =    ⌧sc !is ,                                   (19)
                                                          s

where ⌧sc is the corporate
                  ✓        ◆tax✓rate in ◆state✓s and the
                                                       ◆ firm-specific weights !is are themselves weighted
                      W is         R  is          X is
averages !is = ✓sw           + ✓s⇢         + ✓sx        of in-state activity shares.22 Equation 19 shows
                      W             R             X
                  | {z } | {z } | {z }
                     payroll       property       sales
that the tax rate corporations pay depends on home-state and other states’ tax rates and rules. We
use the latter to construct an external rate ⌧iE , which represents an index of the importance of changes
in every other state’s tax and yields variation that is likely exogenous to local economic conditions.
It is defined explicitly in Appendix A.3.1.
    To implement the activity shares for each firm i, we use the Reference USA dataset from Infogroup
to compute the geographic distribution of payroll at the firm level. Due to the lack of information
on the geographic distribution of property in the Reference USA dataset, we make the simplifying
assumption that capital activity weights equal the payroll weights. Finally, since the apportionment
of sales is destination-based, we use state GDP data for ten broad industry groups from the BEA to
apportion sales to states based on their share of national GDP.23
    Empirically, we use the spatial distribution of establishment-firm ownership and payroll activity in
1997, the first year in which micro establishment-firm linked data are available. We hold the spatial
distribution of establishment-firm ownership and payroll activity weights constant at these initial
values to avoid endogenous changes in e↵ective tax rates. Consequently, variation in our tax measure
⌧iA comes from variation in state apportionment rules, variation in state corporate tax rules, and initial
conditions, which determine the sensitivity of each firm’s tax rate ⌧iA to changes in corporate rates
and apportionment weights. We combine our empirical activity share measures with state corporate
tax rates and apportionment rules from Book of the States, Significant Features of Fiscal Federalism
and Statistical Abstracts of the United States. We then use these components to compute an average
tax rate ⌧¯cA for all establishments in each location and decompose it into average local “domestic”
and external rates, ⌧¯cD and ⌧¯cE .
    Figure 2 shows that apart from a few states that have never taxed corporate income, most states
have changed their rates at least three times since 1979. Appendix Figure A3 shows how large
these rate changes have been over a 30 year period from 1980-2010. States in the South made fewer
  21
     Goolsbee and Maydew (2000) use variation in apportionment weights on payroll activity to show that reducing the
payroll weight from 33% to 25% leads to an increase in manufacturing employment of roughly one percent on average.
In addition, we follow their approach of analyzing the determinants of state tax policy changes by estimating a probit
of the likelihood that a state has a tax policy change based on how observable economic and tax policy conditions such
as state per capita income growth, state corporate tax rates, state income tax rates, and the apportionment weights of
other states relate to apportionment formula and tax rate policy changes. The results, which are discussed in Appendix
A.6, are in Appendix Tables A34 and A35.
  22                        Wis
     In particular, awis ⌘   W
                                 is the payroll activity share. Payroll and sales shares are defined analogously. See
Appendix A.3.1 for more detail on apportionment rules.
  23
     This assumption corresponds to the case where all goods are perfectly traded, as in our model. We use broad
industry groups in order to link SIC and NAICS codes when calculating GDP by state-industry-year.



                                                          15
changes while states in the Midwest and Rust Belt changed rates more frequently. This figure shows
that changes in state corporate tax rates did not come form a particular region of the U.S. State
corporate tax changes are not only frequent but they can also be sizable. Of the 1470 PUMA-decade
observations in the main dataset, there are hundreds of sizable changes in both aspects of corporate
tax policy over three periods of interest: 1980-1990, 1990-2000, and 2000-2010.24
   States also vary in the apportionment rates that they use. Table 3 provides summary statistics of
apportionment weights. Since the late 1970s, apportionment weights generally placed equal weight
on payroll, property, and sales activity, setting ✓sw = ✓s⇢ = ✓sx = 13 . For instance, 80% of states used
an equal-weighting scheme in 1980. However, many states have increased their sales weights over the
past few decades as shown in Figure 3. In 2010, the average sales weight is two-thirds and less than
25% of states still maintain sales apportionment weights of 33%.

4.2.2    Local Business Tax Rate

We combine measures of state personal income tax rates from Zidar (2014) (see Appendix A.3.3 for
details) and local e↵ective corporate tax rates that account for apportionment to construct a measure
of the change in average taxes that local businesses pay:

                     ln(1    ⌧ b )c,t,t   h
                                                  SC
                                              ⌘ fc,t h   ln(1     ⌧ c )c,t,t    h
                                                                                       MC
                                                                                    + fc,t h     ln(1        ⌧¯D )c,t,t   h
                                                |                                   {z                                    }
                                                                               Corporate
                                                          SC        MC
                                                + (1     fc,t h    fc,t,t  h)        ln(1      ⌧ i )c,t,t   h,                (20)
                                                  |                       {z                                }
                                                                       Personal

where h 2 {1, 10} is the number of years over which the di↵erence is measured, fc,tSC is the fraction of
                                                                 M C is the fraction of local establish-
local establishments that are single-state C-corporations, and fc,t
                                            25
ments that are multi-state C-corporations. While this measure captures several key features of local
business taxation, we made a number of simplifying assumptions in generating ⌧ b due to data limita-
tions and feasibility.26 We discuss these assumptions and tax measurement details in Appendix A.3.4.
Overall, changes in corporate tax rates, apportionment weights, and personal income tax rates gen-
erate considerable variation in e↵ective tax rates across time and space. Table 3 provides summary
statistics of a few di↵erent measures of corporate tax changes over 10 year periods. The average log
change over 10 years in corporate taxes due only to statutory corporate rates ln(1 ⌧ c )c,t,t 10 is
near zero and varies less than measures based on business taxes that incorporate the complexities of
apportionment changes. Business tax changes ln(1 ⌧ b )c,t,t 10 are slightly more negative on average
over a ten-year period. The minimum and maximum values are less disperse than the measure based
on statuary rates since sales apportionment reduces location-specific changes in e↵ective corporate
tax rates. Overall, 76% of the variation in ln(1 ⌧ b )c,t,t 10 is due to policy variation (changes in
tax rates and apportionment rules).
  24
     Specifically, Appendix Figure A6 shows a histogram of non-zero tax changes in corporate tax rates in Panel (a) and
in payroll apportionment rates in Panel (b).
  25
     These shares are from County Business Patterns and RefUSA. C-corps accounted for roughly half of employment
and one-third of establishments in 2010. Yagan (2015) notes that switching between corporate types is rare empirically.
  26
     For instance, partnerships and sole-proprietors pay taxes based on the location of the owner and not the establish-
ment. For simplicity, we assume that owners of passthrough entities are located in the same state as the establishment.
Additionally, using aggregated-average rates is not directly justified by the model, so our estimates are approximations.




                                                                  16
4.3    Calibrated Parameters
We calibrate two parameters when implementing the reduced-form formulae in Table 1: the ratio of
the capita to labor output elasticities ( / ) and the housing expenditure share (↵). We use .9 for the
ratio of output elasticities based on data from the Bureau of Economic Analysis. BEA’s 2012 data on
shares of gross output by industry indicate that for private industries, compensation and intermediate
inputs account for 28.5% and 45.6% respectively; the ratio 1 .285.285
                                                                      .456
                                                                           ⇡ .9. Our baseline results use
↵ = .3, which we obtain using data from the Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX).27

                        Table 2: Calibrated Parameters used in Incidence Formulae

   Parameter                         Values                                            Sources
   Parameters for Reduced-Form Implementation
   Ratio of Elasticities: /     {0.90,0.50,0.75}                                 BEA
   Housing Cost Share: ↵        {0.30,0.50,0.65}                    CEX, Albouy (2008), (Moretti, 2013)

   Additional Parameters for Structural Implementation
   Output Elasticity of Labor:    {0.15,0.20,0.25}     IRS, BEA, Kline and Moretti (2014)
   Elasticity of Product             {-2.5,-3.5,    Between Head and Mayer (2013) and
   Demand: "P D                      Estimated}           "LD in Hamermesh (1993)

Notes: This table shows the sources and values for calibrated parameters. Baseline values are noted in bold font.

    We calibrate two additional parameters for the structural estimation: the output elasticity of
labor and the product demand elasticity "P D . We present results for calibrations for wide ranges
of both parameters. We choose a baseline of = .15, which is close to other values used in the local
labor markets literature (e.g., Kline and Moretti (2014) use 1 ↵           = 1 .3 .47 = .23 in their
notation) and is based on cost shares from IRS and BEA. For our baseline "P D , we use values that
                                                            28

are slightly lower that in the macro and trade literatures (e.g., Coibion, Gorodnichenko and Wieland
(2012); Arkolakis et al. (2013)) in order to obtain "LD values that are closer to those used in the labor
literature (Hamermesh, 1993). We also provide specifications in which we estimate "P D directly.
    Table 2 summarizes our choices for calibrated parameters as well as references for each parameter.
Our baseline values are presented in bold and we also include alternative values that we consider
in order to explore the robustness of our results. We also make other implicit calibrations from our
modeling of preferences and technologies. In preferences, the income elasticity and elasticity of sub-
stitution for housing are both set to one. These assumptions result in a constant share of expenditure
on housing, ↵, which yields a constant elasticity of labor supply, "LS . In terms of technologies, the
production function has constant returns to scale and unit elasticity of substitution among capital,
labor, and intermediate goods. This setup a↵ects the scale and substitution components in Equation
8 and thus the elasticity of labor demand, "LD .
  27
     Similar values of this parameter are used by Notowidigdo (2013) and Suárez Serrato and Wingender (2011) and, as
Moretti (2013) notes, the Bureau of Labor and Statistics uses a cost share of 32% for shelter. However, we consider larger
values as well because Albouy (2008) and Moretti (2013) note that housing prices are related to non-housing “home-
goods” which increases the e↵ective cost share and Diamond (2012) also estimates a higher value of this parameter.
  28
     The IRS SOI data are from the most recent year available (2003) and can be downloaded at http://www.irs.gov/
uac/SOI-Tax-Stats-Integrated-Business-Data. These data show that costs of goods sold are substantially larger
                                Salaries and Wages
than labor costs and that Salaries and Wages + COGS
                                                    = .153. Results based on revenue and cost shares from earlier years
available are similar. BEA data on gross output for private industries show similar patterns as well.


                                                           17
5    Reduced-Form Results and Incidence Estimates
We use changes in state tax rates and apportionment formulas to estimate the reduced-form e↵ects
of local business tax changes on population, the number of establishments, wages, and rents. We
estimate Equation 17 for a given outcome Y as the first-di↵erence over a 10-year period:

                 ln Yc,t   ln Yc,t   10   =   Y
                                                  [ln(1    b
                                                          ⌧c,t )   ln(1    b
                                                                          ⌧c,t   10 )]   + D0s,t   LD
                                                                                                   s,t   + uc,t ,   (21)

where ln Yc,t ln Yc,t 10 is approximately outcome growth over ten years, [ln(1 ⌧c,t       b ) ln(1 ⌧ b
                                                                                                       c,t 10 )]
is the change in the net-of-business-tax-rate over ten years, and Ds,t is a vector with year dummies as
well as state dummies for states in the industrial Midwest in the 1980s, and where a county-group fixed
e↵ect is absorbed in the long-di↵erence.29 This regression measures the degree to which larger tax cuts
are associated with greater economic activity. The validity of the reduced-form estimate Y depends
on the assumption that tax shocks conditional on fixed e↵ects are uncorrelated with the residual
term, i.e., E uc,t |[ln(1 ⌧c,t
                             b )  ln(1 ⌧c,tb
                                               10 )], Ds,t = 0. This assumption would be violated by
potentially confounding elements such as concomitant changes in the tax base, government spending,
and productivity shocks. From a dynamic perspective, a violation would also occur if tax changes
are the result of adverse local economic conditions that also determine the long-di↵erence in a given
outcome Y . We support this identifying assumption by showing that the main reduced-form e↵ects of
local business taxes on our outcomes are not a↵ected by changes in a number of potential confounders
and by showing that the tax changes are not related to prior economic conditions.
    Table 4 provides results of long-di↵erences specifications that account for these potential concerns
for the establishment location equation. Column (1) shows that a 1% cut in business taxes causes
a 4.07% increase in establishment growth increase over a ten-year period. Column (2) controls for
other measures of labor demand shocks. The point estimate declines slightly, but 2 tests indicate
that ˆE estimates are not statistically di↵erent than the estimate in Column (1). To the extent that
cuts in corporate taxes are not fully self-financing, states may have to adjust other policies when they
cut corporate taxes. Column (3) controls for changes in state investment tax credits and Column (4)
controls for changes in per capita government spending. There is no evidence that either confounds
the reduced form estimate ˆE . Column (5) uses variation in the external tax rates from changes in
other states’ tax rates and rules, [ln(1 ⌧c,tE ) ln(1 ⌧ E
                                                           c,t 10 )]. This specification has three interesting
results. First, the point estimate of changes in business taxes is 3.9%, which is close to the estimate of
 ˆE without controls in Column (1). Second, the point estimate from external tax changes is roughly
equal and opposite to the estimates of ˆE . This symmetry in e↵ects indicates that external tax
shocks based on state apportionment rules have comparable e↵ects to domestic business tax changes.
  2 tests show that the e↵ects of domestic and external changes are statistically indistinguishable (in

absolute value). Third, one potential concern is that firms do not appear responsive to tax changes
because they expect other states to match tax cuts as might be expected in tax competition models.
By holding other state changes constant, we find no evidence that expectations of future tax cuts
lower establishment mobility. Column (6) controls for all of these potentially confounding elements
simultaneously. The point estimate of E is robust to including all of these controls.
    Figure 4 shows that the long-di↵erence estimate is similar to the cumulative e↵ects of a one-percent
cut in local business taxes over a ten-year period. This relationship holds even when adjusting for
the years of prior economic activity as shown in Figure 4 (see Appendix E.1 for more detail). This
  29
     Figure 2 shows more tax changes in the industrial midwest, so we include these dummies to avoid the concern that
this regional variation is driving our results. Appendix Table A23 shows main results for di↵erent fixed-e↵ects.


                                                              18
evidence, based on annual changes in establishment growth and business taxes, suggests that (1)
business tax cuts tend to increase establishment growth over a five-to-ten-year period and (2) business
tax changes do not occur in response to abnormally good or bad local economic conditions. These
dynamic patterns establishing the validity of local business tax variation also hold for population (see
Appendix Figure A8).30 For brevity, the ten-year results for the other three outcomes – population,
wages, and rental cost – are only shown for the first two specifications in Panel B; the full tables
with all six specifications are provided in Appendix Tables A6, A7, and A8. Non-parametric graphs
showing the relationship between outcome changes and business tax changes over a 10 year period
are shown for each outcome in Appendix Figures A10, A11, A12, and A13, respectively.

5.1    Incidence Estimates
Having established the validity of these reduced-form estimates, we can now implement the incidence
formulae in Table 1; the estimates for incidence and shares of incidence are presented in Table 5.
    Column (1) shows results using the baseline reduced-form specification, Equation 21. Panel A
shows that a 1% cut in business taxes increases real wages by 1.1% over a ten-year period. Rental costs
and profits also increase. In contrast to the conventional view that 100% of the burden of corporate
taxation falls on workers in an open economy, the estimated share of the burden for workers is only
28% as shown in Panel B. This estimate is precise enough to reject the conventional view on its
own. Firm owners bear 42% of the incidence and landowners bear 30%. The landowner estimate is
less precise, perhaps reflecting in part regional housing supply heterogeneity. Column (2) shows that
workers bear a slightly smaller share of incidence when ↵ = .65. Firm owner shares increase when
 / = .5. Columns (4) and (5) show that these incidence results are robust to controlling for Bartik
labor demand shocks and personal income tax changes. Firm owners bear roughly 40 to 45% of the
incidence of state corporate taxes in each of these specifications. Formal conventional view tests,
which evaluate the joint hypothesis that the share of incidence for workers equals 100% and the share
for firm owners equals 0%, are unambiguously rejected across all specifications.31
    We use the relation between reduced-form estimates and incidence expressions in Table 1 to
establish the robustness of these results. First, we explore the role of additional control variables. We
show that our results are robust to including a wide-variety of controls: many dimensions of the state
tax base and rules (Appendix Table A19) as well as state political controls, changes in other state tax
rates and rules (including sales tax rates, income tax rates, and whether the state has gross receipt
taxes), and changes in fiscal and economic conditions in Appendix Table A20. Second, we explore how
di↵erent sources of variation a↵ect our results. Column (6) of Table 5 and Appendix Table A21 show
that using statutory state corporate tax rates in Equation 21 (instead of business tax rates ⌧ b ) results
in similar and significant estimates, indicating that our measure of business tax rates is not crucial for
the results.32 Moreover, using estimates from other sources of variation, such as the absolute value
of the external tax change estimate from Table 4 Column (5), delivers similar incidence results to
those in Tables 5, A20, and A21. Third, we consider alternate ways to account for changes in local
  30
     Wage and rental cost data are only available every ten years, so making comparable graphs is not possible.
  31
     One advantage of our reduced-form incidence formulae is that they combine the information in the four point
estimates and their covariances. Thus, while individual coefficients might not be statistically di↵erent from zero, the
combination of parameters in our formulae can yield estimates of incidence shares that are statistically significant.
  32
     Since not all firms are C-corportions, using variation from this rate results in lower “intent-to-treat” reduced-form
e↵ects. However, we still recover the firm’s valuation of increasing wages, i.e., ("P D + 1), since this number is a ratio
of our reduced-form coefficients and the “intent-to-treat” aspect e↵ectively cancels out.



                                                           19
prices in Appendix G. Accounting for these impacts yields similar estimates to our baseline incidence
estimates.33 Fourth, we explore the ability of incidence expressions in Table 1 to accommodate the
possibility that firm owners do not bear incidence based on conjectured reduced-form impacts that
would be consistent with this view.34 Thus, our approach does not necessarily imply that firm owners
will get a large share of incidence.
    Although we do not have access to direct measures of firm profits,35 evidence from the best mea-
sures available align with the firm owner estimates. Figure A9 shows that state gross operating surplus
(GOS), revenue less labor compensation and taxes on production and imports, increases following
business tax cuts with very little pre-trend. This result provides direct evidence that payments to
firm owners are increasing following business tax cuts. We make two adjustments to GOS to make
it correspond more closely to ⇡. First, we calculate GOS per establishment. Second, we account
for the consumption of fixed capital, which is 44% of GOS on average during the sample period of
1980 to 2010 (NIPA Table 1.14). Table A10 shows the e↵ect of a one percent cut in business tax
cuts on gross operating surplus per establishment ranges from 3.5 to 4.2% over a ten year period.
Multiplying these e↵ects by (1-.44) yields an estimated increase of 1.96 to 2.35% in net operating
surplus per establishment over a ten year period. Sales tax revenue per establishment also provides
a supplementary measure of profit growth.36 Table A11 shows that this measure increases between
2.15 to 2.27%. Both of these estimates are close to the firm owner estimates in Panel A of Table 5.
    Panel B of Table 1 shows that the reduced-form e↵ects have implications not only for incidence,
but also for structural parameters. Table A16 presents the implied values of these parameters based
on a set of specifications used to construct Table 5 and calibrated values of ↵ and . The implied
structural parameters are not precisely estimated and, while the signs of parameters F and "P D do
not match predictions from our theory, we cannot reject these restrictions at the 5% level.
    We follow two strategies to increase the precision of our structural estimates and to alleviate
concerns that our main result is not reliant on these issues. First, we further calibrate the parameter
"P D and show that, conditional on values of ↵, and "P D , all other parameters have the signs predicted
by theory. This calibration generates the following testable restriction: E = N ( ("P D +1) 1) W ,
which constrains the micro-elasticity of demand. Table A16 shows that the data do not reject this
restriction. Second, we use additional sources of variation to increase the precision of our estimates.
The following section augments our reduced-form model to include personal taxes and a productivity
shock due to Bartik (1991). The details of the exact reduced-forms with all three shocks are presented
in Appendix E.5.
  33
     In addition, unlike the local labor market responses to some types of shocks (e.g., import competition shocks in
Autor, Dorn and Hanson (2013), who find larger e↵ects on employment than on population), in our context we observe
very similar employment and population responses to business tax changes over a ten-year period (see Appendix Tables
A6 and A9), which suggests that abstracting from the employment/non-employment margin over a ten-year period does
not materially change the welfare calculations or incidence estimates. We present reduced-form incidence estimates
using employment in Appendix Table A18.
  34
     For instance, if the estimates for N , R , W , E were 1.35, 1.41, 1.74, and 4.88, then firm owners would get 5% of
the incidence. We interpret this example as a set of plausible, counterfactual parameter estimates that show that these
expressions do not mechanically deliver the result that firm owners bear a substantial share of incidence.
  35
     Ideally, we could have firm-level profit data that can be aggregated to the local labor market level.
  36
     In the model with fixed markups, profits and sales are proportional. Equation 27 shows pijc yijc = µyijc cijc )
 p                                              p    y
⇡ijc = pijc yijc yijc cijc = pijc yijc (1 µ1 ) = ijc"P ijc
                                                       D , i.e., pre-tax profits are sales divided by "P D .




                                                          20
6        Structural Estimation
We estimate the model parameters and structural elasticities that rationalize the treatment e↵ects
from the previous two sections. We use a classical minimum distance (CMD) estimator (see, e.g.,
Chamberlain (1984)) to find the parameters that best match the moments m(✓) = Business Tax to
the reduced form e↵ects ˆ :
                                    ˆ = arg min [ ˆ
                                    ✓                     m(✓)]0 V̂   1
                                                                          [ˆ   m(✓)],                                 (22)
                                              ✓2⇥

where V̂ is the inverse variance of the OLS estimate, and m(✓) is the moment predicted by our
model.37 We initially use only variation from tax changes, which provides the four moments from
Equation 17, and then supplement this approach with four additional moments from a Bartik lo-
cal labor demand shock Bartik and four moments from personal income tax changes Personal Tax ,
increasing the precision of our estimates. The supplemental variation from these shocks provides
over-identifying restrictions that enable us to test the goodness-of-fit and assess model predictions.38
Taking a more structured approach allows for more flexibility to match the data and likely results
in more accurate estimates of both incidence and model parameters. Ultimately, however, the esti-
mates in the next section shows that the structural incidence results are similar to the reduced-form
incidence results in Table 5.
    Table A32 shows that we match the moments well and that adding supplemental variation im-
proves fit. Our model does not reject the test of over-identifying restrictions or the restriction that
  E = N      ( ("P D + 1) 1) W imposed by our calibration of "P D in any of the specifications. Note
that these restrictions are identical in the model that only relies on the moments from business taxes
and thus have identical p-values.
    Table 6 shows parameter estimates from using only business tax shocks (panel B) and using all
three shocks (panel A and C). Panel A and B show results for di↵erent calibrated values of the output
elasticity of labor and the product demand elasticity "P D and panel C estimates "P D directly. Our
baseline specification Column (1) using all shocks yields an estimate for the productivity dispersion
ˆ F = 0.28(SE = 0.14).39 The estimate for preference dispersion ˆ W = 0.83(SE = 0.28) is larger.
The elasticity of housing supply, which is likely heterogenous across local areas, is ⌘ˆ = 0.51(SE = 1.4)
is statistically insignificant. Columns (2)-(7) show the e↵ects of di↵erent calibrated values of , ↵,
and "P D . Recall that, by calibrating both and "P D , we place a restriction among our reduced-form
estimates. We test this restriction and find that it is not rejected by the data (p-values range from
.39 to .51). The results using only business tax variation are less precise, especially for the housing
supply elasticity. Panel C shows that using all shocks and estimating "P D produces similar dispersion
parameters and a reasonable but imprecise estimate of the product demand elasticity of roughly -4.7.

6.1      Parameter-based Incidence Estimates and Structural Elasticities
The corresponding incidence results are provided in Table 7. Incidence estimates based on estimated
parameter values are similar to those in Table 5. Figure 5 plots these results and shows that our
    37
     The parameters are the dispersion of productivity F and preferences W , the elasticity of substitution across
varieties "P D , the elasticity of housing supply ⌘, the housing expenditure share ↵, and the output elasticity of labor .
  38
     See Appendix E.5.4 for more detail on goodness-of-fit and over-identification tests. Appendix E shows that alter-
native approaches yield similar parameter estimates.
  39
     The estimates in Panel B and C are similar to those in Appendix Figure A17. Note that this estimate⇣      depends on
                                                                                                                        ⌘
technological assumptions mentioned in Section 4.3 and on the values of and "P D through: F = 1E "P D1+1              W
                                                                                                                          .


                                                            21
baseline values of = 0.15, "P D = 2.5, and ↵ = 0.30 give a conservative share of the incidence to
firm owners. Panel (a) shows that using calibrations with more elastic product demand elasticities,
while holding the output elasticity of labor constant at = 0.15, does not change the result that the
share to firm owners is roughly 40 to 50%. Increasing the calibrated output elasticity of labor generally
increases the share accruing to firm owners. Panel (b) shows that varying ↵ also does not change
the result that the share to firm owners is roughly 40 to 50%. Table 7 shows that for our baseline
parameters,firm owners bear 36.5% and landowners bear 41%, leaving workers with substantially
less than 100% of the burden. Note that the share to land owners varies between 20 to 40% across
specifications, reflecting imprecise housing supply elasticity estimates.40
     The e↵ective labor supply and labor demand curves are key determinants of the incidence. The
bottom of Table 7 shows the estimated supply and demand elasticities corresponding to the three
CMD estimators. The supply elasticities are slightly less than one in most specifications, but range
between .75 and 4.2, which is similar to ranges found in the literature (e.g., Bartik (1991); Notowidigdo
(2013); Albouy and Stuart (2013)). They are somewhat less precise due to imprecision in housing
supply elasticity parameters. When the housing supply is large, house prices do not get bid up quickly
and discourage people from moving, resulting in larger e↵ective labor supply elasticities. However,
even in the specifications with larger housing supply elasticities, incidence results are comparable to
other specifications. In particular, Column (4), which has "ˆLS = 4.2, shows that firm owners bear
45%, workers bear 29% and landowners bear the rest.
     On the demand side, elasticity estimates are more precise and range between -1.7 and -3. The
first two CMD estimators in Columns (1) and (2) show micro elasticities of labor demand of -1.2
and macro elasticities of roughly -2. While there are few estimates of the average slope of local
labor demand, perhaps as a consequence of common assumptions of a representative firm (Card,
2011) and its implied infinite labor demand elasticity (Kline, 2010), our estimates are consistent with
values cited in the literature. In particular, based on estimates from Hamermesh (1993), Kline and
Moretti (2014) use a macro elasticity of local labor demand of -1.5. Column (5), which is estimates
rather than calibrates "P D , illustrates the link between scale e↵ects and the labor demand elasticity.
Since our estimate of "P D is not precise, imprecision in the scale e↵ects cause imprecise estimates of
"ˆLD = 2.9(SE = 6.7). Importantly, the incidence results with more elastic labor demand do not
imply a small share of the burden on firm owners; the parameters consistent with a highly elastic
labor demand curve also imply large shifts in labor demand.
     Overall, these results in Table 7 show that workers do not bear 100% of state corporate taxes.
Landowners often bear some of the increase in wages, which many empirical analyses of corporate tax
incidence attribute as gains to workers. The incidence on firm owners in Columns (1) through (4) as
well as for a wide variety of reasonable calibration values is statistically significant and economically
important. The bottom line of these results is that firm owners bear a substantial burden of the
incidence of U.S. state corporate taxes.
  40
    We consider limiting cases where one actor bears all of the incidence in Appendix C.3. Workers bear 0% of the
incidence when W = 0 and landowners bear 0% of the incidence when ⌘ ! 1. By contrast, firm owners may receive
0% of the incidence even when F > 0. In addition, note that landowner and worker versions of Figure 5 are Appendix
Figures A18 and A19, respectively. Finally, Figure A20 shows the firm owner figure using employment-based estimates
rather than population-based estimates (i.e., using the estimates in Table A9 instead of A6). The results are similar.




                                                         22
6.2    Discussion of Additional Considerations
It is important to note that we document average e↵ects, but there is likely heterogeneity in the e↵ects
of corporate tax cuts across regions.41 For instance, housing markets vary considerably, which a↵ects
the incidence of local corporate tax cuts. Our results should be interpreted as national averages, but
location-specific considerations can alter local incidence and optimal local corporate tax policy.
     The close relationship between the number of establishments and local population is notable.
Future work analyzing the role that co-location of firms and entrepreneurs is worth pursuing.
     Our baseline approach did not account for the e↵ects of business tax cuts on tax revenue and
government spending. In Appendix F, we provide a detailed, quantitative assessment of incidence
that accounts for changes in government spending. We adjust the model to allow workers and firms
to benefit from government spending and use estimates from Suárez Serrato and Wingender (2011)
to quantify how much incorporating these e↵ects changes our incidence results. We evaluate three
cases for how government spending declines: cutting services only, infrastructure only, or both in
proportion to state finance spending. Since governments spend more on services than they do on
infrastructure, workers’ government amenities decline disproportionately more. Accounting for these
worker impacts increases the share of benefits firm owners enjoy overall. In the infrastructure-only
case, spending cuts hurt firm owners, but they also hurt workers because lower infrastructure reduces
productivity and negative productivity shocks hurt workers. Consequently, accounting for government
spending changes reinforces the conclusion that firm owners enjoy a substantial portion of the benefit
of business tax cuts. Finally, changes in our main results due to this consideration are limited because
the revenue e↵ects of a business tax cut (and resulting spending declines) can be limited due to low
revenue shares from state corporate taxes as well as fiscal externalities from impacts on larger sales
and personal income tax bases.42


7     Tax Revenue and Policy Implications
Since the magnitude of these revenue e↵ects is important, we analyze expected changes in tax revenue
following a state corporate tax cut and characterize the revenue-maximizing tax rate. Firm mobility
is an often-cited justification in proposals to lower states’ corporate tax rates. In this section, we
explore whether firm mobility is a compelling reason to lower or eliminate state corporate taxes.
Additionally, we consider how interactions with other state tax revenues, such as personal income
taxes, and with features of apportionment rules a↵ect this conclusion.
    Consider first the e↵ect of a corporate tax cut solely on the corporate tax income revenues of a
given state. In Appendix D, we show that the corporate-tax-revenue-maximizing corporate tax rate
   41
      For example, places like Houston, Texas, which have real estate markets that can accommodate large inflows of
people without large housing costs increases, have more elastic e↵ective labor supply curves "LS . Housing supply curves
may also di↵er across location as the housing expenditure share ↵ varies across location. Corporate tax cuts in these
places will tend to result in more adjustment in population than in prices. Consequently, location decision distortions,
and thus efficiency costs, are likely to be larger in these areas. This statement applies in the absence of other market
failures a↵ecting these areas. In terms of equity, lower adjustment in prices means less incidence on workers. Lower
adjustments in prices, however, benefit firm owners since labor costs will not increase by as much as they would in places
like San Francisco, California, where housing markets are less elastic. Based on this reasoning, the efficiency and equity
consequences of corporate tax cuts will be bigger in places like Houston. In locations like San Francisco, the efficiency
costs are likely less stark and corporate tax cuts will result in more non-firm incidence on landowners.
   42
      Additionally, in terms of externalities, our model abstracts from wage multiplier e↵ects (Tolley, 1974). Furthermore,
due to income taxes, workers receive only a portion of the benefit of higher wages. Abstracting from this consideration
implicitly assumes that income taxes provide benefits that are valued at cost in terms of government service provision.


                                                            23
equals the following expression.
                                                          1
                                               ⌧c⇤ =            (1    tf ed ).
                                                       ˙⇡
                                                       ¯c + Ėc
This expression shows that the revenue-maximizing corporate tax rate is inversely related to the
e↵ects of corporate tax changes on average establishment profitability and on establishment mobility.
Recall that ⇡¯˙ c denotes average percentage change in after-tax profit, Ėc is the percentage change in
establishments in location c, and tf ed is the federal corporate tax rate. Based on our estimates of
average national parameters, we find that establishment mobility on its own does not justify a low
maximal tax rate. In particular, using estimates from Table 7, Column (1), we calculate the maximal
tax rate and report the results in Table 8 for selected states. This rate is roughly 32%, substantially
above current state corporate tax rates.43
    However, this calculation does not account for fiscal externalities on other aspects of local public
finance that are quantitatively important. For instance, one can show that the total state tax revenue
maximizing corporate rate equals the following expression:
                                                       1
                        ⌧c⇤⇤ =                                                  (1            tf ed ),
                                 ¯c + Ėc + (revsharec /revshareC
                                 ˙⇡                  pers
                                                                c )(ẇc + Ṅc )

where revsharepers
                 c   /revshareCc is the relative share of personal tax revenues and corporate tax revenues.
This additional term in the denominator reflects revenue externalities from reduced personal income
and sales tax revenue due to worker mobility. Since state personal income and state sales tax revenue
comprise a larger share of total tax revenue for almost all states, including this extra term in the
denominator lowers the revenue-maximizing corporate tax rate all else equal (e.g., the amenity and
productivity e↵ects of government spending). We present these revenue shares for a few selected states
in Table 8 and provide these statistics for all states in Appendix D. In California, for example, the
personal to corporate revenue share in 2010 was 9.2%. Based on national averages of the percentage
                                                                    ˙
change in wages ŵ˙ c and the percentage change in population N̂c , the revenue-maximizing rate absent
                       ⇤ = 32.0% exceed the revenue-maximizing rate with fiscal externalities ⌧ ⇤⇤ =
fiscal externalities ⌧CA                                                                              CA
3.7% by a factor of 9. This di↵erence in revenue-maximizing rates is smaller in states that raise a
relatively smaller share of their revenue from personal income and sales taxes.
    In addition to fiscal externalities, there are also important and interesting complexities in determin-
ing the revenue-maximizing rate due to apportionment. The relevant rate that incorporates apportion-
            ⇤⇤
ment is 1⌧c✓x . This rate scales up ⌧c⇤⇤ since only a portion of state corporate taxes, namely the payroll
              s
and property components, distort location decisions. Since sales apportionment is destination-based,
it does not distort location decisions (absent trade costs) and allows for higher revenue-maximizing
tax rates. Reducing the location dependence of corporate taxes increases the revenue-maximizing rate
                                                                                                     ⇤⇤
since it alleviates the costs of fiscal externalities mentioned above. We present calculations of 1⌧c✓x for
                                                                                                       s
a few selected states in the last Column of Table 8. A comparison of New Mexico and Arizona illus-
trates the importance of apportionment considerations. As shown in Table 8, New Mexico’s statutory
corporate tax rate ⌧N   c                                              c
                          M was 7.6% in 2010 and Arizona’s rate ⌧AZ was 7.0%. New Mexico used an
  43
     Note that this measure varies slightly across states due to di↵erences in state size. A corporate tax cut in large
states like California a↵ects more local areas simultaneously, which slightly diminishes the e↵ect of a tax cut to an
extent that depends on the state’s establishment share (as shown in Appendix D). We adjust our estimates of the
percent change in local establishments Ėc by state to account for this simultaneous impact based on state size. The
first corporate-revenue-maximizing tax rate, ⌧s⇤ = Ė +
                                                      1
                                                        ⇡
                                                        ˙
                                                          (1 tf ed ), is a function of this state-size-adjusted establishment
                                                       s   c
response Ės and the estimate of national average change in profits ⇡˙ c from Table 7, Column (1).


                                                               24
                                               w        ⇢    x
equal-weighted apportionment formula with ✓N     M = ✓N M = ✓N M = 33% in 2010. Arizona, however,
                                      x
put much more weight on sales as ✓AZ = 80%. As a result, New Mexico’s revenue-maximizing rate
was roughly four times smaller than that of Arizona despite only a 0.6 percentage point di↵erence in
                                                  ⌧ ⇤⇤               ⌧ ⇤⇤
their statutory corporate rates. In particular, 1 N✓xM = 2.1% and 1 AZ  x
                                                                       ✓AZ = 8.3%. Perhaps for this
                                                     NM
reason, we have seen more states shift more weight towards the sales factor ✓sx as shown in Figure 3.
Overall, other tax factors, including apportionment formulae and di↵erences in the reliance on other
sources of tax revenue, account for the large geographic variation in the total revenue-maximizing
state corporate tax rates that range from 0.7% to 36.1%.


8    Conclusion
This paper evaluates the welfare e↵ects of cutting corporate income taxes on business owners, workers,
and landowners. This question is important for three reasons. First, the conventional view among
many economists and policy makers – that workers fully bear the incidence of corporate taxes in
an open economy – is based on fairly abstract arguments and less than fully convincing evidence.
Second, evaluating the welfare e↵ect of corporate taxes also highlights efficiency consequences of
corporate taxation and has direct implications for revenue-maximizing rates. Third, the welfare
impacts of corporate tax cuts closely relate to the welfare impacts of a broad class of local economic
development policies that aim to entice businesses to locate in their jurisdictions.
    We estimate the incidence of corporate taxes in four steps. First, we develop a local labor markets
framework with heterogeneously productive and monopolistically competitive firms. This framework
not only enables us to characterize the incidence on workers, firms, and landowners in terms of a
few parameters, but it can also be used to answer other important questions, such as the welfare
impacts of business location subsidies for individual companies, optimal local tax policy, and the inci-
dence of technological change. Second, we use state corporate tax apportionment rules and matched
establishment-firm data to construct a new measure of the e↵ective tax rate that businesses pay at
the local level. Third, we relate changes in these e↵ective rates to local outcomes and show that a 1%
cut in business taxes increases establishment growth by 3 to 4% over a ten-year period. Fourth, and
most importantly, we combine these three components – a new framework, a new measure of business
taxes, and new reduced form e↵ects of business taxes – to estimate the incidence of corporate taxes
on firm owners, workers, and landowners.
    Three types of evidence support the validity of our incidence estimates. First, we show that our
reduced-form incidence estimates are robust to controlling for trends economic conditions, local labor
demand shocks, government spending changes, and a wide variety of other tax policy changes. Second,
estimates using external business tax changes from other states imply similar incidence estimates.
Third, the structural elasticities that rationalize our estimates are similar to those in the literature.
    We unambiguously reject the view that workers bear 100% of the incidence of state corporate
tax cuts and find that firm owners bear a substantial portion of the incidence. The intuition for this
result is that non-tax considerations, namely heterogeneous productivity, can limit the mobility of
businesses. If a business is especially productive in a given location, small changes in taxes won’t have
large enough impacts on profitability to make changing locations attractive. For instance, technology
firms may still find it optimal to locate in Silicon Valley, even if corporate tax rates were increased
modestly. Consequently, firm owners bear a substantial portion of the incidence of corporate tax
changes, a result that starkly contrasts with the conventional wisdom.



                                                   25
References
Albouy, David. 2008. “Are Big Cities Bad Places to Live? Estimating Quality of Life across
 Metropolitan Areas.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 14472.
Albouy, David, and Bryan Stuart. 2013. “Urban Population and Amenities.” University of Michi-
 gan Working Paper.
Albouy, David, and Gabriel Ehrlich. 2012. “Metropolitan Land Values and Housing Productiv-
 ity.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 18110.
Arkolakis, Costas, Natalia Ramondo, Andrés Rodrı́guez-Clare, and Stephen Yeaple.
 2013. “Innovation and Production in the Global Economy.” National Bureau of Economic Research
 Working Paper 18972.
Arulampalam, Wiji, Michael P. Devereux, and Giorgia Maffini. 2012. “The direct incidence
 of corporate income tax on wages.” European Economic Review, 56(6): 1038 – 1054.
Auerbach, Alan J. 2002. “Taxation and Corporate Financial Policy.” In Handbook of Public Eco-
 nomics. Vol. 3. 1 ed., , ed. Alan J. Auerbach and Martin Feldstein, Chapter 19. Elsevier.
Auerbach, Alan J. 2006. “Who Bears the Corporate Tax? A Review of What We Know.” In Tax
 Policy and the Economy. Vol. 20, , ed. James Poterba, 1–40. The MIT Press.
Autor, David H., David Dorn, and Gordon H. Hanson. 2013. “The China Syndrome: Local
 Labor Market E↵ects of Import Competition in the United States.” American Economic Review,
 103(6): 2121–68.
Bartik, Timothy J. 1985. “Business Location Decisions in the United States: Estimates of the Ef-
 fects of Unionization, Taxes, and Other Characteristics of States.” Journal of Business & Economic
 Statistics, 3(1): 14–22.
Bartik, Timothy J. 1991. Who Benefits from State and Local Economic Development Policies?
 W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research.
Basker, Emek. 2005. “Selling a Cheaper Mousetrap: Wal-Mart’s E↵ect on Retail Prices.” Journal
 of Urban Economics, 58(2): 203–29.
Basu, Susanto. 1995. “Intermediate Goods and Business Cycles: Implications for Productivity and
 Welfare.” The American Economic Review, 85(3): pp. 512–531.
Beraja, Martin, Erik Hurst, and Juan Ospina. 2016. “The Aggregate Implications of Regional
 Business Cycles.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 21956.
Bernthal, Jamie, Dana Gavrila, Katie Schumacher, Shane Spencer, and Katherine Sydor.
 2012. “Single Sales-Factor Corporate Income Tax Apportionment: Evaluating the Impact in Wis-
 consin.” The Wisconsin Department of Revenue.
Bradford, David F. 1978. “Factor Prices May Be Constant But Factor Returns Are Not.” Economics
 Letters, 1(3): 199–203.
Busso, Matias, Jesse Gregory, and Patrick Kline. 2013. “Assessing the Incidence and Efficiency
 of a Prominent Place Based Policy.” American Economic Review, 103(2): 897–947.
Card, David. 2011. “The Return of the Firm to Labor Economics.” U.C. Berkeley.
Carlton, Dennis W. 1983. “The Location and Employment Choices of New Firms.” The Review of
 Economics and Statistics, 75(3).
CCH. 1980-2010. State Tax Handbook 1980-2010. CCH Incorporated State Tax Handbook, Toolkit
 Media Group.
Chamberlain, Gary. 1984. “Chapter 22 Panel data.” In . Vol. 2 of Handbook of Econometrics, 1247
 – 1318. Elsevier.


                                                26
Chirinko, Robert S., and Daniel J. Wilson. 2008. “State Investment Tax Incentives: A Zero-Sum
 Game?” Journal of Public Economics, 92(12).
Clausing, Kimberly. 2013. “Who Pays The Corporate Tax In A Global Economy?” National Tax
  Journal, 66(1): 151–84.
Coibion, Olivier, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, and Johannes Wieland. 2012. “The Optimal Infla-
 tion Rate in New Keynesian Models: Should Central Banks Raise Their Inflation Targets in Light
 of the Zero Lower Bound?” The Review of Economic Studies, 79(4): 1371–1406.
Cronin, Julie Anne, Emily Y. Lin, Laura Power, and Michael Cooper. 2013. “Distribut-
 ing The Corporate Income Tax: Revised U.S. Treasury Methodology.” National Tax Journal,
 66(1): 239–62.
CSG. 1976-2011. Book of the States. Council of State Governments.
Cullen, Zoe, and Juan Carlos Suárez Serrato. 2014. “State Corporate Taxes, Firm Mobility, and
 Innovation Productivity: Evidence from US patent data.” Stanford University and Duke University
 Working Paper.
Desai, Mihir A., C. Fritz Foley, and James R. Hines Jr. 2007. “Labor and Capital Shares
 of the Corporate Tax Burden: International Evidence.” Who Pays the Corporate Tax in an Open
 Economy?
Devereux, Michael P., and Rachel Griffith. 1998. “Taxes and the location of production: evi-
 dence from a panel of US multinationals.” Journal of Public Economics, 68(3): 335 – 367.
Devereux, Michael P, and Simon Loretz. 2007. “The E↵ects of EU Formula Apportionment on
 Corporate Tax Revenues.” Oxford University Centre for Business Taxation working paper.
Diamond, Rebecca. 2012. “The Determinants and Welfare Implications of US Workers’ Diverging
 Location Choices by Skill: 1980-2000.” Harvard University Job Market Paper.
Duranton, Gilles, Laurent Gobillon, and Henry G. Overman. 2011. “Assessing the E↵ects of
 Local Taxation using Microgeographic Data.” The Economic Journal, 121(555): 1017–1046.
Fajgelbaum, Pablo D., Eduardo Morales, Juan Carlos Suárez Serrato, and Owen M.
  Zidar. 2015. “State Taxes and Spatial Misallocation.” National Bureau of Economic Research
  Working Paper 21760.
Feldstein, Martin, and Marian Vaillant. 1998. “Can State Taxes Redistribute Income?” Journal
  of Public Economics, 68(3): 369–396.
Fuest, Clemens, Andreas Peichl, and Sebastian Siegloch. 2013. “Do Higher Corporate Taxes
  Reduce Wages? Micro Evidence from Germany.” Institute for the Study of Labor Discussion Paper.
Fullerton, Don, and Gilbert E. Metcalf. 2002. “Tax Incidence.” In Handbook of Public Eco-
  nomics. Vol. 4, , ed. Alan J. Auerbach and Martin Feldstein, Chapter 26. Elsevier.
Gentry, William M., and R. Glenn Hubbard. 2000. “Tax Policy and Entrepreneurial Entry.”
 American Economic Review, 90(2): 283–287.
Glaeser, Edward L. 2008. Cities, Agglomeration, and Spatial Equilibrium. Oxford University Press.
Glaeser, Edward L. 2012. “Urban Public Finance.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working
 Paper 18244.
Glaeser, Edward L., and Joseph Gyourko. 2005. “Urban Decline and Durable Housing.” Journal
 of Political Economy, 113(2): pp. 345–000.
Goolsbee, Austan, and Edward L. Maydew. 2000. “Coveting thy neighbor’s manufacturing:
 the dilemma of state income apportionment.” Journal of Public Economics, 75(1): 125 – 143.
Gordon, Roger H., and James R. Hines. 2002. “International taxation.” In Handbook of Public
 Economics. Vol. 4, , ed. Alan J. Auerbach and Martin Feldstein, 1935 – 1995. Elsevier.

                                               27
Gordon, Roger H., and John Douglas Wilson. 1986. “An Examination of Multijurisdictional
 Corporate Income Taxation under Formula Apportionment.” Econometrica, 54(6): 1357–73.
Gravelle, Jane, and Kent Smetters. 2006. “Does the Open Economy Assumption Really Mean
 That Labor Bears the Burden of a Capital Income Tax?” The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis
 & Policy, 6(1): 1–44.
Gravelle, Jennifer. 2011. “Corporate Tax Incidence: Corporate Tax Incidence: A Review of Em-
 pirical Estimates and Analysis.” Congressional Budget Office.
Gravelle, Jennifer C. 2010. “Corporate Tax Incidence: Review of General Equilibrium Estimates
 and Analysis.” Congressional Budget Office Working Paper 2010-03.
Greenstone, Michael, and Enrico Moretti. 2004. “Bidding for Industrial Plants: Does Winning
 a ‘Million Dollar Plant’ Increase Welfare?” MIT Department of Economics Working Paper 04-39.
Gyourko, Joseph, and Joseph Tracy. 1989. “The Importance of Local Fiscal Conditions in
 Analyzing Local Labor Markets.” Journal of Political Economy, 97(5): 1208–31.
Hall, Robert E., and Charles I. Jones. 1999. “Why do Some Countries Produce So Much More
 Output Per Worker than Others?” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114(1): 83–116.
Hamermesh, Daniel. 1993. Labor Demand. Princeton University Press.
Harberger, Arnold C. 1962. “The Incidence of the Corporation Income Tax.” Journal of Political
 Economy, 70(3): pp. 215–240.
Hassett, Kevin A., and Aparna Mathur. 2015. “A spatial model of corporate tax incidence.”
 Applied Economics, 47(13): 1350–1365.
Haughwout, Andrew F., and Robert P. Inman. 2001. “Fiscal policies in open cities with firms
 and households.” Regional Science and Urban Economics, 31(2-3): 147 – 180.
Head, K., and T. Mayer. 2013. “Gravity Equations: Workhorse,Toolkit, and Cookbook.” Handbook
 of International Economics Vol. 4.
Heider, Florian, and Alexander Ljungqvist. 2014. “As Certain as Debt and Taxes: Estimat-
 ing the Tax Sensitivity of Leverage from Exogenous State Tax Changes.” Journal of Financial
 Economics.
Helms, L. Jay. 1985. “The E↵ect of State and Local Taxes on Economic Growth: A Time Series–
 Cross Section Approach.” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 67(4): pp. 574–582.
Hendren, Nathaniel. 2015. “The Policy Elasticity.” Tax Policy and the Economy, Volume 30.
 University of Chicago Press.
Hines, James. 2009. “Income Misattribution under Formula Apportionment.” NBER working paper
 15185.
Hines, James R. 1997. “Altered States: Taxes and the Location of Foreign Direct Investment in
 America.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 4397.
Holmes, Thomas J. 1998. “The E↵ect of State Policies on the Location of Manufacturing: Evidence
 from State Borders.” Journal of Political Economy, 106(4): pp. 667–705.
Hopenhayn, Hugo A. 1992. “Entry, Exit, and Firm Dynamics in Long Run Equilibrium.” Econo-
 metrica, 60(5): pp. 1127–1150.
Kline, Patrick. 2010. “Place Based Policies, Heterogeneity, and Agglomeration.” American Eco-
 nomic Review, 100(2): 383–87.
Kline, Patrick, and Enrico Moretti. 2013. “People, Places, and Public Policy: Some Simple
 Welfare Economics of Local Economic Development Programs.” U.C. Berkeley Working Paper.



                                              28
Kline, Patrick, and Enrico Moretti. 2014. “Local Economic Development, Agglomeration
 Economies and the Big Push: 100 Years of Evidence from the Tennessee Valley Authority.” Quar-
 terly Journal of Economics.
Kotliko↵, Laurence J., and Lawrence H. Summers. 1987. “Tax Incidence.” In Handbook of
 Public Economics. Vol. 2, , ed. Alan J. Auerbach and Martin Feldstein, Chapter 16. Elsevier.
Krugman, Paul R. 1979. “Increasing returns, monopolistic competition, and international trade.”
 Journal of International Economics, 9(4): 469 – 479.
Levchenko, Andrei A., and Jing Zhang. 2012. “Ricardian Productivity Di↵erences and the Gains
  from Trade.” Research Seminar in International Economics, University of Michigan Working Papers
  633.
Liu, Li, and Rosanne Altshuler. 2013. “Measuring the Burden of the Corporate Income Tax
  Under Imperfect Competition.” National Tax Journal, 66(1): 215–238.
McFadden, Daniel. 1978. “Modeling the Choice of Residential Location.” In Spatial Interaction
 Theory and Planning Models. , ed. Karlqvist, Lundqvist, Snickars and Weibull. Amsterdam: North
 Holland.
McLure Jr., Charles E. 1977. “State Corporate Income Tax: Lambs in Wolves’ Clothing?” Office
 of Tax Analysis Paper 25.
McLure Jr., Charles E. 1982. “The Elusive Incidence of the Corporate Income Tax: The State
 Case.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 616.
Melitz, Marc J. 2003. “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate Industry
 Productivity.” Econometrica, 71(6): pp. 1695–1725.
Mian, Atif, and Amir Sufi. 2016. “What Explains the 2007-2009 Drop in Employment?” Econo-
 metrica.
Moretti, Enrico. 2010. “Local Multipliers.” American Economic Review, 100(2): 373–77.
Moretti, Enrico. 2011. “Local Labor Markets.” In Handbook of Labor Economics. Vol. 4, , ed. O.
 Ashenfelter and D. Card, Chapter 14, 1237–1313. Elsevier.
Moretti, Enrico. 2013. “Real Wage Inequality.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
 5(1): 65–103.
Newman, Robert J. 1983. “Industry Migration and Growth in the South.” The Review of Eco-
 nomics and Statistics, 65(1): pp. 76–86.
Notowidigdo, Matthew J. 2013. “The Incidence of Local Labor Demand Shocks.” University of
 Chicago Booth School of Business.
Papke, Leslie E. 1987. “Subnational Taxation and Capital Mobility: Estimates of Tax-Price Elas-
 ticities.” National Tax Journal, 40(2).
Papke, Leslie E. 1991. “Interstate Business Tax Di↵erentials and New Firm Location: Evidence
 from Panel Data.” Journal of Public Economics, 45(1): 47 – 68.
Rathelot, Roland, and Patrick Sillard. 2008. “The Importance of Local Corporate Taxes in
 Business Location Decisions: Evidence from French Micro Data.” The Economic Journal, 118.
Roback, Jennifer. 1982. “Wages, Rents, and the Quality of Life.” Journal of Political Economy,
 90(6): 1257–78.
Rosen, Sherwin. 1979. “Wage-Based Indexes of Urban Quality of Life.” In Current Issues in Urban
 Economics. , ed. Mahlon R. Straszheim Peter M. Mieszkowski. Johns Hopkins University Press.
Rothenberg, Alexander D. 2012. “Transport Infrastructure and Firm Location Choice in Equi-
 librium: Evidence from Indonesia’s Highways.” The RAND Corporation Working Paper.


                                               29
Ruggles, Steven, et al. 2010. “Integrated Public Use Microdata Series: Version 5.0.” Minneapolis:
 University of Minnesota [Machine-readable database].
Saez, Emmanuel, and Stefanie Stantcheva. 2013. “Generalized Social Marginal Welfare Weights
  for Optimal Tax Theory.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 18835.
Scheuer, Florian. 2014. “Entrepreneurial Taxation with Endogenous Entry.” American Economic
  Journal: Economic Policy, 6(2): 126–63.
Seegert, Nathan. 2012. “Optimal Taxation with Volatility: A Theoretical and Empirical Decom-
  position.” University of Michigan Job Market Paper.
Siegloch, Sebastian. 2014. “Employment E↵ects of Local Business Taxes.” Annual Conference 2014
  (Hamburg): Evidence-based Economic Policy.
Suárez Serrato, Juan Carlos, and Philippe Wingender. 2011. “Estimating the Incidence of
  Government Spending.” U.C. Berkeley and International Monetary Fund Working Paper.
Syverson, Chad. 2011. “What Determines Productivity?”           Journal of Economic Literature,
  49(2): 326–65.
Tolley, George S. 1974. “The welfare economics of city bigness.” Journal of Urban Economics,
  1(3): 324 – 345.
Topel, Robert H. 1986. “Local Labor Markets.” Journal of Political Economy, 94(3): S111–43.
Train, Kenneth. 2009. Discrete Choice Methods with Simulation. . 2 ed., Cambridge University
  Press.
Wilson, Daniel J. 2009. “Beggar Thy Neighbor? The In-State, Out-of-State, and Aggregate E↵ects
 of R&D Tax Credits.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 91(2): 431–436.
Yagan, Danny. 2015. “Capital Tax Reform and the Real Economy: The E↵ects of the 2003 Dividend
 Tax Cut.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 21003.
Zidar, Owen M. 2014. “Tax Cuts for Whom? Heterogeneous E↵ects of Income Tax Changes on
  Growth and Employment.” University of Chicago Booth School of Business.




                                               30
                                    Table 3: Summary Statistics

  Variable                                                     Mean     S.D.    Min     Max      N

  Annual Outcome Data from BEA and CBP
  Year                                                         1995     8.9     1980    2010     15190
  Log Population: ln Nc,t                                      13.8     1.1     10.9    16.1     15190
  Log Employment: ln Lc,t                                      13.2     1.2     9.4     15.6     15190
  Log Establishments: ln Ec,t                                  10.0     1.2     6.5     12.4     15190

  Annual Data on Apportionment Rules and Corporate, Personal, and Business Tax                  Rates
  State Corporate Tax Apportionment Parameters
                                   w
  Payroll Apportionment Weight: ✓s,t               22.7    11.6 0.0      33.3                    15190
                                     ⇢
  Property Apportionment Weight: ✓s,t              22.8    11.6 0.0      33.3                    15190
                               x
  Sales Apportionment Weight: ✓s,t                 54.5    23.2 25       100                     15190

  Corporate Income
         c
  Rate: ⌧s,t                                                   6.6      3.0     0.0     12.3     15190
  % Change in Net-of-Rate:         ln (1   ⌧ c )s,t,t   1      -0.01    0.4     -5.4    3.8      15190

  Personal Income
                  i
  E↵ective Rate: ⌧s,t                                          2.6      1.7     0.0     7.4      15190
  % Change in Net-of-Rate:         ln (1   ⌧ i )s,t,t   1      0.03     0.2     -3.3    2.5      15190

  Business Income
         b
  Rate: ⌧c,t                                                   3.1      1.1     0.3     5.4      15190
  % Change in Net-of-Rate:         ln (1   ⌧ b)   c,t,t 1      -0.01    0.2     -1.8    1.2      15190

  Decadal Data
  Year                                                         2000     8.2     1990    2010     1470
  % Change in Population: ln Nc,t,t 10                         11.2     10.4    -16.6   76.1     1470
  % Change in Establishments: ln Ec,t,t 10                     15.2     16.5    -23     126.2    1470
  % Change in Adjusted Wages: ln wc,t,t 10                     -2.8     7.2     -31.2   14.9     1470
  % Change in Adjusted Rents: ln rc,t,t 10                     8.5      12.0    -41.4   43.4     1470
  % Change in Net-of-Corp.-Rate: ln (1 ⌧ c )s,t,t 10           -0.1     1.1     -5.4    4.5      1470
  % Change in Net-of-Pers.-Rate: ln (1 ⌧ i )s,t,t 10           -1.3     1.1     -5.3    1.3      1470
  % Change in Net-of-Bus.-Rate: ln (1 ⌧ b )c,t,t 10            -0.8     0.6     -2.8    1.3      1470
  % Change in Gov. Expend./Capita: ln Gc,t,t 10                0.0      0.6     -13.3   11.6     1470
  Bartik Shock: Bartikc,t,t 10                                 7.8      4.8     -15.2   26.0     1470
Sources: BEA, CBP, Zidar (2014), Suárez Serrato and Wingender (2011). Corporate tax sources in Section 4.




                                                        31
            Table 4: E↵ects of Business Tax Cuts on Local Economic Activity over 10 Years

   A. Establishment Growth                     (1)          (2)              (3)        (4)         (5)           (6)

      ln Net-of-Business-Tax Rate            4.07**        3.35**          4.06**     4.14**      3.91**        3.24**
                                             (1.82)        (1.43)          (1.83)     (1.80)      (1.78)         (1.41)
   Bartik                                                 0.59***                                               0.57***
                                                           (0.19)                                                (0.18)
      ln Gov Expend/Capita                                                  -0.01                                 -0.01
                                                                           (0.01)                                (0.01)
       State ITC                                                                       -0.46                      -0.17
                                                                                      (0.32)                     (0.30)
   Change in Other States’ Taxes                                                                 -4.66***      -4.18***
                                                                                                  (1.60)         (1.43)

   Observations                               1,470        1,470           1,470       1,470       1,470         1,470
   R-squared                                  0.472        0.491           0.472       0.475       0.481         0.500

   B: Other Outcomes                         Population Growth              Wage Growth          Rental Cost Growth
                                              (1)        (2)                (1)     (2)            (1)        (2)

      ln Net-of-Business-Tax Rate            4.28**       3.74**            1.45       0.78         1.17         0.32
                                             (1.65)       (1.48)           (0.94)     (0.82)       (1.44)       (1.37)
   Bartik                                                 0.44**                     0.56***                    0.70**
                                                          (0.19)                      (0.08)                    (0.27)

   Observations                               1,470        1,470           1,470       1,470       1,470         1,470
   R-squared                                  0.085        0.113           0.402       0.490       0.139         0.189

Notes: This table shows the e↵ects of local business tax changes over ten years on local establishment growth in panel
A and on population growth, wage growth, and rental cost growth in panel B. The data are decade changes from 1980-
1990, 1990-2000, and 2000-2010 for 490 county-groups. See Section 4 for data sources. In panel A, Col (2)-(6) show
that the e↵ect of business taxes is robust to controlling for Bartik shocks in Col (2), per capita government spending
changes in Col (3), state investment tax credit changes in Col (4), external tax shocks due to changes in tax rules of
                                                                   2
other states in Col (5), and all of these controls in Col (6).         tests indicate that the coefficients in Col (1) and Col
(2) are not statistically di↵erent. Similarly, the negative e↵ect from tax cuts in other states is not statistically di↵erent
                                                                                                                        2
than the positive e↵ect of tax cuts. Panel B provides the results for Col (1) and (2) for three other outcomes.             tests
also indicate that the coefficients in Col (1) and Col (2) are not statistically di↵erent for each of the outcomes. The full
tables similar to panel A for the other three outcomes – population, wages, and rental cost – are provided in Appendix
Tables A6, A7, and A8. Non-parametric graphs showing mean outcome changes by business tax change bins are shown
for each outcome in Appendix Figures A10, A11, A12, and A13, respectively. All regressions use population as weights
and include year fixed e↵ects and dummies for states in the industrial midwest in the 1980s. Table A30 and A31 show
results with controls for tax rates and changes an tax rates, respectively, for each of the four reduced-form outcomes.
Standard errors clustered by state are in parentheses and *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                             32
                                              Table 5: Estimates of Economic Incidence Using Reduced-Form E↵ects



                                                                     A. Incidence                                                     B. Share of Incidence
                                                  (1)       (2)       (3)     (4)          (5)       (6)               (1)        (2)     (3)       (4)     (5)                (6)

       Landowners                                1.17      1.17      1.17        .32      1.86        .62              .30        .34        .27        .18       .42**       .29*
                                                (1.43)    (1.43)    (1.43)     (1.36)    (1.56)     (.60)             (.19)      (.24)       (.2)      (.48)      (.17)       (.16)
       Workers                                   1.1*       .69      1.1*        .68       .98       .58*            .28***       .20      .25***       .37        .22*      .28***
                                                 (.59)     (.44)     (.59)      (.52)     (.84)     (.33)             (.09)      (.16)      (.07)      (.43)      (.12)       (.08)
       Firmowners                               1.63*     1.63*     2.08**       .81     1.54*      .9***            .42***     .47***     .48***     .45***     .35***      .43***
                                                 (.90)     (.90)     (.95)      (1.4)     (.92)     (.34)             (.12)      (.10)      (.17)      (.13)      (.09)       (.10)
       Conventional View Test
        2 of (S W = 100% & S F = 0%)                                                                                 132.67     108.14      48.8        6.96     76.27       195.92
       P-value                                                                                                        0.00       0.00       0.00        0.01     0.00         0.00
33




       Specification
       Net-of-Business Tax                         Y         Y         Y         Y         Y             N              Y          Y          Y          Y         Y            N
       Net-of-Corporate Tax                        N         N         N         N         N             Y              N          N          N          N         N            Y
       Housing share ↵                             .3       .65        .3        .3        .3            .3             .3        .65         .3         .3        .3           .3
       Output elasticity ratio /                   .9        .9        .5        .9        .9            .9             .9         .9         .5         .9        .9           .9
       Bartik Control                              N         N         N         Y         Y             N              N          N          N          Y         Y            N
       Net-of-Personal Tax Control                 N         N         N         N         Y             N              N          N          N          N         Y            N

     Notes: This table shows the estimates of the economic incidence expressions from Table 1. The data are decade changes from 1980-1990, 1990-2000, and 2000-2010
     for 490 county-groups. See Section 4 for data sources. Results were produced by implementing Equation 21 using the specification in Column (1) of Table 4 unless
     otherwise specified. Columns (2) and (3) use the same specification as Column (1) but with di↵erent calibrated values of the expenditure share on housing ↵ and
     the ratio of output elasticities / . Column (4) controls for Bartik shocks. Column (5) controls for Bartik shocks as well as growth in the net-of-personal tax rate,
     i.e.,   ln(1   ⌧ci ). Column (6) uses the net-of-statutory-corporate tax keep rate, i.e.,    ln(1        ⌧cc ) rather than the business keep rate, i.e.,   ln(1    ⌧cb ), which is
     used in Columns (1)-(5). Appendix Table A19 includes many supplemental tax base controls and Appendix Table A20 includes results with additional controls for
     state political, economic, and fiscal policy conditions. More results using statutory state corporate tax rates are in Appendix Table A21. The conventional view
     test evaluates the joint hypothesis that the share of incidence for workers equals 100% and the share for firm owners equals 0%. Note that Columns (4) and (5) use
     Bartik and net-of-personal taxes as controls but does not use the point estimates for incidence share inference beyond that purpose; Table 7 provides results that use
     these estimates to discipline our estimates of structural elasticities and resulting incidence share estimates and conventional view tests. Regressions use population as
     weights and include year fixed e↵ects and dummies for states in the industrial midwest in the 1980s. See Section 4.3 for details on calibration values. Standard errors
     clustered by state are in parentheses and *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
                     Table 6: Minimum Distance Estimates of Structural Parameters


                                                            A. All    Shocks
 Calibrated Parameters                      (1)           (2)            (3)         (4)          (5)          (6)         (7)
 Output Elasticity                         0.150        0.150           0.150       0.200       0.250        0.150       0.250
 Housing Share ↵                           0.300        0.500           0.650       0.300       0.300        0.300       0.500
 Elasticity of Product                    -2.500        -2.500         -2.500      -2.500       -2.500       -4.000      -4.000
 Demand "P D

 Estimated Parameters
 Idiosyncratic Location                   0.277**      0.271**        0.233**      0.321*       0.304        0.149        0.136
 Productivity Disperion F                 (0.138)      (0.120)        (0.092)      (0.186)     (0.186)      (0.096)      (0.093)

 Idiosyncratic Location                  0.829***      0.686***       0.621***    0.845***    0.843***     0.839***      0.649**
 Preference Dispersion           W        (0.282)       (0.260)        (0.230)     (0.294)     (0.295)      (0.294)      (0.253)

 Elasticity of Housing                     0.513         2.185         1.157        1.600       0.707        1.995        2.812
 Supply ⌘                                 (1.417)       (6.206)       (2.661)      (5.065)     (2.301)      (7.320)     (13.688)

 Overid Test (p-value)                     0.458         0.390         0.393        0.385       0.444        0.390        0.507

                                                     B. Business Tax Shock                     C. All Shocks, Estimated "P D
 Calibrated Parameters                      (1)           (2)       (3)              (4)         (5)        (6)        (7)
 Output Elasticity                         0.150        0.150      0.250            0.150       0.150      0.150      0.250
 Housing Share ↵                           0.300        0.650      0.300            0.300       0.300      0.650      0.300
 Elasticity of Product                    -2.500        -2.500    -2.500           -4.000             Estimated Below
 Demand "P D

 Estimated Parameters
 Idiosyncratic Location                   0.119*        0.117*         0.106        0.048       0.109        0.105        0.138
 Productivity Dispersion F                (0.065)       (0.064)       (0.075)      (0.039)     (0.392)      (0.194)      (0.411)

 Idiosyncratic Location                    0.188         0.128         0.171        0.170     0.892***      0.571**     0.753***
 Preference Dispersion           W        (0.184)       (0.147)       (0.176)      (0.175)     (0.337)      (0.234)      (0.245)

 Elasticity of Housing                    6.367          5.724          7.328       6.424       1.925        1.783        3.056
 Supply ⌘                                (15.899)      (13.090)       (20.574)    (16.136)     (8.085)      (6.503)     (25.617)

 Elasticity of Product                                                                          -4.704       -4.439      -4.986
 Demand "P D                                                                                   (11.945)     (6.471)     (12.190)

 Overid Test (p-value)                     0.117         0.117         0.098        0.088       0.251        0.334        0.290
Notes: This table shows the estimated parameters of our model. The data are decade changes from 1980-1990, 1990-
2000, and 2000-2010 for 490 county-groups. See Section 4 for data sources. Panel A presents estimates from models with
business tax, personal tax, and Bartik shocks relying on 12 moments to estimate 3 parameters for a variety of assumed
values of ↵,   and "P D . Panel B uses only the business tax shock relying on 4 moments to estimate 3 parameters
for a variety of assumed values of ↵,        and "P D . Panel C presents estimates from “all shocks” models to estimate
                            PD
4 parameters, including "        , for various calibrated values of    and ↵. See Section 6 for more details on estimation.
Regressions use initial population as weights and include year fixed e↵ects and dummies for states in the industrial
                                                               34
midwest in the 1980s. Standard errors clustered by state are in parentheses and *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
                                        Table 7: Estimates of Economic Incidence Using Estimated Structural Parameters

                                                                    Incidence                                                            Shares of Incidence
                                       (1)           (2)            (3)            (4)               (5)                  (1)       (2)      (3)        (4)                     (5)
                                                 All Shocks                     Business         All Shocks                     All Shocks           Business               All Shocks
      Calibrated Parameters                                                        Tax         Estimated "P D                                          Tax                Estimated "P D
      Output Elasticity      0.150                   0.150         0.150          0.150             0.150                 0.150    0.150   0.150      0.150                    0.150
      Housing Share ↵        0.300                   0.650         0.300          0.300             0.300                 0.300    0.650   0.300      0.300                    0.300
      Elasticity of Product -2.500                  -2.500         -4.000        -2.500            -4.704                -2.500   -2.500   -4.000     -2.500                  -4.704
      Demand "P D                                                                                 (11.945)                                                                   (11.945)

      Estimated Incidence
      Wages ẇ            0.944**                  1.088**        0.655*          0.839              0.646
                          (0.408)                  (0.457)        (0.348)        (0.847)            (1.028)

      Landowners ṙ                   1.111          0.886         0.428          0.591              0.420               0.410       0.376       0.207        0.261             0.202
                                     (1.119)        (1.052)       (1.079)        (1.373)            (1.517)             (0.263)     (0.339)     (0.434)      (0.430)           (0.621)
35




      Workers ẇ       ↵ṙ          0.611**          0.512        0.527*          0.662              0.520              0.225*       0.217       0.255       0.292**            0.250
                                    (0.293)         (0.355)       (0.269)        (0.517)            (0.703)             (0.134)     (0.197)     (0.185)      (0.142)           (0.290)

      Firm Owners ⇡˙                0.990***       0.958***      1.110***       1.014***             1.141              0.365**     0.407**     0.537*        0.447             0.548
                                     (0.092)        (0.103)       (0.157)        (0.191)            (1.012)             (0.168)     (0.164)     (0.297)      (0.392)           (0.734)

      Test of Standard View (p-value)                                                                                    0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000             0.026

      Elasticity of Labor           0.780**          0.757         0.958          4.188              0.902
      Supply "LS                    (0.386)         (0.729)       (0.588)        (4.795)            (0.645)

      Elasticity of Labor          -1.766***      -1.867***      -2.457***      -2.485***            -2.933
      Demand "LD                    (0.269)        (0.252)        (0.646)        (0.692)            (6.731)
     Notes: This table shows structural estimates of economic incidence from our model. The Incidence panel shows the estimates of tax changes from our three minimum
     distance specifications: using all shocks, only business taxes, and all shocks with estimated "P D , respectively. See Table 6 for details about the estimation of the related
     structural models. The Shares of Incidence panel presents the shares of total economic gains to each agent that correspond to each specification. The conventional
     view test evaluates the joint hypothesis that the share of incidence for workers equals 100% and the share for firm owners equals 0%. Panel (b) presents the associated
     structural elasticities. Standard errors clustered by state are in parentheses and *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
                    Table 8: Revenue-Maximizing Corporate Tax Rates for Selected States
                          Establishment    Revenue Ratio      Sales Apport.     Corporate       Revenue Max. Corp. Rate
 State                    Share Es         revpers
                                              s    /revC
                                                       s      Weight ✓sx       Tax Rate ⌧s      ⌧s⇤   ⌧s⇤⇤  ⌧s⇤⇤ /(1 ✓sx )
 Kansas                        1.0              16.0                33             7.1          30.6   2.2         3.4
 New Mexico                    0.6              26.1                33             7.6          32.0   1.4         2.1
 California                   11.7               9.2                50             8.8          32.0   3.7         7.4
 Virginia                      1.5              18.4                50             6.0          30.1   2.0         3.9
 Arizona                       1.8              22.1                80             7.0          30.0   1.7         8.3
 Indiana                       2.0              20.7                90             8.5          32.9   1.8        17.7
 Texas                         7.2                                 100             0.0          30.3

 U.S.   State   Average        2.0               21.7              66.1              6.7        31.9    2.8         7.1
 U.S.   State   Median         1.4               17.1              50.0              7.1        31.5    2.1         4.4
 U.S.   State   Min            0.3                0.4              33.3              0.0        28.6    0.3         0.7
 U.S.   State   Max           11.7              141.5             100.0             12.0        36.8   24.1        36.1
Notes: This table shows the corporate tax revenue-maximizing corporate tax rate ⌧s⇤ and the total tax revenue-
maximizing corporate tax rate ⌧s⇤⇤ , which accounts for fiscal externalities on personal income sources, for a few selected
states (see Appendix Table A36 for the full list of states). These calculations are based on 2010 data and average
national parameter estimates and do not incorporate heterogeneous housing markets. We use three state statistics
to calculate state revenue-maximizing rates discussed in Section 7 and presented in the last columns of the table. These
three statistics are the state’s share of establishments, the state’s ratio of revenue that comes from personal income, i.e.
sales and personal income taxes, to their state corporate tax revenue, and their sales apportionment weight. The second
column shows each state’s share of national establishments in 2010. A corporate tax cut in large states like California
a↵ects more local areas simultaneously, which slightly diminishes the e↵ect of a tax cut to an extent that depends
on the state’s establishment share (as shown in Appendix D). We adjust our estimates of the percent change in local
establishments Ėc by state to account for this simultaneous impact based on state size. The first corporate revenue-
maximizing tax rate, ⌧s⇤ = Ė +   1
                                       (1 tf ed ), is a function of this state-size adjusted establishment response Ės , the
                                 s ⇡˙c
estimate of national average change in pre-tax profits ⇡˙ c from Table 7, panel (a), column (3), and the federal corporate
tax rate tf ed . This rate is much higher than ⌧s⇤⇤ which accounts for fiscal externalities. The size of fiscal externalities
from corporate tax changes vary based on the importance of other revenue sources. We measure the state-specific
importance of population dependent revenue sources revpers   s  /revCs with the ratio of (1) total state tax revenue from sales
and personal income taxes to (2) total state revenue from corporate income taxes. The product of this state-specific
revenue share term and national average responsiveness of wages and population is added to the denominator following
the formula presented in Section 7 and Appendix D. These rates are much lower on average. However, in models without
trade costs, location distortions result from payroll and property apportionment but not from sales apportionment. The
right-most column divides the total state tax revenue-maximizing state corporate tax rate ⌧s⇤⇤ by the apportionment
factors that distort establishment location, i.e. (1 ✓ss ). Since sales is destination based, it does not distort location
decisions (absent trade costs) and allows for higher revenue-maximizing tax rates. See Section 7 and Appendix D for
more details. Sources: U.S. Census Annual Survey of Governments and the other sources listed in Section 4.
             Figure 1: The Impact of a Corporate Tax Cut on Workers and Firm Owners

                              I. E↵ects on Each Local Establishment
                   A. Before Tax Cut                    B. A Corporate Tax Cut Has 3 E↵ects
        $                                             $




        p0                                                             p0
                                                                            1

   MC0                                                                MC0
                                                                      MC!                       2                     .
                                                                                                        3        ∝w
                                                         D                                                      D
                                      MR                                                      MR
                                                             y                                                    y
              II. Equilibrium E↵ects on Local Wages and After-Tax Profits
 C. Wage Increase ẇ Determined in Labor Market    D. Net E↵ect on After-Tax Profits
   w
                                                $


                                           S0
                                                                                                    .       .

                                              # ΔD &                   p0
   w!                                         %          (
                                           .  $ Δ(1− τ ) '             p!
                                           w = LS LD
                                               ε −ε                   MC0
   w0
                                                                      MC!                                             .
                                                                                                                 ∝w
                                 D0                 D!                                                          D
                                                                                              MR
                     L0     L!                               L                                                    y

Notes: A. Monopolistically competitive establishments earn profits, which are divided into taxes and after-tax
profits. B. Cutting corporate taxes has three e↵ects on local establishments: a corporate tax cut reduces the
establishment’s (1) tax liability and (2) capital wedge mechanically. (3) Establishments enter the local area and
bid up wages by ẇ percent. C. Wage increases are determined in the local labor market as workers move in,
house prices increase, each establishment hires fewer workers, and some marginal establishments leave. D. The
cumulative percentage increase on profits ⇡˙ depends on the magnitude of wage increases. We derive the change in
local labor demand, "LS , and "LD from microfoundations and express them in terms of a few estimable parameters
in Section 1. Empirical estimates of these parameters, which govern the three e↵ects above are provided in Tables 6
and A33 and discussed in Section 6. Note that these e↵ects are enumerated to help provide intuition, but the formal
model does not include dynamics. The model shows how the spatial equilibrium changes when states cut corporate taxes.




                                                                 37
                                    Figure 2: State Corporate Tax Rates


                        A. Number of Corporate Tax Changes by State since 1979




                                B. Corporate Tax Rates by State in 2012




Notes: These figures show statistics on state statutory corporate tax rates across states. See Appendix Figures A2,
A3, A4, and A5 for similar figures on state corporate tax apportionment rates, 30 year changes in corporate rates and
apportionment rules, state establishment and population shares, and 30 year changes in establishment and population
shares, respectively.




                                                         38
                               Figure 3: Histogram of Sales Apportionment Weights by Decade

                                        1980                                           1990
                     40
                     30
                     20
                     10
  Number of States
                     0




                                        2000                                           2010
                     40
                     30
                     20
                     10
                     0




                          20    40       60      80       100    20         40          60         80         100
                                               Sales Apportionment Weight


Notes: This figure shows a histogram of the weight on sales activity that states use to apportion the national profits
of multi-state firms for tax purposes. Many states have increased their sales apportionment weights in recent decades.
Forty states used a one-third weight in 1980. As of 2010, more states put half or full 100% weight on sales activity than
the number that still uses the traditional one-third weight. See Section 4.2.1 for a description of state corporate tax
apportionment rules.




                                                           39
             Figure 4: Cumulative E↵ects of Business Tax Cuts on Establishment Growth

                                   A. Cumulative Annual E↵ects without leads



                      5
                      4  3
                  Percent
                      2
                      1
                      0




                              0                  2                  4                    6                  8                     10
                                                                               Year

                                      B. Cumulative Annual E↵ects with leads
                     10
                     5
                  Percent
                     0
                     -5




                               F-test all leads are 0 has p-value= 0.92           F-test all lags are 0 has p-value= 0.036
                     -10




                             -10                     -5                    0                       5                         10
                                                                           Year

                                         Cumulative Effect no leads                            Cumulative Effect w/ leads
                                         Long Difference Point Estimate                        95 % Confidence Interval



Notes: This figure shows the cumulative annual e↵ects of local business tax cuts on local establishment growth over
di↵erent time horizons. Panel A plots the sum of the point estimates in Col (4) of Table A5 and 90% confidence interval
for each time horizon. Panel B plots the sum of the point estimates in Col (7) of Table A5 and 90% confidence interval
for each time horizon starting with the greatest lead. In addition, it reports the p-values for the F-test that all leads
and lags are jointly equal to zero, which is also reported in Col 7 of Table A5. The square shows the point estimate
and 95% confidence interval for the long-run e↵ect of a one percent businesses tax cut on establishment growth, which
corresponds to the estimate reported in Col (4) of Table 4. See Section 4 for data sources and Section 5 for estimation
                                                                          40
details.
                                                                 Figure 5: Robustness of Economic Incidence

                                              Panel (a)
           Firm Owner’s Share of Incidence for ↵ = 0.3 and Calibrated Values of                                                                                  and "P D


                                     -2
                                                                                                                             .9

                                                                            *Baseline
                                                                                                                             .8
                    Elasticity of Product Demand: εPD




                                                                                                                                   Share to Firm Owners
                                            -3




                                                                                                                             .7


                                                                                                                             .6


                                                                                                                             .5
                            -4




                                                                                                                             .4


                                                                                                                             .3
                                     -5




                                                             0       .1          .2            .3          .4      .5
                                                                           Output Elasticity of Labor: γ


                                              Panel (b)
           Firm Owner’s Share of Incidence for = .15 and Calibrated Values of ↵ and "P D
                                           -2




                                                                                                                              .7


                                                                             * Baseline
                         Elasticity of Product Demand: εPD




                                                                                                                              .6          Share to Firm Owners
                                                 -3




                                                                                                                              .5



                                                                                                                              .4
                                 -4




                                                                                                                              .3



                                                                                                                              .2
                                           -5




                                                             0        .2          .4         .6         .8          1
                                                                           Housing Expenditure Share: α



Notes: This figure shows that our baseline empirical result – that firm owners bear a substantial share of incidence – is
robust to using a wide range of calibrated parameter values. The figures plot firm owner incidence shares for a variety
of parameter values and illustrates that our baseline parameters values of                                      = 0.15, "P D =                            2.5, and ↵ = .3 give a
conservative share of the incidence to firm owners. Using calibrations with more elastic product demand elasticities,
while holding constant                                   = 0.15 in Panel A (or while holding constant ↵ = .3 in Panel B), does not change the result that
the share to firm owners ranges between 35 and 40%. Increasing the calibrated                                      in Panel A (or ↵ in Panel B) generally
increases the share accruing to firm owners. Overall, larger product demand elasticities "P D , housing expenditure shares
                                                                                             41
↵, and/or larger output elasticities of labor                                   result in larger burdens on firm owners. See Section 6 for more detail.
Appendices for Online Publication
This appendix contains several sections. Section A discusses tax measurement, supplemental data
sources, and the variation in tax rates. Section B provides a characterization of the establishment
problem under apportionment and several derivations of expressions in the main text. Section C
discusses the e↵ects of a local corporate tax change on the welfare of agents in other locations and
on efficiency. Section D derives revenue-maximizing corporate tax rate expressions in the main text.
Section E contains a detailed description of estimates underlying Figure 4 in the main section, a
discussion of several supplemental robustness tables for key tables in the main text, a step-by-step
guide through our estimation approach, an alternative equation-by-equation discussion of estimation
that provides more intuition for the estimating equations relative to the system approach in the main
text, and details on the structural estimation with all shocks. Section F and G provide more detail
on our robustness exercises that account for the welfare e↵ects of changes in government spending
and local prices, respectively.


A     Data
This section describes advantages of local areas called PUMAs in Section A.1, the derivation of
composition-adjusted outcomes in Section A.2 and the tax data used in Section A.3. In particular,
we provide institutional detail on apportionment and how that informed how we constructed tax
rates that account for apportionment in Section A.3.1, the sources for corporate tax parameters in
the main text in Section A.3.2, the source and methodological overview for our personal income tax
rate data in Section A.3.3, a discussion of the limitations of our tax change measure in Section A.3.4,
data on local prices in Section A.4, and data sources for variables that only appear in appendix tables
in Section A.5. Finally, section A.6 describes variation in tax rates.

A.1    Advantages of Using PUMAs
There are several advantages of using “consistent public-use micro-data areas (PUMAs).” First, this
geographical definition depends on county boundaries that are geographically consistent since 1980.
This fact allows us to generate data series at a yearly frequency using data for individual counties.
Moreover, it allows us to use micro-data from the U.S. census to create wage, rental cost, and home
value indexes for geographically consistent areas across censuses. Second, the level of aggregation does
not straddle state lines, in contrast to other definitions of local economies. This feature is beneficial
since some of the policies we analyze, namely changes in statutory corporate tax rates, vary at the
state level. Since local areas vary in industrial composition, apportionment rules create within state
variation in the taxes businesses pay. To our knowledge, this paper is the first to use apportionment
rules to compute the average tax rates businesses pay across di↵erent locations in the United States.
Finally, this level of aggregation enables us to maximize statistical power and to exploit and measure
variation in prices in local labor and housing markets, which vary considerably within states.

A.2    Composition-Adjusted Outcomes
This appendix describes in detail the construction of the skill-specific, county group outcomes using
micro-data from the IPUMS samples of the 1980, 1990, and 2000 Censuses and the 2009 American
Community Survey (Ruggles et al. (2010)). The data created using this process was first used in
Suárez Serrato and Wingender (2011) and this data appendix is a reproduction of an identical ap-
pendix in that paper. Our sample is restricted to adults between the ages of 18 and 64 who are not




                                                   42
institutionalized and that are not in the farm sector. We define an individual as skilled if they have
a college degree.44
    A number of observations in the data have imputed values. We remove these values from the
following variables: employment status, weeks worked, hours worked, earnings, income, employment
status, rent, home value, number of rooms, number of bedrooms, and building age. Top-coded values
for earnings, total income, rents, and home values are multiplied by 1.5. Since the 2009 ACS does
not include a variable with continuous weeks worked, we recode the binned variable for 2009 with the
middle of each bin’s range.
    Our measure of individual wages is computed by dividing earnings income by the estimate of total
hours worked in a year, given by multiplying of average hours worked and average weeks worked.
Aggregate levels of income, earnings, employment, and population at the county group level are
computed using person survey weights. Average values of log-wages are also computed using person
survey weights while log-rents and log-housing values are computed using housing unit survey weights
and restricting to the head of the household to avoid double-counting. We create composition-adjusted
values of mean wages, rents, and housing values in order to adjust for changes in the characteristics
of the population of a given county group. First, we de-mean the outcomes and the personal and
household characteristics relative to the whole sample to create a constant reference group across
states and years. We then estimate the coefficients of the following linear regression model:
                                                        s,⌧
                                      ẏctsi = Ẋctsi         + ⌫c + µc,⌧ + "ctsi ,

where ẏctsi is observations i’s de-meaned log-price in county group c, year t and state group s. Ẋctsi
is observations i’s de-meaned characteristics, ⌫c is a county group fixed e↵ect, and µc,⌧ is a county
group-year fixed e↵ect. Allowing s,⌧ to vary by state and year allows for heterogeneous impacts of
individual characteristics on outcomes.
    We run this regression, for every state group and for years ⌧ = 1990, 2000, and 2010.45 For each
regression we include observations for years t = ⌧, ⌧ 10 so that the county group-year fixed e↵ect
corresponds to the average change in the price of interest for the reference population. Our analysis
of adjusted prices uses the set of fixed e↵ects {µc,t } as outcome variables.
    The regressions on wage outcomes use individual survey weights, while the regressions on housing
outcomes use housing survey weights and restrict to the head of the household. The wage regressions
include the following covariates: a quartic in age and dummies for hispanic, black, other race, female,
married, veteran, currently in school, some college, college graduate, and graduate degree status. The
housing regressions included the following covariates: a quadratic in number of rooms, a quadratic in
the number of bedrooms, an interaction between number of rooms and number of bedroom, a dummy
for building age (every ten years), interactions of the number of room with building age dummies,
and interactions of the number of bedrooms with building age dummies.
  44
     For the 1980 Census there is no college degree code. We code those with less than 4 years of college education as
not having a college degree. This corresponds to detailed education codes less than 100.
  45
     As a technical note, before every regression was computed, an algorithm checked that no variables would be auto-
matically excluded by the software program in order to avoid problems with cross-equation comparisons.




                                                              43
A.3     Tax Data
A.3.1     Apportionment Details
The tax liability for unitary businesses46 in state s of firm i is comprised of three parts: taxes due on
apportioned national profit based on sales activity, payroll activity, and property activity in state s:

       State Tax Liabilityis =        (⌧sc ✓sx axis )⇧pi    +        (⌧sc ✓sw aw )⇧p        +         (⌧sc ✓s⇢ a⇢is )⇧pi     ,
                                      |       {z      }              |       {zis }i                  |       {z      }
                                  Tax from Sales Activity       Tax from Payroll Activity       Tax from Property Activity

where ⌧sc is the corporate tax rate in state s, 0  ✓sx  1 is the sales apportionment weight in
state s, axis ⌘ SSisi is the share of the firm’s total sales activity that occurs in state s, and ⇧p is
total pretax profits for the entire firm across all of its establishments in the United States. Payroll
and property activity in state s are defined similarly and the weights sum to one for each state,
i.e., ✓sx + ✓sp + ✓s⇢ = 1 8s. Summing tax liabilities across states results in the following firm-specific
“apportioned” tax rate:
                                     X
                                                                              c ⇢ ⇢
                               ⌧iA =    ((⌧sc ✓sx axis ) + (⌧sc ✓sw aw
                                                                     is ) + (⌧s ✓s ais ))            (23)
                                          s

where ⌧iA is the firm-specific tax rate for all of it’s establishments across the U.S. This expression
shows that the e↵ective tax rate of a given establishment depends on (1) apportionment weights
✓s in every state, (2) the corporate rate ⌧sc in every state, and (3) the distribution of its payroll,
                                                          ⇢
property, and sales activity across states: aw                          x
                                                     is ,ais and ais , respectively, for all s. Finally, note that
while the activity weights of payroll and capital are source-based (i.e. where goods are produced), the
activity weights of revenue are destination-based (i.e., where goods are consumed). This distinction
has important efficiency implications, which we discuss in Section 7.
    To ensure that a decrease in tax rates can be interpreted as an in increase in the attractiveness
of any given location, we decompose ⌧iA into three components: one that depends on own-state
“domestic” tax rates and rules, an “external” component that depends on the statutory rates and
rules in other states, and a sales component.
                                                            X                                         X
                                                c ⇢ ⇢                                  c ⇢ ⇢
               ⌧iA        = (⌧sc ✓sw aw
                                      is ) + (⌧  ✓ a   ) +        (⌧ c w w
                                                                      0 ✓ 0 a 0 ) + (⌧  0 ✓ 0 a 0 ) +   (⌧sc ✓sx axis )
              |{z}          |              {z s s is} 0              s s is            s s is
                                                                                                      s
                                                            s 6=s
         Apportioned Rate      Domestic Component           |                 {z                  } |     {z         }
                                                                     External Component               Sales Component


We then define the domestic  P c tax    rate that excludes the external component of tax changes, i.e., ⌧iD ⌘
  c  w  w        c  ⇢ ⇢            x  x
(⌧s ✓s ais ) + (⌧s ✓s ais ) + (⌧s ✓s ais ), and the external rate as the di↵erence between the apportionment
                           s
rate and the domestic rate: ⌧iE ⌘ ⌧iA           ⌧iD .

A.3.2     Additional Tax Rate and Tax Base Data Sources
In addition to the sources listed in the main text, we also rely on tax rate data collected by the
authors of the following papers: Seegert (2012) , Bernthal et al. (2012), Chirinko and Wilson (2008),
and Wilson (2009). In particular, Seegert (2012) generously shared data on corporate tax rates and
Bernthal et al. (2012) provided data on apportionment formulae. In both cases we cross-checked our
newly digitized data with those used by these authors. Chirinko and Wilson (2008) provided us with
data on investment tax credits to analyze the concomitance of changes in corporate tax rates and the
  46
    Unitary businesses are businesses with close connections between units in separate states. See Appendix Sec-
tion A.3.4 for more detail.



                                                            44
corporate tax base. Wilson (2009) shared panel data on R&D tax tax credits.
   In terms of tax base rules, we primarily use data from CCH (1980-2010). However, for combined
reporting and throwback rules are based on the panel provided by Bernthal et al. (2012).47 Information
regarding the federal deductibility of state corporate income taxes across states and years in the
analysis period were gathered from the corporate income tax tables of the CSG (1976-2011), published
biennially until 2002, and published annually thereafter. We enumerate the specific tax base variables
we consider in subsection E.4.1 of Appendix Section E.4.

A.3.3     Personal Income Tax Rate Data
To calculate state personal income tax changes, we use the NBER Tax Simulator TAXSIM, which
calculates individual tax liabilities for every annual tax schedule and stores a large sample of actual
tax returns. Similar to Zidar (2014), we construct a measure of synthetic tax changes by comparing
each individual’s income tax liabilities in the year preceding a tax change to what their tax liabilities
would have been if the new tax schedule had been applied, while holding other tax-relevant factors
such as income and deductions constant. For example, suppose there was a state tax change in 1993.
This measure subtracts how much a taxpayer paid in 1992 from how much she would have paid in
1992 if the 1993 tax schedule had been in place. We then use these measures to calculate e↵ective
state personal income tax changes. This process has the benefit that it mechanically ignores the
e↵ects of taxes on economic behavior, which might be related to unobservable factors driving our
outcomes of interest. Before using these data in our empirical work in Section 5, we first crosscheck
these simulated changes with actual statutory changes to top and bottom marginal rates for each
state to ensure that the variation we observe is actually driven by statutory changes. Note that when
calculating tax liabilities, TAXSIM takes into account each individual’s deductions and credits and
their specific implications for state personal income tax liabilities. See Zidar (2014) for more detail
on the construction of this measure of income tax changes.

A.3.4     Tax Data Limitations
While our measure of local business tax changes ln(1 ⌧ b )c,t,t h captures several important features
of business taxation, the measure has a number of limitations.
    First, we assume that multi-state corporations are all unitary businesses, which has implications
for how profit is apportioned across states. Unitary businesses are businesses with close connections
between units in separate states. If an orange grove in Florida and steel plant in Pennslyvania were
owned by the same firm, these businesses would be considered separate and profits would be taxed
separately in practice. Our approach of treating this firm as a unitary business would incorrectly
apportion profits of the combined entity rather than keeping the establishments separate. We view our
treatment as a reasonable but imperfect approximation. We provide incidence estimates in Appendix
Table A21 that use only variation in statutory corporate taxes, which, in the case of the orange grove
and steel plant, would be the correct and separate rates. We find that the results with our measure
of business taxes and with statutory corporate tax rates are similar.
    Second, an important limitation relates to our inability to assign personal tax rate of non C-corps
to the residence of owners, which could be di↵erent than the state in which the firm operates. For
instance, if investors from Florida own all of the non C-corps in New York, we will mistakenly use the
  47
    We did not verify every state-year observation on throwback and combined reporting rules. We believe that the
throwback series is fairly accurate, but some spot-checking revealed that approximately 15% of the combined reporting
entries before 1993 may be inconsistently classified. Given the wide-variety of robustness checks and the consistency of
our results, we do not expect this to have a material impact on our findings but wanted to flag for other researchers
the potential accuracy issues for this series on combined reporting from Bernthal et al. (2012), especially in years before
1993.



                                                            45
personal tax rate in New York rather than Florida for these firms. Properly measuring the ownership
structure of individual firms is not possible with our data. To the extent that firm ownership shares
among states are fairly stable, specifications with state fixed e↵ects, which are in Appendix Table A23,
can partially address this concern.
    Third, our ability to measure the tax base is imperfect. While we account for state investment tax
credits (see Appendix Section E.3), the presence of gross receipt taxes (see Appendix Section E.4),
and several specific state tax base rules (enumerated in Appendix subsection E.4.1): state throwback
and combined reporting rules, state research and development tax credits, state loss carry-back and
carry-forward rules, state franchise taxes, state rules governing whether or not federal corporate
taxes are deductible, state choices of whether or not they follow the federal income tax base and
federal accelerated depreciation rules, state depreciation rules, state bonus depreciation adoption,
there are other ways that state tax bases di↵er that we do not capture. For example, there are
possible interactions due to limited loss o↵set, other deductions, and other credits that we are not
able to capture. Importantly, we can not directly measure firm profits. Instead, we scale up costs
based on wage changes under the assumption that firms markup prices over costs. The product
demand elasticity "P D governs the magnitude of this markup.48 We can not measure wages at the
establishment level, so we use local measures of wages (as described above in Appendix Section A.2).
The level of analysis in the paper – PUMA-decade – reflects the importance of our wage measure and
how we are able to measure it.
    Fourth, while the establishment-firm data represents a step forward in terms of empirically im-
plementing state apportionment, the available data are imperfect. We are able to link establishments
and firms and construct payroll activity shares, but comparable data on property is not available. We
assume that firms’ factor cost shares are the same across locations, i.e., if 60% of their labor costs
are in New York, then New York will also have 60% of their property costs. Di↵erent establishments
have di↵erent factor cost shares in practice. We view our approach as an imperfect but reasonable
approximation. In addition, we are not able to measure the destination of all sales for every firm.
Since the apportionment of sales is destination-based, we use state GDP data for ten broad industry
groups from the BEA to apportion sales to states based on their share of national GDP.
    Fifth, we do not incorporate local property taxes. Since rates, rules, and institutional details di↵er
materially across local areas within states and over-time, correctly measuring local property taxes for
every county in the U.S. represents a herculean data construction exercise that is beyond the scope
of this paper. Specifications that control for government spending per capita, which should indirectly
measure local finance pressures (via financing inflows from state-to-local governments), yield similar
results to the main incidence findings of the paper.
    We present several pieces of evidence to address these measurement concerns. Results with state
fixed e↵ects, variation exclusively from changes in statutory state corporate taxes, and controls for
tax base di↵erences all yield very similar results. In addition, estimates using external variation from
tax changes in other states imply similar incidence results. Finally, the structural parameters that
rationalize the e↵ects we estimate align with existing estimates from the local labor markets literature.
If measurement error were a substantial problem, it is unlikely we would find results that are not
only consistent across several specifications, but also in line with other estimates from the literature
that use completely di↵erent sources of variation for estimation.49 It is possible but unlikely that our
estimates would be materially di↵erent with better data.
  48
    We also provide results for a range of "P D values, e.g., Figure 5, and estimate it directly in Appendix Section E.5.
  49
    See the discussion in section 6.1 of Bartik (1991); Notowidigdo (2013); Albouy and Stuart (2013) regarding supply-
side parameters and Hamermesh (1993); Kline and Moretti (2014) regarding demand-side parameters.




                                                           46
A.4     Local Price Data
A.4.1     Local Price Data from ACCRA
We measure local prices using data purchased from the American Chamber of Commerce Researchers
Association (ACCRA). These data report survey measures of price levels for a number of categories
of spending in several cities and the quarterly reports of inter-city price indices go back to 1980
and continue to the present.50 Previous researchers using these data include Basker (2005), Moretti
(2013), and Albouy (2008). Basker (2005) describes this data in detail.
    We took the following steps to generate a price index at the PUMA-level (a geographic unit which
is defined in section A.1) from these data:

   1. The first step in processing the raw data from ACCRA is digitization. The data for years
      1980-1989 were available in PDF form, and had to be hand coded. For each metro area in the
      ACCRA reports, three indices were recorded: the composite index, which is the index derived
      from all items in the survey, as well as the indices for grocery items and miscellaneous goods
      and services.

   2. The second step was to create yearly values for these prices. We took the mean price within a
      city-year-category pair, where missing quarterly values were dropped.

   3. The third steps was to use the city-level information to generate a price-index that is similar
      to our level of geography. The ACCRA data are coded at the city level but we found problems
      in the assignment of cities to either CBSA or MSA codes. Instead, for each metro area, we
      identified the primary county assigned these three indices to that county. In order to assign
      the price index to the relevant surrounding counties, we used a crosswalk between counties and
      commuting zones to assign the price index to all counties in the same commuting zone as the
      primary county.51 Finally, we assigned counties to PUMAs using our county-to-puma crosswalk,
      and each puma’s price index was calculated by averaging the price indices of all included counties
      that had an assigned price index.

   4. The final step in generating the price index is dealing with missing values. The data generated
      in the previous step has a wide geographical range but there are some missing values. In order
      to generate a balanced panel dataset with the widest-possible geographic coverage, we estimated
      a linear model of PUMA-level prices changes on state-level prices changes and used predicted
      values of this regression to fill gaps in the data. Some of the PUMAs had a significant number
      of imputed observation. We exclude these cities from our analysis by restricting to areas with
      a low number of imputed values. This procedure generated a panel data of 400 PUMAs where
      only 5% of the data were imputed.

A.4.2     Local Price Data from BLS
We construct a supplemental measure of local prices using price indices corresponding to “All Urban
Consumers” (CPI-U) that are calculated by the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) for several major
metropolitan areas. Price data stretches from 1984 through 2014, with 2014 prices rebased as an
index value of 100 in all CMSAs.
  50
      Note that although the ACRRA index does measure some local prices for services (e.g., haircuts, doctor’s visit, dry
cleaning), local prices for services may not fully reflected in the price index, which is based on the prices of specific
consumption goods (e.g., the price of one dozen large grade A eggs, a gallon of gasoline, a man’s barber shop haircut
with no styling, a 100 tablet bottle of aspirin, the cost of adult teeth cleaning at the dentist, etc).
   51
      This crosswalk can be found on David Dorn’s website: http://www.ddorn.net/data.htm. For robustness,
we also did the same based on definitions of MSA’s using the county-to-MSA crosswalk available from the
http://www.dol.gov/owcp/regs/feeschedule/fee/fs04ctst.xls and found very similar results.


                                                           47
    For states where only one associated CMSA is measured, the state price index is identical to the
corresponding urban CPI. Arizona and the Phoenix metropolitan area are one such example. In total,
27 CMSAs are measured. Note that several states lack any associated urban CMSA as measured by
the BLS, and are therefore excluded from the final panel (Alabama, Arkansas, Idaho, Iowa, Louisiana,
Mississippi, Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, New Mexico, North Carolina, North Dakota, Oklahoma,
Rhode Island, South Carolina, South Dakota, Tennessee, Utah, Vermont, and Wyoming). In instances
in which a state is associated with multiple CMSAs with a price index—Indiana for example, is
mapped to both Cincinnati and Chicago— we construct a state-year panel collapsing the CMSA
level data to the state year level average prices. The underlying price index for each CMSA can be
downloaded here: http://www.bls.gov/cpi/cpiovrvw.htm.

A.5    Other Data Sources for Appendix Tables
In addition to the sources referenced in the notes of Table 5, we also use a few other data sources for
control variables for Appendix Table A20, Appendix Table A21, Appendix Table A22, and Appendix
Table A23. Data on the political party of state governors and sales tax rates were hand-collected
from annual editions of the Book of the States. Corporate tax revenue measures are from the U.S.
Census Bureau’s Government Division: Database on Historical State Tax Collections.
    State level gross receipts taxes are developed strictly from information provided in the CSG (1976-
2011), in notes corresponding to corporate income tax tables and descriptions of recent legislative
changes to rates. Other media reporting, including descriptions of tax systems by state government
websites, were not considered. When rates included thresholds of graduation, the highest reported
rate was used. Gross receipts taxes levied by states on particular industries—Connecticut and New
York enacted such a tax on oil companies in 1980, for example—are not included. When states employ
corporate income taxes with a gross receipts component, only the gross receipts tax is considered.
Additional taxes, such as Kentucky’s Limited Liability Entity Tax—in which the lesser of 0.095%
of an entity’s gross receipts or 0.75% of its gross profits are taxed—as well as allowances for small
business to pay a gross receipts tax in replacement of the standard corporate income tax (most
recently in Idaho and Montana), are also excluded. Finally, taxes must be based on gross receipts to
be considered in the Appendix specifications that control for gross receipts taxes. Franchise taxes or
income taxes that use gross receipts as a threshold marker for graduation levels are not included.
    We use establishment level data from the National Establishment Time Series dataset to perform
additional robustness checks in Tables A15 and A17. In particular, we use these data to compute
the fraction of establishments that belong to single-state firms at the PUMA-decade level. We then
combine these data with the County Business Patterns establishment counts in order to analyze the
e↵ects of business taxes on single-state firms. Specifically, we use the NETS data to obtain the fraction
of establishments that belong to single-state firms at the PUMA-decade level for the years 1990, 2000,
and 2010 and multiply the establishment counts from the County Business Patterns by this fraction.
We use this product to create new changes in the number of establishments across decades and use
this variable as the dependent variable in Tables A15 and A17. This analysis alleviates concerns of
endogeneity of apportionment formulas.

A.6    Variation in Tax Rates
This subsection briefly describes variation in tax rates. There are a substantial number of changes
to both statutory corporate tax rates and apportionment factors that impact local areas across the
United States. Panel (a) of Figure A6 shows the histogram of ten-year changes in the statutory state
corporate rate and panel (b) shows a similar figure for ten-year changes in payroll apportionment
weights. Of the 1470 PUMA-decade observations in the main dataset, there are hundreds of sizable


                                                   48
changes in both aspects of corporate tax policy over three periods of interest: 1980-1990, 1990-2000,
and 2000-2010.
    In terms of the describing the determinants of state tax policy changes, we follow the approach
that Goolsbee and Maydew (2000) use to address endogeneity concerns in section 4.2 of their paper.52
We find similar results. Specifically, we find that tax competition with other states is the main factor
that is related to the decision to change these state tax policies. Neither economic factors nor other
state tax policies are significant for any of the policy probits. For example, for the policy probit
for which the dependent variable is an indicator that equals one if payroll apportionment weights
are changed, only the average payroll apportionment weights of other states are significant at the
5% level. None of the economic factors or other tax rates are significant. See Appendix Tables A34
and A35 for the policy probit results for payroll apportionment and statutory corporate tax changes,
respectively.


B      Model Details
This section characterizes the establishment problem under apportionment in Section B.1 and derives
the expression for profits, local labor demand, and incidence in Sections B.2, B.3, and B.4, respectively.

B.1     Establishment Problem with Apportionment
In a given location c, establishments maximize profits over inputs and prices pijc while facing a local
wage wc , national rental rates ⇢, national prices pv of each variety v, local corporate taxes ⌧sc , and
local apportionment weights ✓s subject to the production technology in Equation 3:

                                                        0                                                       1
                                                                                             Z
  ⇡ijc =           max                 (1       ⌧iA ) @pijc yijc              wc lijc                pv xv,ijc dv A   ⇢kijc   (⌧iA    A
                                                                                                                                     ⌧i/j )⇧pi/j , (24)
           lijc ,kijk ,xv,ijc ,pijc
                                                                                            v2J
                  ✓                                                                              ◆
                      P
where   ⌧iA   =            (⌧sc0 ✓sx0 axis0 )   +   (⌧sc0 ✓sw0 aw
                                                                is0 )   +   (⌧sc0 ✓s⇢0 a⇢is0 )       is the e↵ective “apportioned” corporate tax
                      s0
                                                                        ⇢                                                     w l
rate with activity weights for sales axis , payroll aw                          w    c ijc
                                                     is , and property ais and ais ⌘ Wi is the local share
of national payroll, Wi , for firm i.53 Sales and property activity weights are defined similarly.54 In
            A and ⇧p are the e↵ective apportioned corporate tax rate and pre-tax profit respectively
addition, ⌧i/j       i/j
for firm i without any production from establishment j.
    State tax laws, which apportion firm profits based on firm activity to determine tax liabilities, have
two important e↵ects on establishments. First, the e↵ective apportioned corporate tax rate ⌧ A of an
establishment operating in location c can be quite di↵erent than ⌧cc , the statutory state corporate rate,
due to apportionment and activity weights. Second, increasing production at a given establishment
a↵ects the firm’s tax liability by the product of the change in the firm’s e↵ective apportioned tax
  52
     Specifically, we run policy probits where the dependent variables are an indicator that equals one if a given state
tax policy changes. For apportionment weights, the indicator equals one if the apportionment weight is di↵erent from
the year before. For state corporate tax rates, the indicator equals one if the tax rate change exceeds 0.5 percentage
points. For each, the explanatory variables are the current and lagged mean of the dependent variable in other states,
other state tax policies that are not the dependent variable, and lagged levels of state per capita income growth and
national unemployment rates. This specification follows that of Goolsbee and Maydew (2000) for payroll apportionment
and extends it to include more recent data and a new outcome: state corporate tax rates.
  53
     Given the typical structure of state corporate tax schedules, one can think of ⌧iA as both the marginal and average
tax rate of establishments owned by firm i.
  54
     For apportionment purposes, property is measured as the sum of land and capital expenditures.



                                                                                     49
rate (due to establishment production) and the firm’s pretax profits: (⌧iA ⌧i/jA )⇧p . Thus, including
                                                                                   i/j
this additional term incorporates the ultimate e↵ects on firm i’s profitability due to the location and
production decisions at establishment j.
    One can show that demand takes the following form:55
                                                                            ⇣p            ⌘" P D
                                                                                    ijc
                                                                 yijc = I                            ,
                                                                                  P
where I is the sum of national real income not spent on housing and intermediate good demand
from establishments, and P is the price level, which was normalized to 1 in the prior section.Using
this demand expression to substitute for price gives the following expression for establishment j’s
economic profits.
                          0                                      1
                             1
                                 ⇣
                                    1
                                       ⌘         Z
          ⇡ijc = (1 ⌧iA ) @yijc
                             µ
                                I "P D   wc lijc    pv xv,ijc dv A ⇢kijc (⌧iA ⌧i/j
                                                                                 A
                                                                                   )⇧pi/j ,
                                                                               v2J

                         ⇥        ⇤ 1
where the markup µ ⌘ "P1D + 1         is constant due to CES demand.
    Firms maximize this establishment profit function and set the optimal choices of labor, capital,
and intermediate inputs. These, in turn, determine the scale in production in each establishment.
However, as first noted McLure Jr. (1977), the e↵ective tax rate faced by a given firm is a↵ected by
changes in the geographical distribution of payroll and capital.56 Thus, when firms optimize this profit
function, they take this e↵ect into consideration, thus creating a wedge between the marginal product
of factors and their respective marginal costs. These wedges are evident in the firm’s first-order
conditions for labor and capital: 57

                                                                  0                                                                       1
                                                                                      ⇧pi                          P
                          1
                          µ              ⇣            ⌘               1   ⌧iA   +                ⌧sc ✓is
                                                                                                      w                  aw    c w
                                                                                                                          is0 ⌧s0 ✓is0
                        yijc                   1               B                      Wi
                                                                                                                    s0                     C
                                     I       "P D         = wc B
                                                               @
                                                                                                                                           C,
                                                                                                                                           A        (25)
                         µ lijc                                                                  1           ⌧iA
                                                             |                                    {z                                       }
                                                                                                 ⌘w̃c


                                                                      0                                                              1
                                                                                ⇧pi            ⇢             P
                               1
                               µ                  ⇣          ⌘            1+              ⌧sc ✓is                  a⇢is0 ⌧sc0 ✓is
                                                                                                                               ⇢
                                                                                                                                  0
                              yijc                      1           B           Ri
                                                                                                           s0                         C
                                              I       "P D       = ⇢B
                                                                    @                                     A
                                                                                                                                      C,
                                                                                                                                      A             (26)
                               µ kijc                                                         1          ⌧i
                                                                  |                               {z                                  }
                                                                                                 ⌘˜
                                                                                                  ⇢c

We denote the e↵ective wage and capital rental rates w̃c and ⇢˜c respectively. Note that capital owners
supply capital perfectly elastically at the national rate, so local capital wedges result in lower levels
of local capital.58 These conditions and the input demand for the bundle of intermediate goods yield
  55
     See the appendix of Basu (1995) for a derivation where I is analogous to the sum of intermediate goods and final
goods in Equation (A6) of his paper.
  56
     McLure Jr. (1977) assumed that the corporate rate of all other states was zero, so the term in brackets simplifies
to a simpler factor wedge, e.g., ⌧sc ✓is
                                      w
                                         (1 aw
                                             is ).                                      
  57                                            @⌧iA ⌧sc ✓is
                                                          w   P ⌧sc0 ✓is
                                                                      w
                                                                         0 Wis0                 P w c w
     Note the following auxiliary derivative @lijc = Wi wc            W2
                                                                                wc = Wi ⌧sc ✓is
                                                                                     wc      w
                                                                                                 ais0 ⌧s0 ✓is0 where the
                                                                                       s0                i                                     s0
second equality exploits the assumption that all of a firm’s activity in a given state is done by one establishment.
  58
     Given the setup of the establishment problem, we e↵ectively abstract from consequences of state corporate tax



                                                                               50
an expression for firm revenues and costs that takes the form:59
                                       ⇣          ⌘
                               1
                               µ
                                             1
                                           "P D
                                                                     1 h                              (1          )
                                                                                                                      i
                              yijc I                  = yijc µ           w̃ ⇢˜        (1         )                     ,                              (27)
                                                                   Bijc
                                                                   |                  {z                              }
                                                                                     ⌘cijc

This equation shows that revenues are a markup µ over costs, i.e., pijc yijc = µyijc cijc , indicating that
prices are a markup over marginal costs cijc .

B.2     Deriving the Profit Expression
Taking a ratio of the first order conditions (Equation 25 and 26) and the analogous expression for
the intermediate good bundle yields an expression for the capital to labor and intermediate goods to
labor ratios:
                                                  kijc   w̃c                 Mijc   w̃c 1
                                                       =                          =
                                                  lijc   ⇢˜c                 lijc    1

Plugging these expressions into the production function yields expressions for input demand:
                          ✓                                   ◆1
                              w̃c 1                                             yijc h                                                                    i
  yijc = Bijc lijc kijc                                lijc            ) lijc =        w̃c 1 (˜⇢c )   1
                                                                                                                      (1                )    (1       )
                               1                                                Bijc
                                                                                yijc h                                                                    i
                                                                       ) kijc =              ⇢c ) 1
                                                                                        w̃c (˜              1
                                                                                                                      (1                 )   (1       )
                                                                                Bijc
                                                                                  yijc h                                                          i
                                                                       ) Mijc =          w̃ (˜⇢c )              (1                 )(       + )
                                                                                 Bijc

    Substituting the expression for labor into Equation 25 and rearranging terms yields the markup
expression in Equation 27. With these expressions for establishment factor demand, we can now
derive the expression for profits in Equation 5.

B.2.1     Profits
We begin with the following expression for profits in terms of factors:
                           0                                     1
                                                Z
           ⇡ijc = (1 ⌧iA ) @pijc yijc wc lijc       pv xv,ijc dv A ⇢kijc                                   (⌧iA             A
                                                                                                                           ⌧i/j )⇧pi/j
                                                                          v2J

In terms of after-wedge wages and interest rates, we can use the capital to labor ratio, the intermediate
goods to labor ratio, and the implication of Equation 27 that price is a markup over marginal costs
to express profits as follows:
                                    
                                      µ  1     1            (1 ⌧iA )
                           A
             ⇡ijc = (1 ⌧i )w̃c lijc                                         (⌧iA ⌧i/j
                                                                                    A
                                                                                      )⇧pi/j ,
                                        !w                     !⇢
changes on capital structure choices. See Heider and Ljungqvist (2014) for such an analysis.
  59
     See Appendix B.2 for the derivation. Note that the price of the intermediate good bundle is 1.




                                                                            51
                     0              p
                                        "                                    #1                        0            p
                                                                                                                        "                                    #1
                                ⇧                         P                                                     ⇧                   P
                         1 ⌧ie + Wi         ⌧sc ✓is
                                                 w             aw  ⌧ c ✓w
                                                                is0 s0 is0
                                                                                                           1+ Ri ⌧sc ✓is
                                                                                                                      r                   a⇢is0 ⌧sc0 ✓is
                                                                                                                                                      ⇢
                                                                                                                                                         0
           B                        i
                                                          s0                  C          B                          i
                                                                                                                                     s0                      C
where !w ⌘ @                                  1 ⌧iA                           A and !⇢ ⌘ @                                        1 ⌧ie                      A. Substituting for

labor and using the definition of product demand yields:
                                         
                            "P D "P D +1        1                                                                       (1        ⌧iA )
                      A
         ⇡ijc = (1 ⌧i )Iµ       cijc       µ                                                                                                        (⌧iA           A
                                                                                                                                                                  ⌧i/j )⇧pi/j
                                             !w      1                                                                           !⇢

Notice that in the standard case in which there are no apportionment wedges, the term in brackets
would be µ 1, indicating that profits are a markup over costs where µ 1. Substituting for cijc , we
can express profits as a function of local factor prices, local productivity, and taxes:
                                                                    P D +1)            P D +1)        ("P D +1)
                          ⇡ijc = (1               ⌧iA )w̃c ("                 ⇢˜c ("             Bc                 µ̃ic           (⌧iA          A
                                                                                                                                                 ⌧i/j )⇧pi/j ,                  (28)

where µ̃ic is an apportionment adjusted markup term and  is a constant term across locations.60
    Equation 28 shows that apportionment creates an externality between the after-tax profits within
multi-state firms. In practice, this tax-shifting term is empirically small relative to the other compo-
nents of establishment profitability. The intuition for this result is that the potential change in the
firm’s apportionment tax rates (⌧iA ⌧i/j  A ) is small and declines at a rate faster than the impact of

increasing establishment on profits. Appendix B.2.2 quantifies this argument explicitly.

B.2.2      Quantifying the Tax Shifting Term
In this section, we show that log profits can be closely approximated by ln ⇡ijc = ln(1 ⌧iA ) +
 ("P D + 1) ln w̃ + (1   )("P D + 1) ln ⇢˜ ("P D + 1) ln B + µ̃ic + ln . To illustrate this point, let ⇡
                                                                                                        ¯ be
the average profit of the existing N establishments and assume that the establishments in all states
are of the same size. In this case, we can write the change in firm profits from opening the new
establishment as:
                                   ⇡ = (1 ⌧ A )¯ ⇡     N⇡ ¯ (⌧ A ⌧0A ),
where is a factor of relative profitability of the old establishments and ⌧0A is the pre-existing e↵ective
corporate tax rate. It then follows that the share of new establishment profits as a fraction of the
total change in profit is given by:
                                                 1 ⌧A
                                                                  .
                                        1 ⌧A         N (⌧ A ⌧0A )
From this equation we observe that the fraction is close to 1 when the change in taxes is small, i.e.,
(⌧ A ⌧0A ) ⇡ 0 and is decreasing in the size of the firm N . Note that (⌧ A ⌧0A ) ⇡ ( N 1+1 N1 ). Related
to a point raised by Bradford (1978), one may be concerned that small activity weight changes are
associated with large profits, i.e., N ⇡
                                       ¯ , so the product of activity weight changes and profits may still
be large. However, the product is small in this setting. To see this, note that the product of the
change in activity weights and profits is roughly:
                                                                                 1           1
                                                                             (                 )          N⇡¯.
                                                                                                        | {z }
                                                                             | + {z
                                                                               N   1         N}
                                                                                                        profits
                                                                         Activity weight change

As N ! 1, this product goes to zero regardless of the size of ⇡
                                                              ¯ . Since most employment in the U.S.
happens at firms that are located in more that ten states, we believe that ignoring the tax shifting
                     ⇣                                                  ⌘"P D +1             h                                                       i
 60             PD                                                                                                      1             (1 ⌧iA )
       ⌘ Iµ"                  (1                     )   (1        )
                                                                                   and µ̃ic ⌘ µ            !w                1           !⇢
                                                                                                                                                         .



                                                                                           52
part of the firm’s decision problem does not significantly bias our estimates.

B.3     Local Labor Demand

                                                            ⇤
                                  LD             b
                                   c (wc ; Zc , ⌧s ) = E⇣ [n (⇣ijc )|c = argmax{Vijc0 }]Ec
                                                                                            c0

    To determine local labor demand, we first solve for the intensive labor demand term.

B.3.1     Intensive Margin

                                          yijc h         1             1                                (1     )
                                                                                                                   i
                               lijc =            w̃c         (˜
                                                              ⇢c )                (1                )
                                          Bijc
                                               (✏P D +1)          ✏P D +     1) (1+✏P D )
                               lijc = Bijc                 w̃c(                ⇢˜c               0 ,
                  PD         PD                (✏P D +2) (1                            )(✏P D +2) .                               ⇤ (⇣ )|c =
where 0 = Iµ✏         (✏  +2)+1                                        )    (1                         Thus, we can express E⇣ [lijc ijc
argmax{Vijc0 }] as follows:
   c0

                                                           ✏P D +      1) (1+✏P D )                      (✏P D +1)
                              E⇣ [n⇤ (⇣cj )|c] = w̃c(                    ⇢˜c               0 E⇣ [Bijc                 ],

               (✏P D +1)
where E⇣ [Bijc             ] = exp ( ✏P D             1)B̄c E⇣ [exp ( ✏P D                   1)⇣ijc |c].
                                                            |          {z                             }
                                                                                  ⌘zc


B.3.2     Growth in Local Labor Demand
We can now combine this intensive labor demand expression with the expression for aggregate location
decisions to determine local labor demand.
                                                    ⇤
                                          LD
                                           c = E⇣ [lijc (⇣ijc )|c = argmax{Vijc0 }]Ec
                                                                                  c0

Taking logs yields (log) labor demand:
                     ⇣       PD           P D)
                                                                                                  ⌘
         ln LD
             c  = ln   w̃c( ✏ + 1) ⇢˜(1+✏
                                     c         0 exp B̄c ( ✏P D                             1) zc +
                       B̄c                                                 ln µ̃ic            ln(1 ⌧¯isA)
                  +     F         F
                                      ln w̃c      F
                                                      ln ⇢˜c                                                                ln(C)   ln(¯
                                                                                                                                       ⇡)
                                                                     ("P D   + 1)      F     (" P D + 1) F

    Simplifying this expression yields the (log) local labor demand curve.61
                                                  ✓                     ◆
              D           ln(1 ⌧cb )                   PD        1                      ln µ̃ic
         ln Lc = 2        P D        F
                                          ln ⇡¯+    (✏    +1      F
                                                                    ) 1 ln w̃c        P D                                              F
                        ("     + 1)                                                ("     + 1)
                  ✓                     ◆         ✓                    ◆
                                    1                               1
                + (✏P D + 1         F
                                       ) ln ⇢˜c +    (✏P D + 1) + ( F ) B̄c + zc ,                                                          (29)

  61
     In the model, we treat all establishments as C-corporations, but some labor is demanded by other types of firms. We
assume that C-corporations and non C-corporations are the same in all other dimensions and, for analytical tractability,
that corporate status is fixed. As a result, we can replace the apportioned rate with the corporate form weighted average
business tax rate that was introduced in Section 4.




                                                                        53
where 2 is a common term across locations and ⇡
                                               ¯ is a sufficient statistic for tax, factor price, and
productivity changes in all other cities.62

B.4     Equilibrium and Incidence Expressions
Spatial equilibrium c depends market clearing in factor markets, housing markets, and output markets,
and can be expressed in terms of the expressions for log labor supply (Equation 1), the log of housing
market clearing condition from Section 1.2, and log labor demand (Equation 29) as follows:

               2                                             Āc
                                                                                                                      3
                                                              W
               6                                            BcH                                                        7
               4 ⇣                                                                                                    ⌘5
                                  ln(1 ⌧cb )                                                     ln µ̃ic
                     ln 2      ("P D +1) F
                                               ln ⇡
                                                  ¯+     (✏P D + 1) + ( 1F ) B̄c             ("P D +1)     F   + zc
                                          2  1             ↵ 3    2        3
                                          1  W             W        ln Nc
                                       =4 1   1        1 + ⌘c 5 ⇥ 4 ln wc 5
                                          1 "LD           0          ln rc

The expressions for log population, wages, and rents can be derived using Cramer’s rule yielding the
following local corporate tax elasticities:
                                                                             fcC
                                                   @ ln N        LS ("
                                                                       P D +1) F
                                                             = "
                                                @ ln(1 ⌧ c )        "LS "LD
                                                                                fcC
                                                   @ ln wc                 ("P D +1)     F
                                                             =⇣                      ⌘
                                                @ ln(1 ⌧ c )            1+⌘c ↵
                                                                                             "LD
                                                                       W (1+⌘ )+↵
                                                                             c

                                                                   ✓             ◆         fcC
                                                   @ ln rc             1 + "LS       ("P D +1) F
                                                             =
                                                @ ln(1 ⌧ c )            1 + ⌘c       "LS "LD
                                                                                fcC
                                  @ ln wc           @ ln rc         W LS ("
                                                                            P D +1) F
                                               ↵              =      "
                               @ ln(1 ⌧ c )      @ ln(1 ⌧ c )            "LS "LD
        ⇣               ⌘
             1+⌘ ↵
where       W (1+⌘)+↵       ⌘ "LS is the e↵ective labor supply elasticity.


C      Incidence and Efficiency of Corporate Taxes
This section discusses the e↵ects of a local corporate tax change on the welfare of agents in other
locations and on efficiency. The final section analyzes extreme cases of incidence.

C.1     Global Welfare
The welfare e↵ects derived in Section 2.2 would provide sufficient information for a state-elected official
who is interested in maximizing local welfare. Nonetheless, maximizing local objectives can a↵ect the
welfare of agents in other locations. We now characterize the e↵ects on both local “domestic” agents
and “foreign” agents using the framework in Kline (2010) and Kline and Moretti (2013) by allowing
wages and rental costs in other locations to be a↵ected by tax changes in any given state. We extend
  62
    Note that ⇡¯ is a actually a C-corporation and non C-Corporation share weighted average of profits in all other cities.
In addition, note that 2 ⌘ ln 0 ("P Dln+1)
                                          
                                             F .




                                                            54
their framework to incorporate firm owners and define aggregate social welfare W as the sum of the
expected welfare of workers, firm owners, and landowners:63
                                                      X
                                     W = VW + VF +        VcL .                               (30)
                                                                  c

       The e↵ect of a corporate tax cut in location c on aggregate worker welfare is now:

                                 dV W                              X
                                          = N c ( ẇ c  ↵ ṙ c ) +   Nc0 (ẇc0 ↵ṙc0 ) .
                             d ln(1 ⌧cc )   |        {z       }    0
                                                                     |       {z     }
                                              Domestic Workers   c 6=c Foreign Workers


Similar to the logic of Moretti (2010), who analyzes the e↵ects of a labor demand shock in the two
city case, a corporate tax cut not only benefits local workers by increasing wages, but it also helps
foreign workers via housing cost relief. These gains, however, can be o↵set to the extent that domestic
workers have to pay higher rents and foreign workers earn lower wages.
    The e↵ect of a cut in corporate taxes on aggregate firm owner welfare can be written as:

                                dV F                 X                      dwcc0
                                                                PD
                                         = E c ⇡
                                               ˙ c +   E c 0 ("    + 1)              ,                           (31)
                            d ln(1 ⌧cc )             0
                                                                        d ln(1 ⌧cc )
                                                      c 6=c

where Ec is the share of establishments in location c, ⇡˙ c is the percentage change in after-tax profits
in location c,    is the output elasticity of labor, and "P D is the product demand elasticity. As
in Bradford (1978), factor price changes a↵ect all firm owners foreign and domestic. In particular,
owners of domestic firms benefit from the mechanical decrease in tax liabilities and capital costs, but
have to pay higher wages. Owners of foreign firms do not get the mechanical or capital cost changes,
but they do gain from lower wage costs since fewer establishments bid up wages in their local labor
markets.
    Finally, landowner welfare changes by Ṅ1+⌘  c +ẇc
                                                     c
                                                        in each location. The aggregate of these e↵ects
may be positive or negative depending on the net flows of workers and establishments. Empirically
estimating global incidence is beyond the scope of this paper (see Fajgelbaum et al. (2015) for such an
analysis), yet these calculations illustrate the e↵ects of spatial equilibrium forces on aggregate welfare
when policies are set by maximizing local objectives.

C.2       Efficiency
The previous section detailed the e↵ects of corporate tax changes on the welfare of workers, firm
owners, and landlords. In this section, we turn to efficiency considerations by analyzing how state
corporate taxes a↵ect a social planner’s problem.64 The social planner maximizes global welfare
W = V W + V F + V L over {⌧cc } subject to a revenue requirement. The lagrangian takes the following
form:                                    0                            1
                                               B                                   C
                                               B c         X                   p   C
                                 L=W           B
                                             ' B⌧c Ec ⇡ p
                                                      ¯c +          c
                                                                             ¯c0 RRC
                                                                  ⌧ c0 E c 0 ⇡                                   (32)
                                                                                   C
                                               @           c0 6=c                  A
                                                |          {z                  }
                                                         Tax Revenue
  63
     For simplicity, we assume that there is a continuum of workers, establishments, and landowners of measure one.
We use a utilitarian social welfare function that adds up log consumption terms, but one could easily incorporate more
general social welfare weights as in Saez and Stantcheva (2013).
  64
     This accounting has abstracted away from welfare benefits of government spending which could improve amenities
or local productivity. See Suárez Serrato and Wingender (2011) for an analysis of the welfare e↵ects of government
spending changes.


                                                          55
where ⇡ ¯cp is the average pretax profit of establishments in location c and RR is the government’s
revenue requirement.65
    A consistent message from the previous section is that the e↵ect of a corporate tax change on W
does not depend on behavioral responses. However, behavioral responses have important budgetary
consequences that reveal the economic distortions of corporate taxes.66 There are two key e↵ects of
establishment behavior on the government’s budget. The first e↵ect is due to marginal establishments
that changed locations as in Busso, Gregory and Kline (2013). These establishments are roughly as
profitable as they would have been in their original location without the tax cut, yet tax revenues
from these firms decrease. Since the tax revenue required to pay for these cuts depends on how many
establishments move, establishment mobility has direct implications for efficiency costs. It follows
from Equation 7 that establishment mobility is decreasing in the dispersion of productivity F . As
a result, greater productivity dispersion lowers efficiency costs. Intuitively, if establishments are
inframarginal due to location-specific productivity advantages, small changes in taxes will not induce
establishments to move and will not require excessive payments to new establishments. Measuring
this e↵ects empirically requires estimates of the parameters of model.
    The second e↵ect on the budget is due to spatial distortions created by local corporate tax changes.
Lower taxes induce some establishments to leave the locations where they would be most productive.
As a consequence, scale of production, business revenues, tax collections, and aggregate welfare de-
cline. In addition, greater dispersion in (non-sales apportioned) state corporate rates exacerbate these
e↵ects. Measuring these e↵ect is more complicated as it requires measures of changes in profitability
due to establishment relocation and is an important topic for future research.67
    Although characterizing global efficiency is beyond the scope of this project, in Section 7 we charac-
terize the impacts of behavioral responses on local budgets from the perspective of state policymakers.
Additionally, we derive states’ revenue-maximizing tax rates and relate them to the efficiency costs
of state corporate taxes.

C.3     Extreme Incidence
This section explores limiting cases where the formulae in Table 1 display extreme incidence shares.
We focus our discussion on the e↵ects of three main parameters that govern worker mobility ( W ) ,
firm mobility ( F ), and the housing market response (⌘). We complement our theoretical discussion
with numerical examples presented in Table A1. We consider variations of three cases where one of
the agents receives 0% of incidence and where the remaining incidence may be split or allocated 100%
to one of the other agents. Table A1 provides examples of parameters for each of the following cases:

  A: 0% to Workers. This situation occurs when W = 0 implying that workers are perfectly mobile.
     There are no constraints on how the remaining incidence can be allocated. Sufficiently large
     values of F imply that labor demand will not be a↵ected such that workers are fixed and
      R = 0. This would imply that 100% of the gains go to firm owners. Alternatively, it could

     also be the case that landowners bear 100% of the benefit while firm owners receive 0%. This
  65
     We evaluate these costs starting from point of symmetric statutory rates of zero in all locations for simplicity. In
general, the initial distribution of tax rates impacts conclusions. For instance, suppose all states except California had a
5% rate. If California has a 6% rate, cutting corporate taxes there by one percent would not only increase production but
also reduce distortions. However, if California started at 4% and lowered rates to 3%, then production would increase
but the cut would also exacerbate distortions since some establishments that would more productive elsewhere would
move to California.
  66
     See Hendren (2015) for a discussion of the generality of this calculation.
  67
     Cullen and Suárez Serrato (2014) explores how establishment relocation a↵ects productivity as measured by patent
activity.




                                                            56
   occurs when, holding all other parameters constant, ⌘ is such that
                                                   µ 1
                                                                !
                                                         F
                              1 + ("P D + 1)     1+⌘ ↵              = 0.
                                                   ↵         "LD

   Note that this does not rely on extreme values of F and is rather a knife-edge case. Indeed,
   holding ⌘ at this level as well as all other parameters and decreasing F , implying relatively
   more mobile firms, would lower profits below zero.

B: 0% to land. This situation occurs when ⌘ is sufficiently large, which implies that the stock
   of housing is perfectly adaptable to housing demand. There are no constraints on how the
   remaining incidence can be allocated. For instance, when workers are relatively mobile, and
   certainly at W = 0, firm owners bear all of the benefits. As in the case above, one can also find
   situations where firm owners earn zero profits, which occurs in knife-edge settings that involve
   relatively immobile workers and that do not require F = 0.

C: 0% to firm owners. In contrast to workers, firms may earn zero benefits from a tax cut even in
   cases where F > 0. The zero-profit condition given by:
                                                    µ 1
                                                               !
                                                         F
                                1 + ("P D + 1)                     =0
                                                  "LS        "LD

   does not have a meaningful economic interpretation beyond the fact that profits are zero. Indeed,
   this occurs when the profit cost of rising wages is larger than the lower costs due to a cheaper
   after-tax cost of capital by the exact amount of the decrease in taxes. When this condition
   holds, the remaining incidence can be allocated to either landowners and workers arbitrarily.
   One can find examples such that both this condition holds and W = 0 so that all incidence is
   allocated to landowners. Alternatively, one can find cases where this condition holds and 100%
   of the incidence is allocated to workers. These situations occur when ⌘ is large, so that housing
   supply is very adaptable to changes in the quantity of housing demanded.




                                                 57
                                                Table A1: Numerical Examples of Extreme Incidence

                              A: 0% Workers                                B: 0% Land                                   C: 0% Firms
      Parameters    Shared    100% Land 100% Firms           Shared       100% Workers     100% Firms       Shared    100% Workers 100% Land
      ↵               0.30        0.30       0.30                0.30          0.30           0.30           0.30         0.30         0.30
                      0.15        0.15       0.15                0.15          0.15           0.15           0.15         0.15         0.15
                      0.14        0.14       0.14                0.14          0.14           0.14           0.14         0.14         0.14
      "P D           -5.00       -5.00      -5.00               -5.00         -5.00           -5.00          -5.00        -5.00       -5.00
      ⌘               3.50      29.00        3.50            100000.00     100000.00       100000.00         3.50      100000.00       3.50
       W             0.00        0.00       0.00                 0.47         0.12            1.00           0.31         0.31        0.00
       F             10.00       10.00    10000.00               1.00          1.00         1000.00          0.43         0.50        1.50
58




      Incidence
      Workers         0.00       0.00           0.00            0.97            2.56           0.00           1.98         2.56            0.00
      Landowners      1.30       8.38           0.00            0.00            0.00           0.00           1.99         0.00           8.72
      Firmowners      1.31       0.03           1.54            0.96            0.01           1.54           0.00         0.00           -0.03

      Shares
      Workers         0.00%      0.00%         0.00%           50.00%         100.00%          0.00%         50.00%        100.00%        0.00%
      Landowners 50.00%         100.00%        0.00%            0.00%          0.00%           0.00%         50.00%         0.00%        100.00%
      Firmowners 50.00%          0.00%        100.00%          50.00%          0.00%         100.00%          0.00%         0.00%         0.00%
     Notes: This table provides numerical examples where the shares of incidence are allocated in an extreme fashion. The only parameters that
     vary in this table are F , W , and ⌘. For each case, where one of the agents receives 0% of the incidence, there exists parameters where the
     incidence can be allcoated in an arbitrary fashion such that the remaining agents can receive from 0% to 100% of the incidence.
D      Revenue-Maximizing Corporate Tax Rate
In the next two sections, we briefly derive the revenue-maximizing corporate tax rate under two
scenarios about the underlying policymaker’s objective. First, we consider the case when the poli-
cymaker’s objective is to maximize corporate tax revenue while ignoring other tax collections. The
second case assumes the policymaker’s objective is to maximize all forms of tax revenue. We show
that, while the revenue-maximizing tax rate is inversely related to firm mobility, firm mobility on
its own does not justify a low maximal tax rate. This conclusion, however, is weakened when the
policymaker’s objective considers the e↵ects of corporate tax changes on other revenue sources.68

D.1     Maximal Tax Rate with No Other State Taxes
Local (corporate) tax revenue is given by:

                                                                             ⌧cc
                                          T axRevc = Ec ⇡
                                                        ¯c                                 .
                                                                  1      ⌧cc       tf ed

Taking logs and di↵erentiating with respect to ln(1                    ⌧cc ) we have:

                            d ln T axRevc      d ln Ec                          1                1
                                       c
                                          =               ¯˙ c
                                                         +⇡
                             d ln(1 ⌧c )    d ln(1 ⌧cc )                        ⌧cc        1   ⌧cc    tf ed

Setting the expression above equal to zero and rearranging we have:
                                                            1
                                               ⌧c⇤ =              (1         tf ed ).
                                                       ¯˙ c + Ėc
                                                       ⇡

D.1.1     Maximal Tax Rate with Other State Taxes
Consider now the maximum tax rate for corporate income when the state also collects personal
income.69 Local tax revenue is given by:
                                                                        ⌧cc
                                 T otalT axRevc = Ec ⇡
                                                     ¯c                                 + Nc wc ⌧ci
                                                              1        ⌧cc      tf ed

    Following a derivation similar to that in the previous section, we find a revenue-maximizing tax
rate given by:
                                                 1
                    ⌧c⇤⇤ =                                                 (1 tf ed ),
                           ¯c + Ėc + (revsharec /revshareC
                           ˙⇡                  pers
                                                           c )(ẇc + Ṅc )

where revsharepers
              c    /revshareC
                            c is the relative share of personal tax revenues and corporate tax revenues.


D.1.2     Calculating the Tax Elasticity of Establishment Location for States
This section describes the calculation of the elasticity of establishment location with respect to state
corporate tax rates and explores two forms of heterogeneity that may a↵ect this elasticity: size of
location (in terms of market share of establishments) and the e↵ects of apportionment across locations
in a given state.
  68
      In addition, these calculations abstract from other potential policy goals (e.g., maximizing welfare) as well as from
issues related to assumptions regarding risk aversion of the agents in the model.
   69
      In this derivation, we lump sales revenue and personal income tax revenue together. We also ignore the e↵ects of
corporate taxes on property tax revenue since local areas rather than states collect the vast majority of property taxes.
However, there are interesting fiscal externalities on localities that do collect property taxes.



                                                             59
State Tax Revenue
In the simple case without apportionment e↵ects, state corporate tax revenue is given by:
                                                                       ⌧sc
                                     T axRevs = Es ⇡
                                                   ¯s                                 ,
                                                                 1    ⌧sc     tf ed
                                                                                            ⇡
                                                                                            ¯s
where Es is the share of national establishments in state s and 1                         ⌧sc tf ed       is average pre-tax profits.
Taking logs and di↵erentiating with respect to ln(1 ⌧sc ) we have:

                        d ln T axRevs      d ln Es                          1                 1
                                   c
                                      =              +⇡
                                                      ˜s                                                      .
                         d ln(1 ⌧s )    d ln(1 ⌧sc )                        ⌧sc       1    ⌧sc       tf ed
                                                                                                                             d ln Es
To derive the key component of the expression above – the state level location elasticity                                 d ln(1 ⌧sc )   –
first consider the elasticity with respect to changes at the local PUMA level.

Local Elasticity

Let tc0 be e↵ective corporate rate paid in location c0 . Suppose that a policy can be enacted that
changes only tc0 but not other corporate tax rates in the same state. From standard logit formulae
(see Train (2009), Chapter 3.6 ), the elasticity of establishment location for a given location c is given
by:
                                           (        1
                            d log Ec            F ("P D +1) (1     Ec ) if c0 = c
                                         =                1
                         d log(1 tc0 )                F ("P D +1) Ec    otherwise.

    As we show below, this is not the same exercise as changing the state corporate tax rate.                                      The
reason is that the change in the state rate a↵ects the rates of every location within a state                                      and
is thus described by a simultaneous change in every state, rather than just a change in c0 .                                       The
correct calculation needs to account for both within-states changes in establishment location as                                   well
as inter-state changes in establishment location that occur from this joint change.
    We now derive the elasticity at the state level under two di↵erent cases.

No Apportionment Taxation
Let ⌧Sc be the state corporate tax rate in state S and assume that tc = ⌧Sc for every c in S. The
experiment of changing ⌧Sc corresponds to simultaneously changing the rate in every PUMA c in state
S. The elasticity of the state tax on establishment location for a given location c is then given by:

                               d log Ec             X          d log Ec d log(1                  tc 0 )
                                                =
                           d log(1   tCorp
                                      S    )        c0 2S
                                                            d log(1 tc0 ) d log(1                ⌧sc )
                                                                                                  !
                                                              1                           X
                                                =         F ("P D
                                                                                  1           Ec0         ,
                                                                     + 1)
                                                                                      c0 2S

                                          d log(1 tc0 )                                          P
where we use the assumption that          d log(1 ⌧sc )     = 1. Letting ES ⌘                             Ec0 describe the share of
                                                                                                 c0 2S
establishments in the state, we find that this elasticity is smaller that the own-tax elasticity in a given
location by the fraction:
                                               1 ES
                                                        < 1.
                                               1 Ec


                                                            60
This result shows that as taxes are simultaneously reduced in several places, fewer establishments
will move into a given location with a tax cut. From this result we can log-linearize to arrive at the
elasticity at the state level, which is given by:

                                   d log ES      X ✓ Ec ◆ d log Ec
                                              =
                                d log(1 ⌧sc )        ES d log(1 ⌧sc )
                                                 c2S
                                                            1
                                             =         F ("P D
                                                                        (1   ES ) .                 (33)
                                                                 + 1)

Apportionment Taxation
The result in Equation 33 holds when dd log(1
                                          log(1 tc )
                                                ⌧sc ) = 1. However, due to di↵erent rules across states
and di↵erent activity weights across locations in a given state, this derivative is not generally equal
to 1. Following the same logic as above, it can be shown that:
                                                                                    !
                   d log ES            1                     X ✓ Ec ◆ d log(1 tc )
                              =                  (1 ES )                              ,
                d log(1 ⌧sc )      F ("P D + 1)                  ES d log(1 ⌧sc )
                                                                  c2S

where the last term measures the size-weighted average e↵ect of a change in the state corporate rate
on the e↵ective rate paid by firms in a given state.
   This formula accounts for di↵erences across states that are due to size of the state as well as to the
formulae used to determine state taxes and the distribution of economic activity within each state.
Note that
                                                                  ✓                    ⇢ ◆
          d log(1 tc )    (1 ⌧sc )      x x     w w     ⇢ ⇢      c   w @as
                                                                          w
                                                                                  ⇢ @as
                       =           ⇥ (✓s as + ✓s as + ✓s ac ) + ⌧s ✓s Corp + ✓s Corp          ,      (34)
         d log(1 ⌧sc )    (1 tc )                                     @ts           @ts

where ✓Sj is the apportionment weight on factor j and ajs is the activity weight is for factor j and
where j = x, w, ⇢ correspond to sales, payroll, and property, respectively.


E     Empirical Appendix
This section has several components. Section E.1 provides a detailed description of estimates un-
derlying Figure 4. Section E.2 provides detailed steps on which parameter is estimated and what
data is used. Section E.3 shows evidence on the influence (or lack thereof) of investment incentive
changes. In Section E.4, we support the robustness of the reduced-form incidence results using a
wide-variety of control variables (the state tax base in subsection E.4.1 and state political and fiscal
policy in subsection E.4.2) as well as calibration values in subsection E.4.3. In Section E.5, we provide
estimation details on how we estimate the system with four additional moments from Bartik Shocks
using classical minimum distance (CMD). Section E.6 presents a complementary approach to our
main estimation methodology that estimates the key equations – labor supply, housing supply, and
establishment location – equation-by-equation, which facilitates further discussion of our model and
provides more flexibility in terms of the estimated structural parameters.

E.1    Annual E↵ects of Business Tax Cuts on Establishment Growth
One potential concern is that tax changes may be related to local economic conditions and bias our
main result. We measure the e↵ects of local business tax cuts on the growth in the number of local




                                                       61
establishments using the following specification:

                                        h
                                        X
            ln Ec,t   ln Ec,t   1   =         h [ln(1
                                                         b
                                                        ⌧c,t   h)   ln(1    b
                                                                           ⌧c,t   1 h )]   + D0s,t   s,t   + ec,t ,     (35)
                                        h=h

                                                                                 b
where ln Ec,t ln Ec,t 1 is the annual log change in local establishments, ln(1 ⌧c,t              b
                                                                                     h ) ln(1 ⌧c,t 1 h )
is the annual log change in the net-of-business-tax rate for di↵erent time horizons indexed by h, Ds,t
is a vector with year dummies as well as state dummies for states in the industrial Midwest in the
1980s. The specification relates changes in establishment growth to leads and lags of annual changes
in business taxes, di↵erences out time invariant local characteristics, and adjusts for average national
establishment growth and abnormal conditions in rust belt states in the 1980s.
     This specification allows for lags that can show the dynamic impacts of tax changes and leads
that can detect pre-trends. The baseline specification includes five lags and no leads, i.e., h = 5
and h = 0. In this baseline, we relate business tax changes over the past five years to establishment
growth. Summing up the coefficients for each lag provides an estimate of the cumulative e↵ect of a
change in business taxes. For example, a state tax change in 2000 has its initial impact 0 in 2000, its
first year impact 1 in 2001, the second year impact in 2002, etc. The number of local establishments
                                                                                                   P
                                                                                                   5
in 2005 reflects the impact of each of these lagged e↵ects, which sum to the cumulative e↵ect         h.
                                                                                                                      h=0
We also include leads in some specifications. Including leads, i.e., h < 0, enables the detection of
abnormal average establishment growth preceding tax changes.
    Table A5 shows results for di↵erent combinations of leads and lags. Column (1) shows that a one
percent cut in business taxes increases establishment growth by roughly 1.5% over a five-year period.
This increase in average growth tends to occur two and three years after the cut. Columns (2) sets
h = 2 and Column (3) sets h = 5. The estimates of each of the leads in Column (2) indicate
that average establishment growth in the two years preceding a business tax cut are not statistically
di↵erent from zero. The same applies for the specification with 5 leads in Column (3). In addition,
the p-value of the joint test that all leads are zero is quite large for both cs. Columns (4) through (7)
show similar results with 10 lags and up to 10 leads. Panel A of Figure 4 and Panel B of Figure 4
help visualize the resulting estimates from the ten leads and lags.
    Panel A of Figure 4 shows the cumulative e↵ects of the estimates in Column (4). It shows that
establishment growth increases following a one percent cut in business taxes, especially two to four
years after a tax cut. The cumulative e↵ect after ten years is roughly three percent, which amounts to
roughly one fifth of a standard deviation in establishment growth over a ten-year period. Controlling
for 10 lags makes the estimates less precise, but the cumulative e↵ect after 10 years is statistically
significant at the 90% level. Panel B of Figure 4 shows the analogous information using the estimates
in column (7), which come from a specification with 10 leads and lags. This figure with leads shows a
modest dip in average establishment growth in the years before business tax changes occur. However,
this decline is statistically indistinguishable from zero. The figure also shows the cumulative e↵ects
of the lags if the leads were set to zero. The two cumulative e↵ects with and without leads are quite
similar.
    Regarding the precision of the event study estimates, it is worth noting three things. First, if
we were to narrow the event window around the event, we would reduced the number of estimated
e↵ects and increase precision. For example, Column (3) of Table A5 shows statistically significant
e↵ects two and three years after the tax cut in a specification that includes leads and lags for five
years. Second, having a long event window also reduces the number of data points. Notice that the
number of observations in column (7), which corresponds to the event study, is less than half the
number of observations in Column (1) and (2). The magnitudes of the two year and three year e↵ects


                                                               62
are similar across columns, but they become less precise when we increase the number of parameters
and decrease the number of observations. Finally, note that we can reject the hypothesis that the
cumulative e↵ects are zero in specifications with fewer parameters and more observations.

E.2     Detailed Estimation Steps
This section enumerates the estimation steps and shows which parameter is being estimated, what
data are used, and under what assumptions.

E.2.1     Overview
There are four main estimation steps:

   1. Estimate Reduced-Form Parameters

          • Estimates      W,   N,     R,   E.

          • Results in Table 4.

   2. Estimate Incidence Using Linear Combinations of Reduced-Form Estimates
                                            ⇣ N E        ⌘
        • Estimates W ↵ R , R , and 1 +         W    + 1   ( W   ) from Table 1.
          • Results in Table 5.

   3. Estimate Structural Parameters

          • Estimates      F,   W,   ⌘, "P D .
          • Results in Table 6.

   4. Estimate Incidence using Structural Parameter Estimates

          • Estimates ẇ ↵ṙ, ṙ, ⇡˙ from Table 1. Equations 10, 11, and 12 express ẇ, ṙ, and ⇡˙ in
            terms of the structural parameters.
          • Results in Table 7.

E.2.2     Estimate Reduced-Form Parameters
   1. Parameter:       W


          • Specification: Equation 21 where Y = W .
          • Data:
               –   Cells: 490 county groups by decade: 1980-1990, 1990-2000, 2000-2010.
               –   ln wc,t ln wc,t 10 from ACS (see Appendix Section A.2 for wage construction details).
               –            b )
                   [ln(1 ⌧c,t     ln(1 ⌧ b )c,t 10 ] from sources described in section 4.2.2.
               –   Ds,t are indicator variables based on geography.
          • Identification Assumption: E uW
                                          c,t |[ln(1
                                                                b )
                                                               ⌧c,t   ln(1     b
                                                                              ⌧c,t   10 )], Ds,t   = 0.70
  70
    As we note in the main text in section 5, this assumption would be violated by potentially confounding elements such
as concomitant changes in the tax base, government spending, and productivity shocks. From a dynamic perspective,
a violation would also occur if tax changes are the result of adverse local economic conditions that also determine the
long-di↵erence in W . We support this identifying assumption by showing that the main reduced-form e↵ects of local
business taxes on our outcomes are not a↵ected by changes in a number of potential confounders and by showing that
the tax changes are not related to prior economic conditions.


                                                          63
        • Results in Table A7.

  2. Parameter:      N


        • Specification: Equation 21 where Y = N .
        • Data:
             –   Cells: 490 county groups by decade: 1980-1990, 1990-2000, 2000-2010.
             –   ln Nc,t ln Nc,t 10 from BEA Regional Accounts (CA30).71
             –            b )
                 [ln(1 ⌧c,t     ln(1 ⌧ b )c,t 10 ] from sources described in section 4.2.2.
             –   Ds,t are indicator variables based on geography.
        • Identification Assumption: E uN
                                        c,t |[ln(1
                                                          b )
                                                         ⌧c,t   ln(1    b
                                                                       ⌧c,t   10 )], Ds,t   = 0.
        • Results in Table     A6.72

  3. Parameter:      R


        • Specification: Equation 21 where Y = R.
        • Data:
             –   Cells: 490 county groups by decade: 1980-1990, 1990-2000, 2000-2010.
             –   ln rc,t ln rc,t 10 from ACS (see Appendix Section A.2 for rental cost details).
             –            b )
                 [ln(1 ⌧c,t      ln(1 ⌧ b )c,t 10 ] from sources described in section 4.2.2.
             –   Ds,t are indicator variables based on geography.
        • Identification Assumption: E uR
                                        c,t |[ln(1
                                                          b )
                                                         ⌧c,t   ln(1    b
                                                                       ⌧c,t   10 )], Ds,t   = 0.
        • Results in Table A8.

  4. Parameter:      E


        • Specification: Equation 21 where Y = E.
        • Data:
             –   Cells: 490 county groups by decade: 1980-1990, 1990-2000, 2000-2010.
             –   ln Ec,t ln Ec,t 10 from County Business Patterns.
             –            b )
                 [ln(1 ⌧c,t     ln(1 ⌧ b )c,t 10 ] from sources described in section 4.2.2.
             –   Ds,t are indicator variables based on geography.
        • Identification Assumption: E uE
                                        c,t |[ln(1
                                                          b )
                                                         ⌧c,t   ln(1    b
                                                                       ⌧c,t   10 )], Ds,t   = 0.
        • Results in Table 4.

E.2.3   Estimate Incidence Using Linear Combinations of Reduced-Form Estimates
  1. Incidence on Workers

        • Expression:      W    ↵   R

        • Data:
             – The data for reduced-form estimates of       W   and    R   listed in section E.2.2.
 71
    The comparable estimate in terms of employment rather than population uses employment data from County
Business Patterns.
 72
    The results for employment rather than population are in Table A9.




                                                    64
                – ↵ is calibrated (at di↵erent values depending on the Table).73
            • Identification Assumptions:
                – E uW
                     c,t |[ln(1
                                            b )
                                           ⌧c,t       ln(1    b
                                                             ⌧c,t   10 )], Ds,t   = 0.
                – E uR
                     c,t |[ln(1
                                            b )
                                           ⌧c,t       ln(1    b
                                                             ⌧c,t   10 )], Ds,t   = 0.
            • Results in Table 5.

   2. Incidence on Landowners

            • Expression:        R

            • Data:
                – The data for reduced-form estimates of                          R   listed in section E.2.2.
            • Identification Assumption:
                – E uR
                     c,t |[ln(1
                                            b )
                                           ⌧c,t       ln(1    b
                                                             ⌧c,t   10 )], Ds,t   = 0.
            • Results in Table 5.

   3. Incidence on Firm owners
                           ⇣ N                    E
                                                        ⌘
         • Expression: 1 +                            +1 (   W         )
                               W

            • Data:
                – The data for reduced-form estimates of N , E , and W listed in section E.2.2.
                – is calibrated (at di↵erent values depending on the Table).74
            • Identification Assumptions:
                – E uN
                     c,t |[ln(1
                                            b )
                                           ⌧c,t       ln(1    b
                                                             ⌧c,t 10 )], Ds,t     = 0.
                – E     uE
                         c,t |[ln(1
                                            b )
                                           ⌧c,t       ln(1    b
                                                             ⌧c,t 10 )], Ds,t     = 0.
                – E     uW
                         c,t |[ln(1
                                            b )
                                           ⌧c,t       ln(1    b
                                                             ⌧c,t 10 )], Ds,t     = 0.
            • Results in Table 5.

E.2.4       Estimate Structural Parameters
       • Parameters:        F,   W,       ⌘, "P D .

       • There are four moments in equation 17:

           1.   W     ẇ
           2.   N     ẇ"LS
                R     1+"LS
           3.          1+⌘ ẇ
                E     µ 1
           4.           F        F   ẇ

       • Definitions:

           – Equation 10 defines ẇ in terms of the structural parameters.
                   ⇣           ⌘
           – "LS = W1+⌘    ↵
                       (1+⌘)+↵
                                 in terms of the structural parameters.
  73
     See Appendix Tables A24 and A25 for iterations of this table for the following calibrated parameter values: ↵ 2
{.5, .65}, respectively.
  74
     See Appendix Tables A26 and A27 for iterations of this table for the following calibrated parameter values:   2
{.75, .5}, respectively.


                                                                      65
                ⇥    1
                                ⇤    1
        – µ=        "P D
                           +1            in terms of the structural parameters.

  • Identification Assumptions:

        – E uW
             c,t |[ln(1
                                     b )
                                    ⌧c,t       ln(1    b
                                                      ⌧c,t   10 )], Ds,t    = 0.
        – E uN
             c,t |[ln(1
                                     b )
                                    ⌧c,t       ln(1    b
                                                      ⌧c,t 10 )], Ds,t      = 0.
        – E    uR
                c,t |[ln(1
                                     b )
                                    ⌧c,t       ln(1    b
                                                      ⌧c,t 10 )], Ds,t      = 0.
        – E uE
             c,t |[ln(1
                                     b )
                                    ⌧c,t       ln(1    b
                                                      ⌧c,t 10 )], Ds,t      = 0.

  • Data

        – The data for reduced-form estimates of                           W,     N,   R,   and   E   listed in section E.2.2.
        – We calibrate the output elasticity                      and      "P D   in some columns (see Table).

  • Results in Table 6.

E.2.5   Estimate Incidence using Structural Parameter Estimates
  1. Incidence on Wages

        • Expression: ẇ
        • Definitions:
              – Equation 10 defines ẇ in terms of the structural parameters.
        • Data:
              – The data are those listed in section E.2.4.
        • Identification Assumptions:
              – The identification assumptions are those listed in section E.2.4.
        • Results in Table 7.

  2. Incidence on Landowners

        • Expression: ṙ
        • Definitions:
              – Equation 11 defines ṙ in terms of the structural parameters.
        • Data:
              – The data are those listed in section E.2.4.
        • Identification Assumptions:
              – The identification assumptions are those listed in section E.2.4.
        • Results in Table 7.

  3. Incidence on Workers

        • Expression: ẇ                 ↵ṙ
        • Definitions:
              – Equation 10 defines ẇ in terms of the structural parameters.
              – Equation 11 defines ṙ in terms of the structural parameters.
        • Data:

                                                                     66
               – The data are those listed in section E.2.4.
               – ↵ is calibrated.
          • Identification Assumptions:
               – The identification assumptions are those listed in section E.2.4.
          • Results in Table 7.
   4. Incidence on Firm Owners
          • Expression: 1 + ("P D + 1)(ẇ            )
          • Definitions:
               – Equation 10 defines ẇ in terms of the structural parameters.
          • Data:
               – The data are those listed in section E.2.4.
               – and are calibrated. "P D is calibrated in some specifications (see Table).
          • Identification Assumptions:
               – The identification assumptions are those listed in section E.2.4.
          • Results in Table 7.

E.3     Robustness: Investment Tax Credit Changes
One concern is that concomitant investment incentives might confound the e↵ects of state corporate
tax changes in ways that are not detectable in the long di↵erence specification. To address this
concern, we use data generously provided by Chirinko and Wilson (2008) and find that there is no
relationship between long-run tax changes and investment tax credit changes. Figure A7 shows how
the average tax rate change varies for di↵erent bins of investment credit changes. The best fit line is
fairly flat, the estimated slope is 0.026 (se=.06), which is quite modest and not statistically di↵erent
from zero. For further discussion on concerns regarding the tax base, such as the deductibility of
federal corporate taxes and gross receipts taxes, see Appendix Section A.3.4.

E.4     Robustness: Incidence Estimates Using Reduced-Form E↵ects
In this section, we establish the robustness of the reduced-form incidence estimates for a few types
of controls: (1) state tax base changes in E.4.1 and (2) controls for state political, fiscal policy, and
economic condition in subsection E.4.2. We estimate the four main reduced-form e↵ects – N , W ,
  R , and E – using the specification in Equation 21 plus a given control. We then use those four

reduced-form estimates to implement out incidence expressions in Table 1. To construct Appendix
Table A19 Columns (1)-(12), we consecutively add the following controls to the baseline specification
(i.e., Equation 21).75

E.4.1     State Tax Base Controls
   1. Throwback rules. These rules eliminate “nowhere income” that would be untaxed by either the
      state with the corporation’s nexus or the state in which the relevant sales were being made.
      Data from Bernthal et al. (2012).76
  75
     For Column 13, we control for all of the tax base controls in Columns (1)-(12) other than Column 7. Column 7
uses a di↵erent tax rate that adjusts for federal deductibility (see equation 36), so to avoid using a di↵erent tax rate
in the all controls specification in Column 13, we use the main tax rate and account for federal deductibility using an
indicator for whether or not federal income tax is deductible in a given state-year in Column 13.
  76
     See A.3.2 for additional details on data on throwback rules. Specifically, see footnote 47.


                                                          67
  2. Combined reporting rules. An indicator of whether a state requires a unitary business to submit
     combined reporting. Data from Bernthal et al. (2012).77

  3. Investment tax credit. This variable is the rate of the tax credit. Data from Chirinko and
     Wilson (2008).

  4. Research and development tax credit. This variable is the statutory credit rate adjusted for
     recapture and type of credit. Data from Wilson (2009).

  5. Loss carry-back rules. The number of years that a corporation may carry forward any excess
     loss following the loss year. Data from CCH (1980-2010).

  6. Loss carry-forward rules. The number of years that a corporation may carry forward any excess
     loss following the loss year. Data from CCH (1980-2010).

  7. Franchise Tax. An indicator for whether or not there exists a franchise tax in a given state-year.
     Data from CCH (1980-2010).

  8. Federal Income Tax Deductible. An indicator for whether or not federal income tax is deductible
     in a given state-year. Data from CCH (1980-2010). To account for federal deductibility, we
     define the keep rate in for Column 7 of Appendix Table A19 as follows:
                                   ⇢      c
                                     1 ⌧s,t    ⌧fced,t     if I(F edDeductable)s,t = 0
                  (1 ⌧s+f ed,t ) =          c          c                                       (36)
                                     (1 ⌧s,t )(1 ⌧f ed,t ) if I(F edDeductable)s,t = 1

        where ⌧fced,t is the top U.S. statutory federal corporate tax from the University of Michigan
        World Tax Database.

  9. Federal Income as State Tax Base. An indicator for whether or not federal income is used as
     the state tax base in a given state-year. Data from CCH (1980-2010).

 10. Federal Accelerated Depreciation. An indicator for whether or not federal accelerated depreci-
     ation is allowed in a given state-year. Data from CCH (1980-2010).

 11. Accelerated Cost Recovery System (ACRS) Depreciation. An indicator for whether or not
     ACRS is allowed in a given state-year. Data from CCH (1980-2010).

 12. Federal Bonus Depreciation. An indicator for whether or not federal bonus depreciation is
     allowed in a given state-year. Data from CCH (1980-2010).

E.4.2      Controls for State Political, Fiscal Policy, and Economic Conditions
Similarly, to construct Appendix Table A20 Columns (1)-(10), we consecutively add the following
controls to the baseline specification (i.e., Equation 21).

  1. Political Controls. This specification includes indicators for political party. In particular, the
     specification is Equation 21 plus I(Gov = D)s,t + I(Gov = R)s,t + I(Gov = Indep)s,t .

  2. Sales Tax Rate. This specification includes the state sales tax rate, i.e., Equation 21 plus
     SalesT axRates,t .

  3.      Sales Tax Rate. This specification includes the percentage change in the state sales tax rate
        over a 10 year period, i.e., Equation 21 plus ln SalesT axRates,t ln SalesT axRates,t 10 .
 77
      See A.3.2 for additional details on data on combined reporting. Specifically, see footnote 47.


                                                            68
  4. Income Tax Rate. This specification includes the state personal income tax rate, i.e., Equa-
     tion 21 plus IncomeT axRates,t .

  5.      Income Tax Rate. This specification includes the percentage change in the state income tax
       rate over a 10 year period, i.e., Equation 21 plus ln IncomeT axRates,t ln IncomeT axRates,t 10 .

  6.      Gov. Expend/capita. This specification includes the percentage change in government expen-
       ditures per capita, i.e., Equation 21 plus ln GovExpendP ercapitas,t ln GovExpendP ercapitas,t      10 .

  7. Corporate Tax Rev. to GDP. This specification includes the corporate tax revenue share of
     GDP, i.e., Equation 21 plus CorpT axRevGDP ratios,t .

  8.      Gov. Expend/capita and Corporate Tax Rev. to GDP. This specification is Equation 21 plus
       ln GovExpendP ercapitas,t ln GovExpendP ercapitas,t 10 and CorpT axRevGDP ratios,t .

  9. Bartik. This equation is the same as specification (4) in the main table. It is included for later
     iterations of this table, which use state statutory corporate tax rates and state fixed e↵ects.

 10. Gross Receipt Tax Control. This specification includes indicators for whether the state has a
     gross receipts tax. In particular, the specification is Equation 21 plus I(GRT )s,t .

    To show that these results are robust to focusing on variation just from statutory state corporate
tax rates, we provide estimates from each of the same 10 specifications in Appendix Table A21 for
                     c in place of ⌧ b for t0 2 {t, t 10} in the baseline Equation 21. We also provide
specifications with ⌧s,t 0          c,t0
Appendix Table A22, which uses the same specifications as Appendix Table A21, but also adjusts for
federal corporate taxes and deductibility. As in Appendix Table A19, we use the keep rate definition
in equation 36 for Appendix Table A22. Finally, we provide results for Equation 21 for each of our
10 controls but with state-fixed e↵ects in Appendix Table A23.

E.4.3    Di↵erent Calibrated Parameter Values
We show how sensitive these tables are to di↵erent assumptions about the housing expenditure share
↵ and the output elasticity ratio . Our baseline calibrated parameter values are ↵ = .3 for the
housing expenditure share (using data from the Consumer Expenditure Survey) and = .9 for the
output elasticity ratio (using data from the Bureau of Economic Analysis on gross output shares for
private industries). Appendix Tables A24, A25, A26, and A27 provide iterations of Table 5 for the
following calibrated parameter values: ↵ 2 {.5, .65} and 2 {.75, .5}, respectively.
    Finally, to obtain a sense of the range of the estimates for ‘extreme’ combinations, we run this
incidence analysis for all of the combinations of parameter values in the paper, i.e., ↵ 2 {0.3, 0.5,
0.65} and 2 {0.5, 0.75, 0.9}, for each of the specifications in the reduced-form incidence tables (i.e.,
Table A24-A27). Quantitatively, the extremes for each of the shares are: 0.175 - 0.374, 0.403 - 0.614,
and 0.133 - 0.335 for workers, firm owners, and landowners, respectively.

E.5     CMD Estimation of the Simultaneous Equation Model
This section shows how we introduce Bartik shocks in section E.5.1 and both personal tax and Bartik
shocks in section E.5.3 for the all shocks specifications.

E.5.1    CMD Estimation with Moments from Bartik Shocks
We interpret the Bartik as a proxy for changes in local productivity that may take three forms: a
productivity shock to the housing supply, a mean productivity shock to the local area, or a shock to


                                                   69
the average idiosyncratic productivity of the firms locating in a given area. In order to interpret the
variation in this shock in each of the units of these three types of productivity, we estimate auxiliary
parameters for the housing supply, labor demand, and establishment location equations as follows:

                                         Bc,t = 'Bartikc,t + vc,t
                                         H
                                        Bc,t = 'h Bartikc,t + vc,t
                                                               h

                                        zc,t = 'z Bartikc,t + vc,t
                                                               z
                                                                   .

The auxiliary parameters (', 'h , 'z ) project the Bartik shock to each type of productivity shock.
   With these productivity measures, we define a new reduced form that relates the matrix of tax
and Bartik shocks:                        ⇥                         ⇤
                                                     b ) Bartik
                                             ln(1 ⌧c,t
                                  Zc,t =                         c,t ,

to the same vector of outcomes Yc,t . The matrix A remains unchanged and the matrix B in Equa-
tion 17 is now given by:        2                ⇣         ⌘    3
                                                                     1
                                                            "P D +1   F     ' 'z
                                           1
                                6 "LD    F ("P D +1)              " LD             7
                                6                                                  7
                                6          0                          0            7
                              B=6                                                  7.
                                6          0                       ⌘c ' h          7
                                4                                 1+⌘c             5
                                           1                        '
                                        F ("P D +1)                   F


The matrix of reduced form moments C now includes the e↵ects of taxes and the e↵ects of productivity
shocks                                ⇥                       ⇤
                                  C = Business Tax     Bartik
                                                                .
This gives us a total of 8 reduced-form e↵ects. The predicted moments from our model have similar
intuitive interpretations as those above and are listed in Appendix E.5.2.




                                                       70
E.5.2      Equilibrium and Incidence Expressions with Bartik Shocks


                  2                      b
                                                        ("P D + 1) + 1F
      ln wc,t =   t   + (ẇ)   ln(1     ⌧c,t )+                               'Bartikc,t                              (37)
                                                          "LS "LD
                                                    ✓                ◆
                       1         z                         ↵⌘c              "LS
                               '   Bartik   c,t +                                 'h Bartikc,t + u2c,t
                 "LS "LD                              1 + ⌘c ↵ "LS "LD
                                                                   ("P D + 1) + 1F
      ln Nc,t = 1t + ẇ"LS           ln(1 ⌧c,t   b
                                                    ) + "LS                          'Bartikc,t                       (38)
                                                                     "LS "LD
                                                    ✓                ◆
                     "LS         z                         ↵⌘c           "LS "LD h
                               '   Bartik   c,t +                                 ' Bartikc,t + u1c,t
                 "LS "LD                              1 + ⌘c ↵ "LS "LD
                        ✓               ◆                         ✓          ◆
                  3       1 + "LS                        b          1 + "LS      ("P D + 1) + 1F
       ln rc,t = t +                 ẇ      ln(1 ⌧c,t ) +                                         'Bartikc,t         (39)
                           1 + ⌘c                                    1 + ⌘c        "LS "LD
                 ✓           ◆                                      ✓            ◆ LS
                   1 + "LS             1          z                        ⌘c       " (1 "LD W ) h
                                                '   Bartik   c,t +                                     ' Bartikc,t + u3c,t
                    1 + ⌘c       "LS "LD                               1 + ⌘c ↵        "LS "LD
                        ✓                                  ◆
                  4                1                                      b
      ln Ec,t = t +           F ("P D + 1)            F
                                                        ẇ       ln(1 ⌧c,t   )
                                                            !
                    1               ("P D + 1) + 1F                                    1
               +     F       F          LS        LD
                                                               'Bartikc,t +         LS
                                                                                             'z Bartikc,t             (40)
                                      "         "                               F "      "LD
                     ✓                ◆
                            ↵⌘c               "LS
                                           LS        LD
                                                         'h Bartikc,t + u4c,t
                  F     1 +  ⌘ c    ↵    "         "

E.5.3      CMD Estimation with Moments from Bartik and Personal Tax Shocks
We also can add personal tax shocks using similar steps. We incorporate personal taxes into the
model in two new places: in the household problem (as mentioned in footnote 9) and in the housing
market (as mentioned in footnote 11). In particular, for the household problem, we replace wages
with after-tax wages:
                                                                                                    0                      1     "P D
                                                                                                                                "P D +1
                                                      Z                                                 Z      "P D +1
                                                                                              B                             C
max ln A + ↵ ln h + (1          ↵) ln X s.t. rh +          pj xj dj = w(1    ⌧ i ), where X = @               xj"P D
                                                                                                                         dj A             ,
h,X
                                                     j2J                                                j2J

                                                                                                                            PD
This addition makes demand for varieties a function of personal tax rate xj = (1 ↵)w(1 ⌧ i )p"j .
Similarly, housing demand will have the same expenditure share, but lower total spending. Specifically,
                                    i
housing demand is HcD = Nc ↵wrcc(1 ⌧c ) . Both of these amendments a↵ect indirect utility:

                                       W
                                      Vnc = a0 + ln wc (1     ⌧ i)   ↵ ln rc + ln Anc ,

    The second impact is on the supply of housing. As mentioned in footnote 11, housing supply that
                                                H
incorporates personal taxes is HcS = (1 ⌧ i ) (BcH rc )⌘c . The housing market clearing condition,
HcS = HcD , determines the rents rc in location c and is given in log-form by a similar expression to
equation 2:
                                                            ✓              ◆
                    1              1              ⌘c            1
          ln rc =        ln Nc +        ln wc         BcH +              H
                                                                             ln(1 ⌧ci ) + a1 ,   (41)
                  1 + ⌘c         1 + ⌘c        1 + ⌘c         1 + ⌘c
                                                                                           1                                    H.
where the coefficient on the personal tax keep rate reflects both demand                  1+⌘c   and supply forces

                                                            71
   With these two additions for personal taxes, we can define a new reduced-form that relates the
matrix of tax and Bartik shocks Zc,t to the same vector of outcomes Yc,t . Specifically, the shocks in
our all shocks specification are:
                                   ⇥        b ) Bartik              i )
                                                                        ⇤
                            Zc,t =   ln(1 ⌧c,t         c,t   ln(1 ⌧c,t    ,

The matrix A remains unchanged and the matrix B in Equation 17 is now given by:
                        2              ⇣
                                         PD     1
                                                  ⌘
                                                      z
                                                                      3
                                                               "          +1       F   ' '
                                               1
                                6 "LD        F ("P D +1)                    "LD
                                                                                                             0      7
                                6                                                                            1      7
                                6              0                               0                                   ⌘7
                              B=6                                                                 ⇣          W
                                                                                                                    7.
                                6              0                            ⌘c ' h                     1          H 7
                                4                                          1+⌘c                       1+⌘c          5
                                               1                             '
                                            F ("P D +1)                        F                             0

Pre-multiplying by the inverse of the matrix of structural coefficients A gives the reduced form:

                                                                      1                    1
                                                     Yc,t = A             BZc,t + A            ec,t                                              (42)
where
                                                                                       2              3      2 1                         ↵        3
                                                                                             ln wc,t             W                 1     W      0
                                                                               6                                                    1
               ⇥                                                  ⇤                          ln Nc,t 7       6 1                         0      07
 A    1B   =       Business Tax    Bartik          Personal Tax
                                                                      , Yc,t = 6
                                                                               4
                                                                                                      7, A = 6 1                   "LD            7.
                                                                                              ln rc,t 5      4
                                                                                                               1+⌘
                                                                                                                                    1
                                                                                                                                   1+⌘   1      05
                                                                                             ln Ec,t            F                  0     0      1

The three vectors of reduced-form e↵ects of the shocks, which are the three columns of the 4 ⇥ 3
matrix A 1 B are the twelve moments that we use in the all shocks specification. Specifically, these
three vectors are given by the following expressions.
                                               2 W3 2                3
                                                             ẇ
                                               6 N7 6      ẇ"LS 7
                                 Business Tax
                                              =6    7=6              7
                                                                       ,
                                               4 R 5 4 1+"LS ẇ 7
                                                      6
                                                                     5
                                                           1+⌘
                                                  E     µ 1
                                                         F      F ẇ


 Bartik
           is a vector of reduced-form e↵ects of Bartik shocks in equations 37 38, 39, 40, i.e.,

                                  2                       ⇣                            ⌘                                                        !       3
                                                              ("P D +1)+           1                              ⇣            ⌘
                                                                                   F                  1                 ↵⌘c          "LS
                               6              "LS "LD
                                                             ' "LS "LD +                                     'z       1+⌘c ↵        7
                                                                                                                                   "LS "LD
                                                                                                                                           'h
                               6                                                                                                    7
                               6            ⇣                 ⌘                                                     !               7
               2             3 6               ("P D +1)+ F1                           ⇣         ⌘                                  7
                    W,Bartik   6         LS                             "LS       z         ↵⌘c      "LS "LD      h                 7
                               6       "         "LS "LD
                                                                '    "LS "LD
                                                                               '    +     1+⌘c ↵ "LS "LD       '                    7
             6      N,Bartik 7 6                                                                                                    7
  Bartik
            =6
             4
                             7=6
                    R,Bartik 5         ⇣
                               6 ⇣ LS ⌘ ("P D +1)+ 1    ⌘
                                                                ⇣ LS ⌘                       ⇣         ⌘ LS
                                                                                                                                  ! 7,
                                                                                                                                    7
                               6 1+"                  F           1+"          1        z        ⌘ c      "    (1   " LD
                                                                                                                          W )   h   7
                    E,Bartik   6  1+⌘c     "LS "LD
                                                          '        1+⌘c   "LS "LD
                                                                                      ' + 1+⌘c ↵              "LS "LD
                                                                                                                              ' 7
                               6                                                                                                    7
                               6           ⇣                 ⌘!                                                                ! 7
                               6              ("P D +1)+ 1F                                     ⇣           ⌘                       7
                               4     1                                         1        z            ↵⌘c          "LS        h      5
                                     F   F      " LS " LD        '  +   F "
                                                                            LS   " LD '       F   1+⌘c ↵ "      LS    " LD '

        Personal Tax
and                    is a vector of reduced-form e↵ects of personal tax shocks, i.e.,




                                                                          72
                                                       2⇣                                           ⌘3
                                                                     ↵ H (1+⌘)              "LS
                              2                    3        F ("LS "LD )[↵+ W (1+⌘)]     " LS "LD
                                  W,P ersonal T ax   6         ⇣ LD                          ⌘      7
                                                     6             " [1+⌘+↵( 1+ H (1+⌘))]           7
                              6   N,P ersonal T ax 7 6             F LS     LD     W                7
              Personal Tax
                             =6                    7=6      ⇣ H (" LD" W)[↵+H (1+⌘)]            ⌘   7.
                              4   R,P ersonal T ax 5 6           (1+⌘) " [      (  ⌘    H 1) 1]     7
                                                     6               LS    LD     W                 7
                                  E,P ersonal T ax   4          ⇣ ("      " )[↵+     (1+⌘)] ⌘       5
                                                                      [1+⌘+↵( 1+ H (1+⌘))]
                                                                   F ("LS "LD )[↵+ W (1+⌘)]



E.5.4    Model Fit
We evaluate the fit of our model by comparing the estimated reduced-form e↵ects to the predictions of
our model. Table A32 presents the estimated reduced-form e↵ects along with the predicted moments
based on the estimated parameters for three cases. Panel (a) shows the model for the case where only
taxes are used in estimation and corresponds to Column (1) in Panel (a) of Table 6. In all four cases,
the model matches the reduced-form estimates well. However, most of of the e↵ects are not precisely
estimated, with the exception of the e↵ect of taxes on establishment growth. This estimation has
three parameters and four moments, which allows us to conduct a test of over identifying restrictions.
The last line of Panel (a) reports the results of this test and shows that this restriction is not rejected
by the data. Panels (b) and (c) report similar results models corresponding to Columns (1) and (5)
of Panel (b) of Table 6, respectively. In both cases the models fit the reduced-form estimates well and
do not reject the over identification restriction. The benefit of using the additional variation in the
Bartik shock is evident in these panels as the corresponding moments are more precisely estimated
than those in Panel (a).

E.6     Single-Equation Estimates of Labor Supply, Housing Supply,
        and Establishment Location
In this subsection, we present a complementary approach to our main estimation methodology by
estimating the labor supply, housing supply, and establishment location equations separately. By
isolating each equation, we clarify the potential estimation pitfalls, we show the sources of variation
that we use to overcome these pitfalls, and explore how the structural estimates relate to economic
features in our model. By contrast, in our main strategy, we estimate a simultaneous equation model
that incorporates all of the spatial equilibrium forces of our model. This approach uses classical
minimum distance methods to match the reduced-form e↵ects of business tax changes on equilibrium
outcomes with the prediction from our model. This strategy improves the precision of our estimates
and allows for inference on the incidence to workers, landowners, and firm owners.

E.6.1    Labor Supply
The log of Equation 1 relates changes in labor supply ln Nc,t to changes in wages                        ln wc,t , rental
costs ln rc,t , and amenities Āc,t in location c and year t:

                                                  ln wc,t     ↵   ln rc,t       Āc,t
                                    ln Nc,t =               W
                                                                            +   W
                                                                                        .                           (43)

where W is the dispersion of idiosyncratic worker location preferences. We define log real wage
changes, ln Real Wagec,t ⌘ ln wc,t ↵ ln rc,t , where we calibrate ↵ = 0.3 using data form the
Consumer Expenditure Survey. In order to implement this equation, consider estimating the following
empirical analogue:
                         ln Nc,t = LS ln Real Wagec,t + D0s,t LS       LS
                                                                s,t + ⌫c,t                     (44)




                                                         73
                                                                                                   LS
where the changes are decadal changes in year ⇥ t 2 1990, 2000, 2010 are relative to year t 10, ⇤0 is
total e↵ect of real wage changes, and Ds,t = I(t = 1990) . . . I(t = 2010) I(M idwest1990)s,t is a
vector with year dummies as well as state dummies for states in the industrial Midwest in the 1980s,
       LS is the error term. From Equation 43, it follows that the error term will be composed partly
and ⌫c,t
of aggregate amenity shocks to a given area. Since changes in real wages and changes in amenities are
likely negatively correlated, an OLS estimate of LS will be biased downwards. Intuitively, rightward
shifts in supply due to amenity improvements result in apparently flatter local labor supply curves.
Since W is related to the inverse of LS , attenuation in LS results in overestimates of W . In
order to deal with this endogeneity concern, we instrument for real wage changes using the Bartik
instrument for local labor demand as well as changes in taxes ln(1 ⌧c,t   c ). The exclusion restriction

is that workers only value changes in labor demand and corporate taxes only through their e↵ects on
the real wage.78
    Table A33 provides estimates for the preference dispersion parameter W using both OLS and
IV approaches. In both cases, we estimate ˆ W as a non-linear function of the estimated ˆLS using
the delta method. Comparing Columns (1) and (2), we find that OLS indeed overestimates the
parameter W relative to the IV estimate. Our IV estimate yields a point estimate of ˆ W = 0.72
that is significantly di↵erent than zero at the 1% level with a standard error of 0.28. Figure A16
depicts the relationship of these estimates to worker mobility. Figure A16 plots the mean log change
in population for several bins of log change in real wages as well as the fitted values of a first stage
regression of changes in log real wages on the Bartik shock and the tax shock. The fitted lines plot
the associated estimates from OLS and IV regressions and show that the IV estimates imply that
workers are indeed three times more mobile than the OLS estimates would imply. The IV estimate
implies that a $1 increase in the real wages leads to an increase in population of 1.64. In Section 3.1
we discuss how this estimate relates to others in the literature.

E.6.2     Housing Market
The log of housing market clearing condition from Section 1.2 provides the following estimable equa-
tion for housing costs:

                            ln rc,t =   HM
                                             (   ln Nc,t +        ln wc,t ) + D0s,t   HM
                                                                                      s,t
                                                                                               HM
                                                                                            + ⌫c,t                  (45)

where the changes are decadal changes in year t 2 1990, 2000, 2010 relative to year t 10, Ds,t is a
vector with year dummies as well as state dummies for states in the industrial midwest in the 1980s,
      HM is the error term. The structural model implies that HM = 1 , the average elasticity of
and ⌫c,t                                                                1+⌘
housing supply.
    As discussed in the previous section, the error term in this equation is partly composed of pro-
ductivity shocks to the housing sector. To the extent that these shocks are positively correlated with
changes in population, we would expect that OLS estimates of the coefficient HM might be biased.
We avoid this potential issue by estimating this equation via IV, where we instrument for changes
in population and wages using corporate tax changes and Bartik productivity shocks. As before, we
report estimates of the parameter ⌘ from a delta method calculation.
    Table A33 provides estimates for ⌘. Column (3) provides the OLS estimate and Column (4)
provides the IV estimate, which gives a similar, though slightly smaller estimate of the elasticity of
housing supply of 0.834(SE = 0.432). The parameter implies that a 1% increase in population or
wages would raise rental costs by 0.55%(SE = 0.12), which is a statistically significant e↵ect at the
99% level. While not perfectly comparable to previous estimates, this estimate is within the range
  78
    In order to ensure that this is the case, we control for changes in state personal income taxes that might drive both
the location of establishments and workers.



                                                             74
of parameters from previous studies including those in Notowidigdo (2013) and Suárez Serrato and
Wingender (2011).79

E.6.3     Establishment Location and Labor Demand
Log di↵erencing Equation 7 we obtain the following equation:
                              ✓               ◆
                                µ 1
                    ln Ec,t =    F       F
                                           ẇ            b
                                                 ln(1 ⌧c,t ) + D0s,t                    ES
                                                                                        s,t
                                                                                                 ES
                                                                                              + ⌫c,t .
                              |      {z       }
                                                ES



To observe the interpretation of the coefficient ES as a combination of direct and indirect e↵ects,
consider first estimating the following alternative equation for establishment share growth:

                          ln Ec,t =    ES
                                             ln(1     b
                                                     ⌧c,t )+     ES
                                                                 2    ln wc,t + D0s,t    ES
                                                                                         s,t
                                                                                                  ES
                                                                                               + ⌫c,t .               (46)

If both changes in wages and changes in taxes are exogenous, Equation 46 shows that ES would be
related to ("P D1+1) F and that a coefficient on wages 2ES would be related to        F . The key issue

in estimating this equation is that the structural error term, i.e. the change in common productivity
   B̄c,t , is likely positively correlated with wages. This omitted variable would likely bias an OLS
estimation and produce estimates of the output elasticity of labor that are negative, contrary to
any plausible economic model. Indeed, Column (5) of Table A33 presents the implied estimates from
such a regression. As predicted, this estimation yields a non-sensical, negative estimate of the output
elasticity of labor ˆ , which would imply an up-ward sloping labor demand curve.
     In order to deal with this endogeneity problem we exclude the endogenous regressor ln wc,t (i.e.,
we impose the constraint that 2ES = 0). This exclusion, however, changes the interpretation of
the parameter ES . This estimate corresponds to the reduced form e↵ects of a business tax cut on
establishment growth as reported in Table 4, Column 4. The estimation of the parameter F from
this equation is presented in Section E.6.4.

E.6.4     CMD Estimation of the Establishment Location Equation
Estimating labor demand functions in models of local labor markets has been limited by the lack of
plausibly exogenous labor supply shocks that may trace the slope of the demand function.80 Instead,
this equation exploits the empirical tradeo↵ firms make among productivity, corporate taxes, and
factor prices to recover the parameters governing labor demand and the incidence on firm profits.
    Recall from Section 3.1 that the exact reduced-form of the establishment location equation is
given by:
                                  ✓              ◆
                                    µ 1
                        ln Ec,t =    F      F
                                              ẇ           b
                                                    ln(1 ⌧c,t ) + D0s,t 4s,t + u4c,t .
                                  |     {z       }
                                                 E


   79
      Our housing supply elasticity parameter and corresponding estimates are not directly comparable due to our model’s
assumption of Cobb Douglas housing demand rather than the assumption that each household inelastically demands
one unit of housing. This feature makes rent a function of both wages and population rather than just population and
slightly alters the functional form. We adopt the Cobb-Douglas assumption to allow households to adjust to shocks over
the long run, but this feature is not an essential part of our model or results. In an earlier version of the paper, we used
inelastic demand and found similar results to those reported here.
   80
      Recent papers have used structural approaches to ensuring a downward-sloping labor demand curve (e.g., No-
towidigdo (2013)) or have emphasized the role of local amenities in driving relative demand for skilled and unskilled
workers (e.g., Suárez Serrato and Wingender (2011) and Diamond (2012)).


                                                            75
While we derived this equation from the SEM, this equation can also be obtained by log di↵erencing
Equation 7. We can decompose the parameter E into two forces: the increased desirability of a
location through lower taxes and the countervailing force of higher wages:
                                                        1         ⇣ ⌘
                                       m(✓) ⌘                          ẇ(✓)                       (47)
                                                   ("P D + 1) F |  F
                                                                    {z     }
                                                 |      {z     }
                                                     LowerTaxes      Higher Wages

where ẇ(✓) is given in Equation 10 and ✓ is the vector of parameters of the model. Thus, given the
parameters of the model ⌘, W , "P D , and and an estimated ˆE , one can recover an estimate of the
productivity dispersion parameter F .
    Formally, we recover the estimate of F via classical minimum distance. We first estimate E via
OLS. Using the parameter ˆE as an empirical moment of the data along with its respective variance
V̂, the classical minimum distance estimator is the solution to Equation 22 where m(✓) is as in
Equation 47. This approach takes calibrated values of the parameters ⌘, W , "P D , and , finds the
value ˆ F that solves Equation 22 and computes its variance.
    Figure A17 shows estimates for F from the CMD estimation using the values for calibrated
parameters discussed above. The graph plots the mean values of log changes in the number of
establishments for di↵erent bins of log changes in the net of business tax rate. The red line plots
the relation between changes in taxes and firm mobility that is implied by the CMD estimation.
The parameter estimate in this case is ˆ F = 0.1(SE = 0.058), which is statistically significant. The
black line plots the same relationship when we use an implied value of F from an OLS regression
that ignores the indirect e↵ect of tax cuts on firm location through higher wages. The red line is
steeper than the black line, which makes firms look more mobile than they would appear in the OLS
specification and is consistent with the fact that the CMD estimate is three times smaller than the
implied value from the OLS regression.81 However, if we consider the conventional wisdom of perfect
mobility as given by the vertical green line, we see that even a small value of productivity dispersion
  F yields estimates of firm mobility that are far smaller than that implied by the conventional wisdom.



F       Accounting for Changes in Government Spending
We follow Suárez Serrato and Wingender (2011) in modeling the e↵ects of changes in government
spending on the local economy. This modeling approach takes into account the e↵ects of changes in
labor demand from government, changes in the provision of public goods, and changes in the provision
of infrastructure.
    Consider first the e↵ects of changes on the welfare of workers. Extending the indirect utility
function to account for government services GS, we have:
                                   W
                                  Vnc = a0 + ln wc       ↵ ln rc + ln GSc + ln Anc ,

where is the worker’s valuation of government services. Including a direct e↵ect of government
services on utility leads to a naturally extension of Equation 13 for the welfare e↵ects of a change in
corporate taxes:

                                            dV W
                                                     = Nc (ẇc      ↵ṙc + ĠSc ),
                                        d ln(1 ⌧cc )

where V W = E" [maxc Vnc
                      W ]. Implementing this equation requires two pieces of data: the valuation of

 81
      The results of these regressions are also presented in table form in Table A33.



                                                            76
government services and the change in services provided. We use the results from Suárez Serrato
and Wingender (2011) with an estimate of = 0.45.82 Government services are provided by local
workers such that ĠSc is determined by changes in expenditure on services as well as changes in the
wages of local workers. That is, ĠSc = ĖxpGS
                                            c   ẇc . We implement this equation empirically with:
                                            W         R
                                                  ↵       + (ĖxpGS
                                                                 c
                                                                           W
                                                                               ).

    A key thing to note from this equation is that workers care about the e↵ects of the policy change
on their real income ln wc ↵ ln rc and that the equilibrium change in this quantity equals W ↵ R
regardless of whether this change is due to increases in the demand of workers or changes in the
supply of workers due to changes in government spending. For the same reason, the incidence on
landowners is still given by ṙc = R .
    Consider now the e↵ects of changing infrastructure spending on the profits of firms. We model
infrastructure as a component of productivity by decomposing the productivity shock Bc = B̃c Z ⌫ ,
where Zc is infrastructure and ⌫ is the firms’ output elasticity of infrastructure. If changes in revenue
from a change in the corporate tax rate result in changes in infrastructure spending, then the e↵ect on
firm profits can be quantified as a combined change in taxes and an infrastructure-based productivity
shock. Following the incidence equations for a productivity shock in Appendix B.4, the combined
e↵ects of a tax change on profit is:
                 2                                                        3
                 6                                                      !
                 6                                     1
                                                             (" P D + 1) 77
          ⇡˙ c + 6                                                        7⇥
                         PD                 PD          F
                 6 |  ("     +  1)   +   ("    + 1) ⇥                     7             ⌫ Ż           ,
                 4        {z     }                        "LS "LD         5             |{z}c
                   Direct E↵ect on ⇡   |              {z                 }   Size of Productivity Shock
                                              E↵ect of Wage Change on ⇡

where ⇡˙ c is as given in Equation 14. Implementing this equation requires parameters from our struc-
tural estimates as well as two additional pieces of data: the firms’ output elasticity of infrastructure
⌫ and the change in infrastructure spending. We use the results form Suárez Serrato and Wingender
(2011) with an average estimate of ⌫ = 0.27.83 Infrastructure Zc is assumed to be imported and does
not require the hiring of local workers so that Żc = ĖxpZc.
    We require an estimate of the e↵ects of a tax cut on revenue in order to implement these equations
requires. Since the average share of corporate taxes revenue to income tax revenue is approximately
20%, a static forecast of the change in revenue following a 1% tax cut would be -.2%. Given that tax
cuts lead to increases in economic activity, the static estimate would be a lower bound on the e↵ects
on revenue. We thus assume that the change in revenue following a 1% tax cut would be -.1%.
    We implement these expanded incidence equations under three alternative scenarios about how
the change in revenues a↵ects expenditures on infrastructure and expenditure on government services.
The first scenario assumes that, following a tax cut, the decrease in revenue will be used to decrease
government services. The second scenario assumes that the associated decrease in revenue will be used
to decrease the provision of infrastructure. The third and final scenario assumes that the decrease in
revenue will be used to decrease both government services and infrastructure proportionally.
    Table A2 presents the results from this exercise. Column (1) presents our baseline results that
do not account for changes in government spending. Column (2) assumes that all of the change in
  82
     Suárez Serrato and Wingender (2011) estimate the value of government services for skilled and unskilled workers.
The value we use in our calculations is the average of these two value assuming an average share of skilled workers of
25%.
  83
     Suárez Serrato and Wingender (2011) estimate the output elasticity of infrastructure for the labor demand of skilled
and unskilled workers. The value we use in our calculations is the average of these two value assuming an average share
of skilled workers of 25%.



                                                            77
revenue a↵ects changes in the provision of government services. We use an average share of spending
on services to individuals of 90% following data from the Annual Survey of State Finances from
2013. This implies that a 1% drop in revenue lowers expenditures on public goods by 1.11%. In this
scenario, the decrease in government services lowers worker utility resulting in smaller share of the
total benefits of 18%. Column (3) explores the e↵ect of decreasing infrastructure on firm profits. In
this case, since only 10% of spending is assumed to be infrastructure related, a 1% drop in revenue
lowers infrastructure spending by 10%. We observe that the incidence in firm profits falls to 0.71
from 0.81. However, this decrease in profits only lowers the share of incidence accruing to firm owners
to 41%. Finally, consider the case where the decrease in revenue is apportioned proportionally so
that a 1% fall in revenue implies a 1% decline in spending in each category. Column (4) present the
incidence resulting form this scenario. We observe that firm profits are only modestly a↵ected while
worker welfare sees a steeper decline. Relative to the baseline case, we observe that the result that
firm owners bear a substantial portion of the benefit of a corporate tax cut is only strengthened by
accounting for the e↵ects on government spending.

                Table A2: Incidence Estimates Accounting for Government Spending
                                           (1)      (2)          (3)           (4)

         Assumptions for Analysis
         Value of Government Services         N         Y             N              Y
         Value for Infrastructure             N         N             Y              Y
         Change in Funds                     None    Services   Infrastructure   Proportional

         Incidence
         Landowners                          0.32        0.32        0.32            0.32
         Workers                             0.68        0.25        0.68            0.29
         Firm Owners                         0.81        0.81        0.71             0.8

         Share of Incidence
         Landowners                          18%         23%         19%             23%
         Workers                             38%         18%         40%             21%
         Firm Owners                         45%         59%         41%             57%



G     Accounting for Changes in Local Prices
This section amends the model and incidence estimates to account for changes in local prices (i.e.,
the price of non-housing, non-traded goods). We present modified incidence expressions and discuss
how the results change. We then provide additional detail on how we amend the demand and supply
components of the model to derive the modified incidence expressions.

G.1    Incidence Estimates that Account for Non-traded Goods
With local goods, the welfare e↵ects of a tax cut in location c on the welfare of workers are similar to
the expression in equation 13. The part of the expression that accounts for local increases in rental




                                                    78
prices, (↵ṙc ), is replaced with (↵H ṙc + ↵N T ṗN T
                                                   c ):

                                      dV W
                                               =Nc (ẇc        ↵H ṙc + ↵N T ṗN T
                                                                               c )                                 (48)
                                  d ln(1 ⌧cc )
                                                         W
                                                 =Nc (          ↵H   R
                                                                         + ↵N T   NT
                                                                                       ),                          (49)

where ↵H is the expenditure share on housing and ↵N T is the expenditure share on non-housing,
non-traded goods. For firm owners and landowners, the expressions are the same as in 14 and 15.84
     We implement these modified incidence expressions in four ways. First, we use the local price
index from ACCRA instead of R in our baseline approach, i.e., the welfare for workers is measured
as follows: W .3 P,ACCRA . Mian and Sufi (2016) show that on an employment basis in their main
trade-based classification of industries, non-tradable industries account for 20% of employment and
construction accounts for 11% of employment. However, other work uses larger shares for expenditure
on local goods. In the second implementation, we consider a larger value of ↵ = .6 from Beraja,
Hurst and Ospina (2016).85 In this case, the incidence expression for workers is W .6 P,ACCRA .
Third, we split local goods into housing and non-traded, non-housing goods using local expenditure
shares from Beraja, Hurst and Ospina (2016), resulting in the following expression for worker welfare:
  W     .2 P,ACCRA,residual .4 P,ACCRA,N T where P,ACCRA,residual is the reduced-form impact on the
portion of the local price index that is not categorized as non-traded. It is calculated using weights in
the ACCRA formulas that put .47 on the items in P,ACCRA,N T , which implies P,ACCRA,residual =
  P,ACCRA .47⇥ P,ACCRA,N T
            (1 .47)         . Finally, for the fourth importation, we use a di↵erent measure of local
prices from the BLS and measure the welfare e↵ects for workers as W .3 P,BLS .
     Table A3 shows the results of accounting for local prices. We find similar estimates to our baseline
results when accounting for changes in local prices. Columns (1)-(4) implement the four approaches
using the reduced-form e↵ects of local business tax cuts that control for Bartik; Columns (5)-(8)
implement the same four approaches using the reduced-form e↵ects that do not control for Bartik
(i.e., column (1) of the reduced-form outcome tables). In particular, Column (1) shows the incidence
on workers is .78 .3 ⇥ .16 = .73 where .78 is from the Bartik specification (i.e., Column (4)) in
Table A7 and .16 is from the Bartik specification in Table A12. Column (2) uses a higher value of ↵,
but the same reduced-form e↵ects as the first column, resulting in a slightly lower impact on workers
of, .78 .6 ⇥ .16 = .68. Column (3) shows that separating local goods into a non-traded group and
a residual produces similar results. We use the reduced-form impacts from Tables A12 and A13 to
implement the third approach: W .2 P,ACCRA,residual .4 P,ACCRA,N T = .78 .2 ⇥ .28 .4 ⇥ .02 =
.66.86 Finally, Column (4) uses a di↵erent measure of local prices P BLS , for which the reduced-form
impacts are reported in Table A14. This alternative measure is notably similar to our baseline that
uses the change in rental prices. Columns (5)-(8) repeat the same calculations using slightly di↵erent
inputs from the respective reduced-form tables. Overall, local price increases are modest over a ten
year period. Accounting for these impacts results in similar incidence results to our baseline estimates.




  84                                                                        ˙
     We also show below (in section G.2.2) that we can use ⇡˙ c = 1 + AvgSales  c to measure incidence in terms of sales
rather than in terms of cost. The resulting estimates are similar (e.g., compare the estimate from Column (1) in Table
A15 with the incidence estimates on firm owners that use reduced-form estimates from the same specification such as
those in Column (1) of Table 5). We primarily focus on the cost-based estimates for firm owners since they are more
precise than those in Table A15, but these results provide further support for the conclusion that firm owners bear a
substantial share of the incidence of business tax cuts.
  85
     See Tables A24 and A25 for our baseline specification for ↵ = .5 and ↵ = .65, respectively.
                                            P,ACCRA
  86                                                  .47⇥ P,ACCRA,N T
     Note that .28 = P,ACCRA,residual =              (1 .47)
                                                                       .


                                                          79
                                               Table A3: Incidence Estimates Accounting for Changes in Local Prices
                                      A. Using Reduced-Form Estimates w/ Bartik Controls B. Using Reduced-Form Estimates w/o Bartik Controls
                                           (1)       (2)           (3)                (4)       (5)        (6)       (7)                 (8)
        Incidence
        Landowners                        0.32          0.32               0.32                      0.32       1.17             1.17                1.17                     1.17
        Workers                           0.73          0.68               0.66                      0.52       1.34             1.22                1.18                     1.08
        Firm Owners                       0.81          0.81               0.81                      0.81       1.63             1.63                1.63                     1.63

        Share of Incidence
        Landowners                      17.2%        17.6%               17.9%                  19.4%         28.3%            29.1%            29.4%                       30.2%
        Workers                         39.3%        37.7%               37.0%                  31.6%         32.3%            30.4%            29.7%                       27.7%
        Firm Owners                     43.5%        44.7%               45.2%                  49.0%         39.4%            40.5%            41.0%                       42.1%

        Local Price Index             P ACCRA     P ACCRA      P ACCRA,N T                      P BLS       P ACCRA       P ACCRA       P ACCRA,N T                         P BLS

        Parameters
        ↵                                  0.3           0.6                                          0.3         0.3             0.6                                           0.3
80




        ↵H                                                                  0.2                                                                       0.2
        ↵N T                                                                0.4                                                                       0.4

     Notes: This table shows incidence of local business tax changes over ten years on landowners, firm owners, and workings using di↵erent measures of local prices.
     Local price data are described in Appendix A.4. The first four columns show incidence results based on reduced-form estimates from Column 4 in Table 4-type tables,
     which controls for Bartik, for all the relevant outcomes in the incidence expressions in equations 48, 14, and 15. The last four columns repeat the same specifications
     but use the reduced-form estimates from Column 1 in Table 4-type tables, which does not control for Bartik. Specifically, Column (1) and (5) calculate the incidence
     on workers by taking the di↵erence between the reduced-form impact on wages and ↵ ˆP,ACCRA from Tables A7 and A12. For example, the worker estimate in
     Column (1), which corresponds to the specification controlling for Bartik, is ˆW ↵ ˆP,ACCRA = .78 .3 ⇥ .16 = .73 and for Column (5), which corresponds to the
     specification not controlling for Bartik, is ˆW ↵ ˆP,ACCRA = 1.45 .3 ⇥ .38 = 1.34. Column (2) and (6) use an ↵ of .6 instead of .3. Columns (3) and (7) break
                                                                                           W         P,ACCRA,residual          P,ACCRA,N T            P,ACCRA,residual
     out traded and non-traded ACCRA price indexes and to present estimates of                  .2                      + .4                 where                       is the ACCRA
                                                                                                                                                                  P,ACCRA,N T
     local price index on items not covered in the NT index. It is calculated using weights in the ACCRA formulas that put .47 on the items in                                  , which
                                       P,ACCRA
               P,ACCRA,residual                  .47⇥ P,ACCRA,N T
     implies                      =              (1 .47)
                                                                    . These estimates are from Tables A12 and A13. The expenditure weight of .6, which is divided into .2 and
     .4, is based on estimates from Beraja, Hurst and Ospina (2016) on the share of total local consumption (.6) and the share of housing consumption (.2), which they
     assume is entirely local. Finally, Columns (4) and (8) use an alternative local price index from BLS, which isn’t available for all locations but covers a large share of
     the population. In particular, the estimates for workers are ˆW ↵ ˆP,BLS and the reduced-form estimates for local prices P,BLS are in Table A14.
G.2         Deriving Incidence Expressions that Account for Non-traded Goods
G.2.1        Demand with Non-traded Goods
In location c with amenities A, households maximize Cobb-Douglas utility over housing h, a composite
X N T of local (non-housing non-traded) goods xN T
                                                j , a composite X of tradable goods xj while facing
a wage w, rent r, local good prices pN T
                                     j , and traded good prices pj :
                                                                                                               X                      X
 max         ln A + ↵H ln h + ↵N T ln X N T + (1                   ↵H         ↵N T ) ln X s.t. rh +                       pN T NT
                                                                                                                           j xj   +         pj xj dj = w,
h,xN T ,X
                                                                                                           j2J N T                    j2J

                                                           !    ✏P D,N T                                       !    "P D
                                                               ✏P D,N T +1                      "P D +1            "P D +1
                        P               ✏P D,N T +1                                    P         "P D
where X N T =                   (xN T
                                  j )
                                         ✏P D,N T     dj                     ,X =            xj           dj                  , and ✏P D,N T <    1
                      j2J N T                                                          j2J
is the product demand elasticity of local goods.
    Demand from each household for local variety j in location c is:
                                                                  P D,N T                      P D,N T
                                          xN T    NT ✏
                                           jc = (pjc )                       IcN T (Pjc
                                                                                     N T 1+✏
                                                                                        )                                                      (50)
                                                        !        1
                                                               1+"P D
                       P                       1+"P D
where PcN T =                   EcN T (pN T
                                        jc )                            , EcN T is the number of non-traded establishments,
                     j2JcN T
and IcN T = ↵N T Nc wc is total expenditures on local goods.

G.2.2        Supply of Non-traded Goods
Similar to the baseline firm problem, establishments in location c maximize profits over inputs and
prices pN T
        jc while facing a local wage wc , national rental rates ⇢, national prices pv of each variety v,
and local business taxes ⌧cb subject to the production technology in Equation 3:
                                            0                                   1
                                                                 Z
             NT
            ⇡jc =       max        (1 ⌧cb ) @pN T NT
                                              jc xjc    wc ljc      pv xv,jc dv A ⇢kjc ,            (51)
                       ljc ,kjc ,xv,jc ,pN
                                         jc
                                           T
                                                                                           v2J

Following the same input demand steps in appendix B.2, we can relate sales to unit costs:
                                                 h                                                                        i
                                        NT NT 1
                          pN
                           j
                             T NT
                              x j   = x j µ        w ⇢                                (1             )    (1          )
                                                                                                                                               (52)
                          | {z }             Bjc
                          ⌘SalesN T
                                             |                                        {z                                  }
                                   jc                                                 ⌘cjc


This expression shows that local prices are a fixed-mark up over unit costs, pN
                                                                              j
                                                                                T = µN T c where the
                                                                                          jc
                        N T
                              ⇥   1
                                           ⇤  1
markup on local goods µ     ⌘ "P D,N T + 1      is constant due to CES demand. Since local prices are




                                                                         81
a fixed-mark up over unit costs, we can express after tax profits as follows:
                                   NT
                                  ⇡jc = (1      ⌧cb ) pN
                                                       jc
                                                          T
                                                                cjc xN
                                                                     jc
                                                                        T
                                                                                                              (53)

                                   NT
                                                                       SalesN jc
                                                                                 T
                                  ⇡jc = (1      ⌧cb ) pN
                                                       jc
                                                          T
                                                                cjc                                           (54)
                                                                         pN
                                                                          jc
                                                                             T


                                   NT
                                                                            SalesNjc
                                                                                     T
                                  ⇡jc = (1      ⌧cb ) µN T cjc        cjc                                     (55)
                                                                             µN T cjc
                                   NT
                                                        SalesN
                                                             jc
                                                                T
                                  ⇡jc = (1      ⌧cb )                                                         (56)
                                                         "P D,N T
where the second line comes from the definition of sales, the third line comes from the relationship
between prices and costs (from equation 52) and the fourth line comes from the definition of the
                                                                                                T =
markup. Similar steps imply that we can express after tax profits for traded-establishments as ⇡jc
          Sales
(1    ⌧cb ) "P D,T
                jc
                   .
     Therefore total after-tax firm profits is:
                                                                                    !
                                              AvgSales   T          AvgSales    NT
                                                         jc                     jc
      EcT ⇡ T
          ¯jc + EcN T ⇡ NT
                      ¯jc  = (1   ⌧cb ) EcT                 + EcN T                                           (57)
                                                  "P D,T                 "P D,N T
                                       ✓                                 ◆
                                    b     T otSalesTc     T otSalesNc
                                                                       T
                          = (1    ⌧c )                 +                                                      (58)
                                              "P D,T          "P D,N T
                                                   ✓                                                      ◆
                                                     T otSalesTc       1       T otSalesNc
                                                                                           T     1
                          = (1    ⌧cb )T otSalesc                            +                                (59)
                                                      T otSalesc "P D,T          T otSalesc    "P D,N T

This expression shows that total sales changes reveal information about changes in total profits. In
the simple case in which the product demand elasticities are the same, then⇣ the term⌘in parenthesis is
   1
  "P D
                                                              ¯cT = (1 ⌧cb ) AvgSales
       and the average after-tax profit per establishment is: ⇡                  "P D
                                                                                      c
                                                                                        . In the case in
which the product demand elasticities are di↵erent, the term in parenthesis will be constant (since the
sales shares will be constant due to Cobb Douglas preferences and production technology.) Therefore,
                              ˙
in both cases, ⇡˙ c = 1 + AvgSales  c . We can use this expression to quantity ⇡
                                                                               ˙ c when there are both
traded and non-traded goods.




                                                           82
                                   Table A4: Correlation in State Tax Rates

                 A. Tax Rates
                                                                   ⌧sc      ⌧ssales       ⌧si      ⌧sprop
                 ⌧sc                                             1.000
                 ⌧ssales                                         0.008       1.000
                 ⌧si                                             0.323      -0.257      1.000
                 ⌧sprop                                          0.113      -0.030      0.012     1.000

                 B. 10 Year Di↵erences in Tax Rates
                                                                    ⌧sc      ⌧ssales       ⌧si      ⌧sprop
                   ⌧sc                                           1.000
                   ⌧ssales                                       0.315       1.000
                   ⌧si                                           0.078      -0.007     1.000
                   ⌧sprop                                        -0.046     -0.191     -0.176     1.000

Notes: This table shows the correlation between tax rates in levels (in Panel A) and changes (in Panel B). See Section 4
for data sources for ⌧scorp and ⌧si . State sales tax rates come from the Book of the States, Table 7.10. The variable is
the general sales and gross receipts tax (percent). For property taxes, we use U.S. Censuses as well as the 2009 ACS to
obtain an estimate of average property tax liability at the state level. The ratio of these tax liabilities to self reported
home values is our estimate of the property tax rate.




                                                            83
               Table A5: Annual E↵ects of Business Tax Cuts on Establishment Growth
       Establishment Growth                       (1)      (2)       (3)      (4)      (5)      (6)      (7)
          Log Net-of-Business-Taxt               0.11      0.16     -0.04    0.19      0.42      0.20     0.27
                                                (0.16)    (0.21)   (0.24)   (0.18)   (0.26)    (0.30)   (0.38)
          Log Net-of-Business-Taxt   1           0.14      0.36     0.36     0.14    0.47*     0.54**     0.59
                                                (0.13)    (0.22)   (0.23)   (0.14)   (0.27)    (0.27)   (0.39)
          Log Net-of-Business-Taxt   2         0.48***    0.50**   0.51**   0.52**   0.54**    0.61**     0.63
                                                (0.17)    (0.20)   (0.24)   (0.20)   (0.25)    (0.29)   (0.38)
          Log Net-of-Business-Taxt   3         0.57***    0.55**   0.58**   0.57**    0.55*     0.62*     0.50
                                                (0.20)    (0.23)   (0.25)   (0.22)   (0.28)    (0.31)   (0.34)
          Log Net-of-Business-Taxt   4           0.20      0.19     0.17     0.15      0.16      0.17     0.13
                                                (0.13)    (0.13)   (0.16)   (0.25)   (0.30)    (0.34)   (0.37)
          Log Net-of-Business-Taxt   5           0.02      0.03     -0.00    0.19      0.25      0.25     0.21
                                                (0.25)    (0.26)   (0.26)   (0.32)   (0.37)    (0.38)   (0.41)
          Log Net-of-Business-Taxt   6                                       0.18      0.22      0.26     0.30
                                                                            (0.25)   (0.31)    (0.31)   (0.36)
          Log Net-of-Business-Taxt   7                                      0.34**   0.43*       0.33   0.46*
                                                                            (0.16)   (0.23)    (0.23)   (0.26)
          Log Net-of-Business-Taxt   8                                       0.21      0.21      0.15     0.26
                                                                            (0.13)   (0.17)    (0.18)   (0.18)
          Log Net-of-Business-Taxt   9                                       0.03      0.01      0.04     0.02
                                                                            (0.14)   (0.15)    (0.16)   (0.17)
          Log Net-of-Business-Taxt   10                                      0.26      0.25    0.32*    0.31*
                                                                            (0.16)   (0.16)    (0.16)   (0.18)
          Log Net-of-Business-Taxt+1                        0.10     0.03              0.13      0.20     0.02
                                                          (0.20)   (0.20)            (0.22)    (0.23)   (0.30)
          Log Net-of-Business-Taxt+2                       -0.02    0.22              -0.06     0.30     0.08
                                                          (0.16)   (0.20)            (0.18)    (0.23)   (0.31)
          Log Net-of-Business-Taxt+3                                -0.10                       0.04     -0.05
                                                                   (0.32)                      (0.33)   (0.40)
          Log Net-of-Business-Taxt+4                                -0.33                       -0.36    -0.30
                                                                   (0.22)                      (0.25)   (0.45)
          Log Net-of-Business-Taxt+5                                -0.33                       -0.39    -0.28
                                                                   (0.23)                      (0.27)   (0.42)
          Log Net-of-Business-Taxt+6                                                                     -0.15
                                                                                                        (0.33)
          Log Net-of-Business-Taxt+7                                                                     -0.30
                                                                                                        (0.38)
          Log Net-of-Business-Taxt+8                                                                     -0.30
                                                                                                        (0.33)
          Log Net-of-Business-Taxt+9                                                                     -0.05
                                                                                                        (0.11)
          Log Net-of-Business-Taxt+10                                                                    -0.11
                                                                                                        (0.13)
       Observations                             13,230    12,250   10,780   10,780    9,800    8,330    5,880
       R-squared                                 0.225     0.143   0.099    0.197     0.106    0.054    0.120
       Cumulative E↵ect over 5 Years            1.51**     1.80*    1.59     1.77*     2.38     2.39      2.34
                                                (0.75)    (1.02)   (1.14)   (1.03)    (1.58)   (1.72)   (2.10)
       Cumulative E↵ect over 10 Years                                       2.79*      3.49     3.49      3.70
                                                                            (1.51)    (2.27)   (2.36)   (2.81)
       P-value of All Lags=0:                   0.003     0.012    0.051    0.000     0.002    0.037    0.036
       P-value of All Leads=0:                             0.74     0.40               0.66     0.46     0.92


Notes: This table shows the e↵ects of annual local business tax cuts on local establishment growth. Data are for
490 county-groups. See Section 4 for sources. Cumulative e↵ects and F-stats of joint tests that all leads and lags are
zero indicate that tax cuts increase local establishment growth and do not exhibit statistically non-zero pre-trends.
Regressions use initial population as weights and include year fixed e↵ects and dummies for states in the industrial
midwest in the 1980s. Standard errors clustered by state are in parentheses and *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.


                                                         84
             Table A6: E↵ects of Business Tax Cuts on Population Growth over 10 Years

  Population Growth                      (1)          (2)     (3)      (4)       (5)        (6)

     ln(1   ⌧ b)                       4.28**     4.29**    4.25**    3.74**   4.11**      3.53**
                                       (1.65)     (1.66)    (1.66)    (1.48)   (1.59)      (1.47)
    ITC                                            -0.09                                    0.19
                                                  (0.25)                                   (0.25)
     ln GOVEXPEND PER CAPITA                                 -0.01                          -0.01
                                                            (0.01)                         (0.01)
  Bartik                                                              0.44**               0.44**
                                                                      (0.19)               (0.17)
     ln(1   ⌧ EXT )                                                            -4.70***   -4.74***
                                                                                (1.70)     (1.63)
  Constant                             0.07***   0.07***    0.07***    0.02    0.08***       0.03
                                        (0.02)    (0.02)     (0.02)   (0.02)    (0.02)     (0.02)

  Observations                          1,470     1,470      1,470    1,470     1,470      1,470
  R-squared                             0.112     0.112      0.115    0.138     0.135      0.164


Notes: See notes from Table 4.




                                                 85
                  Table A7: E↵ects of Business Tax Cuts on Wage Growth over 10 Years


 Wage Growth                              (1)           (2)     (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)

   ln(1    ⌧ b)                           1.45       1.50       1.45       0.78       1.42        0.82
                                         (0.94)     (0.94)     (0.95)     (0.82)     (0.96)     (0.84)
   ITC                                             -0.37**                                       -0.23
                                                    (0.15)                                      (0.16)
   ln GOVEXPEND PER CAPITA                                      0.00                             0.00
                                                               (0.00)                           (0.00)
 Bartik                                                                  0.56***               0.54***
                                                                          (0.08)                (0.08)
   ln(1    ⌧ EXT )                                                                    -0.98      -0.44
                                                                                     (1.02)     (0.79)
 Constant                               -0.09***   -0.09***   -0.09***   -0.14***   -0.09***   -0.14***
                                         (0.01)     (0.01)     (0.01)     (0.01)     (0.01)     (0.01)

 Observations                            1,470      1,470      1,470      1,470      1,470      1,470
 R-squared                               0.402      0.414      0.402      0.490      0.404      0.495


Notes: See notes from Table 4.




                                                   86
             Table A8: E↵ects of Business Tax Cuts on Rental Cost Growth over 10 Years

   Rental Cost Growth                     (1)           (2)      (3)      (4)       (5)       (6)

      ln(1   ⌧ b)                         1.17       1.33       1.17      0.32     1.02        0.43
                                         (1.44)     (1.40)     (1.44)    (1.37)   (1.48)     (1.36)
     ITC                                           -1.13**                                   -0.88*
                                                    (0.55)                                   (0.50)
      ln GOVEXPEND PER CAPITA                                   -0.00                         -0.00
                                                               (0.01)                        (0.01)
   Bartik                                                                0.70**             0.63***
                                                                         (0.27)              (0.23)
      ln(1   ⌧ EXT )                                                               -4.25*    -2.83*
                                                                                   (2.39)    (1.58)
   Constant                             0.08***    0.08***     0.08***    0.01    0.09***      0.03
                                         (0.01)     (0.01)      (0.01)   (0.03)    (0.01)    (0.03)

   Observations                          1,470         1,470    1,470    1,470     1,470     1,470
   R-squared                             0.139         0.177    0.139    0.189     0.153     0.223


Notes: See notes from Table 4.




                                                  87
            Table A9: E↵ects of Business Tax Cuts on Employment Growth over 10 Years

  Employment Growth                     (1)          (2)     (3)       (4)       (5)        (6)

    ln(1    ⌧ b)                      4.32**    4.42**     4.30**    3.54**    4.10**       3.41**
                                      (1.79)     (1.73)    (1.80)    (1.51)    (1.69)       (1.41)
    ITC                                         -0.67**                                      -0.32
                                                 (0.33)                                     (0.26)
    ln GOVEXPEND PER CAPITA                                 -0.01                            -0.01
                                                           (0.01)                           (0.01)
  Bartik                                                             0.65***               0.61***
                                                                      (0.17)                (0.14)
    ln(1    ⌧ EXT )                                                            -6.23***   -5.53***
                                                                                (1.79)      (1.55)
  Constant                            0.13***   0.13***    0.13***   0.06***   0.14***     0.08***
                                       (0.02)    (0.02)     (0.02)    (0.02)    (0.02)      (0.02)

  Observations                         1,470     1,470      1,470     1,470     1,470      1,470
  R-squared                            0.139     0.177      0.139     0.189     0.153      0.223


Notes: See notes from Table 4.




                                                88
   Table A10: E↵ects of Business Tax Cuts on Growth in GOS per Establishment over 10 Years

         Growth in GOS per establishment           (1)           (2)      (3)      (4)       (5)        (6)

           ln Net-of-Business-Tax Rate           4.07**         3.92*    4.08*    3.66*    4.20**     3.50*
                                                 (2.02)         (2.02)   (2.03)   (2.00)   (1.95)     (1.95)
           State ITC                                           1.05***                               1.06***
                                                                (0.27)                                (0.32)
           ln Gov. Expend./Capita                                         0.00                         0.00
                                                                         (0.00)                       (0.00)
         Bartik                                                                    0.34               0.42*
                                                                                  (0.22)              (0.22)
         Change in Other States’ Taxes                                                      3.63       2.47
                                                                                           (2.33)     (2.21)

         Observations                             1,470         1,470    1,470    1,470    1,470      1,470
         R-squared                                0.138         0.172    0.138    0.150    0.149      0.196

Notes: This table shows the e↵ects of local business tax changes over ten years on gross operating surplus (GOS) per
establishment. The data are decade changes from 1980-1990, 1990-2000, and 2000-2010 for 490 county-groups. GOS
data are from BEA regional statistics. See Section 4 for other data sources used in the table. The specifications are
exactly the same as in Table 4. Standard errors clustered by state are in parentheses and *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
p<0.1.




                                                          89
       Table A11: E↵ects of Business Tax Cuts on Growth in Sales Tax Revenue over 10 Years

  Growth in sales tax revenue per establishment                 (1)      (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)

     ln Net-of-Business-Tax Rate                              2.26      2.24      2.27      2.27      2.16       2.15
                                                             (3.42)    (3.43)    (3.42)    (3.44)    (3.37)    (3.41)
     State ITC                                                          0.09                                     0.23
                                                                       (0.33)                                  (0.31)
     ln Gov. Expend./Capita                                                       0.01                           0.01
                                                                                 (0.01)                        (0.01)
  Bartik                                                                                    -0.01               -0.01
                                                                                           (0.30)              (0.30)
  Change in Other States’ Taxes                                                                       -3.82     -4.12
                                                                                                     (2.57)    (2.47)

  Observations                                               1,422     1,422     1,422     1,422     1,422     1,422
  R-squared                                                  0.539     0.539     0.539     0.539     0.543     0.544

Notes: This table shows the e↵ects of local business tax changes over ten years on state sales tax revenue per establish-
ment. The data are decade changes from 1980-1990, 1990-2000, and 2000-2010 for 490 county-groups, but not all states
collect sales taxes so the number of observations has 16 fewer county-groups per decade. Sales tax revenue is from the
census of governments. See Section 4 for other data sources used in the table. The specifications are exactly the same
as in Table 4. Standard errors clustered by state are in parentheses and *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                           90
 Table A12: E↵ects of Business Tax Cuts on Growth in Local Price Index (ACCRA) over 10 Years

         Growth in Price Index (ACCRA)                (1)         (2)      (3)      (4)       (5)       (6)

            ln Net-of-Business-Tax Rate              0.38         0.36     0.38     0.16     0.29       0.01
                                                    (1.39)       (1.38)   (1.39)   (1.51)   (1.43)    (1.55)
             State ITC                                            0.20                                  0.33
                                                                 (0.19)                               (0.21)
            ln Gov. Expend./Capita                                         -0.00                       -0.00
                                                                          (0.00)                      (0.00)
         Bartik                                                                    0.22*              0.23**
                                                                                   (0.11)             (0.11)
         Change in Other States’ Taxes                                                       -2.12     -2.34
                                                                                            (1.79)    (1.76)

         Observations                                1,201       1,201    1,201    1,201    1,201      1,201
         R-squared                                   0.119       0.121    0.119    0.129    0.127      0.142

Notes: This table shows the e↵ects of local business tax changes over ten years on growth in the ACCRA price index.
The data are decade changes from 1980-1990, 1990-2000, and 2000-2010 for 490 county-groups, but some local areas are
not covered by ACCRA. See Appendix A.4 for data details on local prices and Section 4 for other data sources. The
specifications are exactly the same as in Table 4. Standard errors clustered by state are in parentheses and *** p<0.01,
** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                            91
Table A13: E↵ects of Business Tax Cuts on Growth in Local Non-traded Price Index (ACCRA) over
10 Years


 Growth in Local Non-traded Price Index (ACCRA)                     (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)

    ln Net-of-Business-Tax Rate                                    0.11      0.08      0.12      0.02      0.10      -0.06
                                                                  (0.88)    (0.86)    (0.88)    (0.91)    (0.89)    (0.92)
    State ITC                                                               0.34**                                  0.39**
                                                                            (0.15)                                  (0.15)
    ln Gov. Expend./Capita                                                             0.00                           0.00
                                                                                      (0.00)                        (0.00)
 Bartik                                                                                          0.09               0.11**
                                                                                                (0.06)              (0.05)
 Change in Other States’ Taxes                                                                             -0.33     -0.63
                                                                                                          (1.24)    (1.07)

 Observations                                                     1,201     1,201      1,201     1,201     1,201     1,201
 R-squared                                                        0.055     0.068      0.056     0.058     0.055     0.076

Notes: This table shows the e↵ects of local business tax changes over ten years on growth in the ACCRA non-traded
price index. The data are decade changes from 1980-1990, 1990-2000, and 2000-2010 for 490 county-groups, but some
local areas are not covered by ACCRA. See Appendix A.4 for data details on local prices and Section 4 for other data
sources The specifications are exactly the same as in Table 4. Standard errors clustered by state are in parentheses and
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                          92
   Table A14: E↵ects of Business Tax Cuts on Growth in Local Price Index (BLS) over 10 Years

    Growth in Local Price Index (BLS)              (1)          (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)

       ln Net-of-Business-Tax Rate                1.25       1.35         1.27        0.86       1.19      1.06
                                                 (0.92)     (0.87)       (0.91)      (0.81)     (0.94)    (0.79)
       State ITC                                           -0.30***                                      -0.27**
                                                            (0.09)                                        (0.11)
       ln Gov. Expend./Capita                                           0.00***                          0.00**
                                                                         (0.00)                           (0.00)
    Bartik                                                                          0.22***              0.18**
                                                                                     (0.07)               (0.07)
    Change in Other States’ Taxes                                                                -0.50     0.17
                                                                                                (1.31)    (1.13)

    Observations                                   714          714       714         714        714        714
    R-squared                                     0.323        0.373     0.327       0.363      0.327      0.400

Notes: This table shows the e↵ects of local business tax changes over ten years on growth in the BLS local price index.
The data are decade changes from 1980-1990, 1990-2000, and 2000-2010 for 490 county-groups, but not all states are
covered by the BLS local price index. See Appendix A.4 for data details on local prices and Section 4 for other data
sources. The specifications are exactly the same as in Table 4. Standard errors clustered by state are in parentheses
and *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                          93
 Table A15: E↵ects of Business Tax Cuts on Growth in Single-State Establishments over 10 Years

     Single-State Establishment Growth              (1)          (2)       (3)       (4)        (5)         (6)

        ln Net-of-Business-Tax Rate               4.32**      3.55**     4.30**    4.37**     4.17**     3.42**
                                                  (1.89)      (1.47)     (1.90)    (1.87)     (1.85)      (1.47)
     Bartik                                                  0.63***                                     0.62***
                                                              (0.19)                                      (0.18)
        ln Gov Expend/Capita                                              -0.01                            -0.01
                                                                         (0.01)                           (0.01)
        State ITC                                                                   -0.35                  -0.06
                                                                                   (0.29)                 (0.28)
     Change in Other States’ Taxes                                                            -4.20**    -3.84**
                                                                                               (1.70)     (1.55)

     Observations                                  1,470        1,470    1,470      1,470      1,470       1,470
     R-squared                                     0.429        0.452    0.430      0.431      0.437       0.461

Notes: This table shows the e↵ects of local business tax changes over ten years on growth in the number of single-state
establishments. The data are decade changes from 1980-1990, 1990-2000, and 2000-2010 for 490 county-groups. See
Section 4 for data sources and Section A.5 for details on the construction of our single-state establishment data. The
specifications are exactly the same as in Table 4. Standard errors clustered by state are in parentheses and *** p<0.01,
** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                           94
           Table A16: Implied Structural Parameter Estimates Using Reduced-Form E↵ects

                                                                     (1)        (2)        (3)       (4)

             Productivity Dispersion          F                      -.09*     -.06        -.23      -.44
                                                                     (.05)    (.07)       (.21)     (.44)
             Preference Dispersion        W                           .26       .18        .64      1.12
                                                                     (.17)    (.18)       (.98)    (1.71)
             Housing Supply ⌘                                         3.88    13.01        .64      1.09
                                                                    (5.24)   (57.42)      (1.1)    (1.15)
             Product Demand "P D                                      7.59    10.01       5.66        4.8
                                                                    (6.25)   (13.01)     (4.76)    (3.15)

             Test of Restriction
             P-value of E = N           ( ("P D + 1)      1)   W     .12        .27        .22       .2

             Specifications
             Net-of-Business Tax                                      Y          Y         Y         N
             Net-of-Corporate Tax                                     N          N         N         Y
             Bartik Control                                           N          Y         Y         Y
             Net-of-Personal Tax Control                              N          N         Y         Y

Notes: This table shows the implied structural parameter estimates associated with the reduced-form e↵ects underlying
the incidence results in Table 5. Column (1) corresponds to the reduced-form e↵ects from Columns (1)-(3) of Table 5.
Recall that these columns use the same reduced-form e↵ects with di↵erent calibrated parameter values, which results in
the same implied structural parameters (other than for ˆW = .16(.13) in the specification that corresponds to Column
(2) of Table 5, i.e., the specification with the same reduced-form e↵ects as Column (1) but with ↵ = .65). Column (2),
(3), and (4) in this table correspond to Column (4), (5), and (6) of Table 5, respectively. Standard errors clustered by
state are in parentheses and *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                          95
                     Table A17: Estimates of Economic Incidence Using Reduced-Form E↵ects (Only Single-State Establishments)


                                                                     A. Incidence                                           B. Share of Incidence
                                                    (1)      (2)      (3)      (4)      (5)     (6)        (1)       (2)        (3)       (4)     (5)     (6)

               Landowners                          1.17     1.17     1.17      .32     1.86     .62         .29      .33        .26      .18     .42**    .29*
                                                  (1.43)   (1.43)   (1.43)   (1.36)   (1.56)    (.6)       (.18)    (.23)      (.19)    (.47)    (.17)    (.16)
               Workers                             1.1*      .69     1.1*      .68      .98    .58*       .28***     .19      .24***     .38      .22*   .28***
                                                   (.59)    (.44)    (.59)    (.52)    (.84)   (.33)       (.09)    (.16)      (.07)    (.48)    (.12)    (.08)
               Firmowners                         1.71*    1.71*    2.23**     .79     1.57    .9**       .43***   .48***      .5***   .44***   .36***   .43***
                                                   (.99)    (.99)    (.99)   (1.58)    (.97)   (.35)       (.11)    (.09)      (.16)    (.16)    (.08)    (.09)
               Conventional View Test
96




                2
                  of (S W = 100% & S F = 0%)                                                              160.50   110.78      56.94    4.03     81.33   223.27
               P-value                                                                                     0.00     0.00        0.00    0.04      0.00    0.00

               Specification
               Net-of-Business Tax                  Y         Y       Y        Y        Y       N           Y         Y         Y        Y        Y        N
               Net-of-Corporate Tax                 N         N       N        N        N       Y           N         N         N        N        N        Y
               Housing share ↵                      .3       .65      .3       .3       .3      .3          .3       .65        .3       .3       .3       .3
               Output elasticity ratio /            .9        .9      .5       .9       .9      .9          .9        .9        .5       .9       .9       .9
               Bartik Control                       N         N       N        Y        Y       N           N         N         N        Y        Y        N
               Net-of-Personal Tax Control          N         N       N        N        Y       N           N         N         N        N        Y        N
     Notes: This table, which is analogous to Table 5, uses changes in single-state establishments (i.e., using the estimates in Table A15 instead of Panel A of Table 4).
                                           See Section A.5 for details on the construction of our single-state establishment data.
                Table A18: Estimates of Economic Incidence Using Reduced-Form E↵ects (with Employment instead of Population)


                                                                  A. Incidence                                          B. Share of Incidence
                                                 (1)      (2)      (3)     (4)       (5)     (6)       (1)      (2)         (3)      (4)      (5)      (6)

              Landowners                         1.17     1.17     1.17      .32     1.86     .62      .3*       .33        .27      .17     .4**     .3**
                                                (1.43)   (1.43)   (1.43)   (1.36)   (1.56)    (.6)    (.18)     (.23)      (.19)     (.5)    (.16)    (.15)
              Workers                            1.1*      .69     1.1*      .68      .98    .58*    .28***       .2      .25***     .37     .21*    .28***
                                                 (.59)    (.44)    (.59)    (.52)    (.84)   (.33)     (.1)     (.16)      (.08)    (.36)    (.11)    (.09)
              Firmowners                         1.65     1.65    2.11*      .85     1.77    .85*    .42***    .47***     .48***   .46***   .38***   .42***
                                                (1.04)   (1.04)   (1.13)   (1.11)   (1.38)    (.5)    (.11)     (.09)      (.16)    (.15)    (.07)    (.07)
97




              Conventional View Test
               2
                 of (S W = 100% & S F = 0%)                                                          140.55    95.74       62.3    19.15    144.68   1321.58
              P-value                                                                                 0.00      0.00       0.00     0.00     0.00      0.00

              Specification
              Net-of-Business Tax                 Y        Y        Y        Y        Y       N         Y        Y          Y        Y        Y        N
              Net-of-Corporate Tax                N        N        N        N        N       Y         N        N          N        N        N        Y
              Housing share ↵                     .3      .65       .3       .3       .3      .3        .3      .65         .3       .3       .3       .3
              Output elasticity ratio /           .9       .9       .5       .9       .9      .9        .9       .9         .5       .9       .9       .9
              Bartik Control                      N        N        N        Y        Y       N         N        N          N        Y        Y        N
              Net-of-Personal Tax Control         N        N        N        N        Y       N         N        N          N        N        Y        N
     Notes: This table, which is analogous to Table 5, uses employment changes rather than population changes (i.e., using the estimates in Table A9 instead of A6).
                        Table A19: Incidence Estimates Using Reduced-Form E↵ects, Business Tax Changes (Tax Base Controls)

                                                                          Panel (a) Incidence
                                                (1)       (2)      (3)     (4)       (5)      (6)       (7)      (8)      (9)      (10)     (11)     (12)     (13)

     Workers ẇ   ↵ṙ                          1.19*    1.12*     1.1*    1.16**    1.13*     1.05*   1.07**    .81**   1.35**    1.33**    1.02    1.21**   1.32**
                                                (.62)     (.6)    (.59)    (.59)     (.63)    (.62)    (.49)    (.34)    (.58)     (.58)    (.64)    (.59)     (.58)
     Landowners ṙ                              1.39     1.04     1.21     1.08      1.19     2.03     1.15      .38     1.68      1.67      .29      1.21    2.21*
                                               (1.44)   (1.45)   (1.47)   (1.46)    (1.49)   (1.32)   (1.32)    (.82)   (1.35)    (1.43)   (1.89)   (1.46)    (1.25)
     Firmowners ⇡˙                             1.94*    1.61*    1.63*    1.76*     1.51*    1.65**   1.59*    1.02**   1.68*     1.95**    1.17     1.65*   1.82***
                                               (1.05)    (.92)    (.89)    (.95)     (.79)    (.84)    (.84)    (.41)    (.86)     (.91)     (.8)    (.88)     (.69)


                                                                      Panel (b) Shares of Incidence
                                                (1)       (2)      (3)      (4)      (5)       (6)      (7)      (8)      (9)      (10)     (11)     (12)     (13)

     Worker Share                              .26***    .3***   .28***   .29***    .29***   .22***   .28***    .37**   .29***    .27***    .41      .3***   .25***
                                                (.08)    (.11)    (.09)     (.1)     (.11)    (.07)     (.1)    (.15)    (.08)     (.08)   (.35)      (.1)    (.08)
     Landowner Share                            .31*      .28      .31      .27       .31    .43***      .3      .17     .36**     .34**    .12        .3    .41***
                                                (.16)    (.21)    (.19)     (.2)     (.21)    (.11)     (.2)    (.27)    (.15)     (.16)   (.63)      (.2)    (.11)
98




     Firmowner Share                           .43***   .43***   .41***   .44***     .4***   .35***   .42***   .46***   .36***    .39***    .47     .41***   .34***
                                                 (.1)    (.12)    (.12)    (.12)     (.13)    (.08)    (.12)    (.12)     (.1)     (.11)   (.29)     (.12)    (.06)


     Conventional View Test
      2
        of (S W = 100% and S F = 0%)           147.34   137.85   130.74   164.57    96.42    122.84   156.19   403.29    99.66    130.04   92.65    142.7    160.25
                                                0.000    0.000    0.000    0.000    0.000     0.000    0.000    0.000    0.000     0.000   0.000    0.000     0.000

     Specifications

     Throwback Tax Rule                          Y        N         N        N        N        N        N         N        N        N        N        N         Y
     Combined Reporting                          N        Y         N        N        N        N        N         N        N        N        N        N         Y
     INvestment Tax Credit                       N        N         Y        N        N        N        N         N        N        N        N        N         Y
     R&D Tax Credit Rate                         N        N         N        Y        N        N        N         N        N        N        N        N         Y
     Loss carry-back rules                       N        N         N        N        Y        N        N         N        N        N        N        N         Y
     Loss carry-forward rules                    N        N         N        N        N        Y        N         N        N        N        N        N         Y
     Franchise Tax                               N        N         N        N        N        N        Y         N        N        N        N        N         Y
     Federal Income Tax Deductible Controls      N        N         N        N        N        N        N         Y        N        N        N        N         Y
     Federal Income as State Tax Base            N        N         N        N        N        N        N         N        Y        N        N        N         Y
     Federal Accelerate Depreciation             N        N         N        N        N        N        N         N        N        Y        N        N         Y
     ACRS Depreciation                           N        N         N        N        N        N        N         N        N        N        Y        N         Y
     Federal Bonus Depreciation                  N        N         N        N        N        N        N         N        N        N        N        Y         Y


       Notes: See notes of Table 5; See Section A.3.2 for supplemental tax data sources and Section E.4 for estimating equations and subsection E.4.1 for variable
                                                                              definitions.
         Table A20: Incidence Estimates Using Reduced-Form E↵ects, Business Tax Changes (Political, Fiscal Policy, Economic Conditions)

                                                             Panel (a) Incidence
                                            (1)      (2)       (3)       (4)     (5)      (6)       (7)        (8)      (9)      (10)

      Workers ẇ   ↵ṙ                     1.15*     1.1*    1.54**   1.34*     1.36*     1.1*    1.39***   1.39***      .68    1.08**
                                            (.59)    (.61)    (.64)    (.72)    (.71)     (.59)     (.52)     (.52)     (.52)    (.49)
      Landowners ṙ                          .93     1.07     1.17     1.63     1.72      1.17      1.79      1.79       .32     1.12
                                           (1.52)   (1.48)   (1.61)   (1.54)   (1.56)    (1.43)    (1.22)    (1.22)    (1.36)   (1.21)
      Firmowners ⇡˙                         1.6*    1.56*    2.05**   1.69*    2.03**    1.63*    1.98**    1.98**       .81     1.6*
                                            (.89)    (.91)     (.9)    (.99)   (1.02)      (.9)     (.88)     (.88)     (1.4)    (.83)


                                                       Panel (b) Shares of Incidence
                                            (1)      (2)      (3)      (4)       (5)      (6)       (7)        (8)      (9)      (10)

      Worker Share                          .31**   .29***    .32**   .29***    .27**    .28***   .27***     .27***      .37    .28***
                                            (.13)    (.11)    (.14)     (.1)    (.11)     (.09)    (.07)      (.07)     (.43)     (.1)
      Landowner Share                        .25      .29      .25     .35**    .34**       .3    .35***     .35***      .18      .3*
                                            (.26)    (.21)    (.23)    (.14)    (.17)     (.19)    (.13)      (.13)     (.48)    (.18)
99




      Firmowner Share                      .44***   .42***   .43***   .36***    .4***    .42***   .38***     .38***    .45***   .42***
                                            (.14)    (.13)    (.12)    (.09)     (.1)     (.12)    (.09)      (.09)     (.13)     (.1)


      Conventional View Test
       2
         of (S W = 100% and S F = 0%)      145.34   130.84    73.08    85.61    94.50    130.47    116.5     115.71    6.96     153.98
                                            0.000    0.000    0.000    0.000    0.000     0.000    0.000      0.000    0.010     0.000

      Specifications

      Political Controls                     Y        N        N         N        N        N         N         N         N        N
      Sales Tax Rate                         N        Y        N         N        N        N         N         N         N        N
         Sales Tax Rate                      N        N        Y         N        N        N         N         N         N        N
      Income Tax Rate                        N        N        N         Y        N        N         N         N         N        N
         Income Tax Rate                     N        N        N         N        Y        N         N         N         N        N
         Gov. Expend/capita                  N        N        N         N        N        Y         N         Y         N        N
      Corporate Tax Rev. to GDP              N        N        N         N        N        N         Y         Y         N        N
      Bartik                                 N        N        N         N        N        N         N         N         Y        N
      Gross Receipt Tax Control              N        N        N         N        N        N         N         N         N        Y


     Notes: See notes of Table 5; See Section A.5 for supplemental data sources and Section E.4 for variable definitions and estimating equations.
                              Table A21: Incidence Estimates Using Estimated Reduced-Form E↵ects, Corporate Rate Changes

                                                              Panel (a) Incidence
                                             (1)      (2)        (3)       (4)       (5)      (6)      (7)      (8)      (9)     (10)

       Workers ẇ   ↵ṙ                      .58*     .59*      .75**     .58*       .7**     .59*     .57*     .58*     .41    .52*
                                             (.34)    (.33)      (.3)     (.34)     (.32)     (.33)    (.33)   (.33)    (.28)   (.29)
       Landowners ṙ                          .65      .65       .38       .63        .52      .62      .59      .59     .27     .43
                                             (.58)     (.6)     (.78)      (.6)     (.73)      (.6)    (.61)   (.61)    (.51)   (.59)
       Firmowners ⇡˙                        .91***   .92***     .97**    .92***     .96**    .91***   .89***   .9***    .71*    .8**
                                             (.32)    (.35)     (.38)     (.29)      (.4)     (.33)    (.34)   (.33)    (.42)   (.34)


                                                      Panel (b) Shares of Incidence
                                             (1)      (2)      (3)      (4)      (5)          (6)      (7)      (8)      (9)     (10)

       Worker Share                         .27***   .27***      .36**   .27***     .32***   .28***   .28***   .28***   .29**    .3***
                                             (.09)    (.08)      (.16)    (.09)      (.12)    (.08)    (.09)    (.09)   (.13)    (.11)
       Landowner Share                       .3**     .3**        .18      .3*        .24     .29*     .29*     .29*     .19      .25
                                             (.15)    (.15)      (.27)    (.16)      (.21)    (.16)    (.17)    (.17)   (.28)    (.22)
100




       Firmowner Share                      .43***   .42***     .46***   .43***     .44***   .43***   .43***   .43***   .51**   .46***
                                             (.09)    (.08)      (.12)    (.11)       (.1)     (.1)     (.1)     (.1)    (.2)    (.13)


       Conventional View Test
        2
          of (S W = 100% and S F = 0%)      167.40   282.85     433.55   125.85     572.33   189.43   195.49   188.74   39.36   154.3
                                             0.000    0.000      0.000    0.000      0.000    0.000    0.000    0.000   0.000   0.000

       Specifications

       Political Controls                     Y        N          N        N          N        N        N        N       N        N
       Sales Tax Rate                         N        Y          N        N          N        N        N        N       N        N
          Sales Tax Rate                      N        N          Y        N          N        N        N        N       N        N
       Income Tax Rate                        N        N          N        Y          N        N        N        N       N        N
          Income Tax Rate                     N        N          N        N          Y        N        N        N       N        N
          Gov. Expend/capita                  N        N          N        N          N        Y        N        Y       N        N
       Corporate Tax Rev. to GDP              N        N          N        N          N        N        Y        Y       N        N
       Bartik                                 N        N          N        N          N        N        N        N       Y        N
       Gross Receipt Tax Control              N        N          N        N          N        N        N        N       N        Y


      Notes: See notes of Table 5; See Section A.5 for supplemental data sources and Section E.4 for variable definitions and estimating equations.
            Table A22: Incidence Estimates Using Estimated Reduced-Form E↵ects, Corporate Rate Changes (Including Federal Corp. Tax)

                                                              Panel (a) Incidence
                                             (1)      (2)        (3)       (4)       (5)      (6)      (7)      (8)      (9)      (10)

       Workers ẇ   ↵ṙ                      .82**   .79**      .82**    .79**      .76**    .82**     .8**    .82**    .59**    .72***
                                             (.36)    (.35)     (.33)    (.34)       (.35)    (.34)    (.34)    (.34)    (.3)     (.24)
       Landowners ṙ                          .34      .43       .47      .35         .61      .41      .42      .44     .27        .1
                                             (.87)    (.82)     (.84)    (.83)       (.79)    (.83)    (.84)    (.83)   (.87)     (.87)
       Firmowners ⇡˙                        1.02**   1.02**    1.05***    1**       1.04**   1.03**   1.02**   1.04**    .78      .85**
                                             (.41)    (.43)      (.4)    (.39)       (.43)    (.41)    (.43)    (.42)   (.48)     (.39)


                                                        Panel (b) Shares of Incidence
                                             (1)      (2)       (3)       (4)      (5)        (6)      (7)      (8)      (9)      (10)

       Worker Share                          .38**    .35**     .35**     .37**     .32***    .36**    .36**    .36**     .36      .43
                                             (.18)    (.15)     (.15)     (.16)      (.11)    (.15)    (.15)    (.14)    (.24)    (.29)
       Landowner Share                        .16      .19        .2       .16        .25      .18      .19      .19      .16      .06
                                             (.31)    (.26)     (.26)     (.29)       (.2)    (.27)    (.26)    (.26)     (.4)    (.48)
101




       Firmowner Share                      .47***   .45***    .45***    .47***     .43***   .46***   .46***   .45***   .48***   .51***
                                             (.14)    (.11)     (.11)     (.14)      (.09)    (.12)    (.12)    (.12)    (.17)    (.19)


       Conventional View Test
        2
          of (S W = 100% and S F = 0%)      271.06   445.18    394.07    340.56     525.79   402.05   471.04   468.11   128.11   95.18
                                             0.000    0.000     0.000     0.000      0.000    0.000    0.000    0.000    0.000   0.000

       Specifications

       Political Controls                     Y        N         N         N          N        N        N        N        N        N
       Sales Tax Rate                         N        Y         N         N          N        N        N        N        N        N
          Sales Tax Rate                      N        N         Y         N          N        N        N        N        N        N
       Income Tax Rate                        N        N         N         Y          N        N        N        N        N        N
          Income Tax Rate                     N        N         N         N          Y        N        N        N        N        N
          Gov. Expend/capita                  N        N         N         N          N        Y        N        Y        N        N
       Corporate Tax Rev. to GDP              N        N         N         N          N        N        Y        Y        N        N
       Bartik                                 N        N         N         N          N        N        N        N        Y        N
       Gross Receipt Tax Control              N        N         N         N          N        N        N        N        N        Y


      Notes: See notes of Table 5; See Section A.5 for supplemental data sources and Section E.4 for variable definitions and estimating equations.
                                        Table A23: Incidence Estimates Using Reduced-Form E↵ects, State Fixed E↵ects

                                                              Panel (a) Incidence
                                             (1)      (2)        (3)        (4)      (5)      (6)      (7)      (8)      (9)      (10)

       Workers ẇ   ↵ṙ                      1.25    1.39**    2.31***   1.72**     2.05**   1.37**   1.01*    1.01*     1.2**   1.32**
                                             (.79)     (.7)      (.69)    (.7)       (.94)    (.69)    (.57)    (.57)    (.54)    (.65)
       Landowners ṙ                         2.44     1.77        .51    3.66**       .12     1.72      .41       .4     1.16      1.4
                                            (1.81)   (1.73)     (3.35)   (1.79)     (2.88)   (1.72)   (1.92)   (1.93)   (1.61)   (1.75)
       Firmowners ⇡˙                        1.74*    1.76*       1.96    2.57**      1.76     1.76*    1.26     1.25    1.51**   1.66*
                                              (1)     (.99)     (1.32)   (1.05)     (1.23)    (.99)   (1.06)   (1.05)    (.76)    (.99)


                                                       Panel (b) Shares of Incidence
                                             (1)      (2)      (3)       (4)       (5)        (6)      (7)      (8)      (9)      (10)

       Worker Share                          .23**   .28***      .48     .22***      .52     .28***    .38      .38      .31**    .3**
                                              (.1)     (.1)     (.46)     (.06)     (.47)      (.1)   (.33)    (.34)     (.15)    (.13)
       Landowner Share                      .45***    .36**      .11     .46***      .03      .35**    .15      .15        .3      .32
                                             (.15)    (.16)     (.61)     (.09)      (.7)     (.17)   (.54)    (.55)     (.25)    (.21)
102




       Firmowner Share                      .32***   .36***     .41**    .32***      .45     .36***   .47**    .47**    .39***   .38***
                                             (.09)     (.1)      (.2)     (.06)     (.28)      (.1)   (.22)    (.22)     (.13)     (.1)


       Conventional View Test
        2
          of (S W = 100% and S F = 0%)      89.41    90.87      6.90     158.91     8.33     88.47    66.76    65.18    83.12    89.86
                                            0.000    0.000      0.010     0.000     0.000    0.000    0.000    0.000    0.000    0.000

       Specifications

       Political Controls                     Y        N          N         N         N        N        N        N        N        N
       Sales Tax Rate                         N        Y          N         N         N        N        N        N        N        N
          Sales Tax Rate                      N        N          Y         N         N        N        N        N        N        N
       Income Tax Rate                        N        N          N         Y         N        N        N        N        N        N
          Income Tax Rate                     N        N          N         N         Y        N        N        N        N        N
          Gov. Expend/capita                  N        N          N         N         N        Y        N        Y        N        N
       Corporate Tax Rev. to GDP              N        N          N         N         N        N        Y        Y        N        N
       Bartik                                 N        N          N         N         N        N        N        N        Y        N
       Gross Receipt Tax Control              N        N          N         N         N        N        N        N        N        Y


      Notes: See notes of Table 5; See Section A.5 for supplemental data sources and Section E.4 for variable definitions and estimating equations.
                                        Table A24: Estimates of Economic Incidence Using Reduced-Form E↵ects (↵ = .5)


                                                                               A. Incidence                              B. Share of Incidence
                                                                     (1)       (2)      (3)         (4)           (1)        (2)       (3)             (4)

                       Workers                                     0.86*     1.13**     0.87*      0.62         0.24*       0.27**       0.24*        0.35
                                                                   (0.45)    (0.49)     (0.45)    (0.42)        (0.11)      (0.10)       (0.11)      (0.51)

                       Landowners                                   1.17       1.27      1.17      0.32          0.32        0.30         0.32        0.18
                                                                   (1.43)     (1.42)    (1.43)    (1.36)        (0.22)      (0.21)       (0.22)      (0.52)
103




                       Firm Owners                                 1.63*     1.79**     1.63*      0.81        0.44***     0.43***      0.44***     0.46***
                                                                   (0.90)    (0.80)     (0.90)    (1.40)        (0.11)      (0.10)       (0.11)      (0.11)
                       Conventional View Test
                        2 of (S W = 100% and S F = 0%)                                                           141.1       94.2        139.4         4.6
                       P-value                                                                                   0.000       0.000       0.000        0.032

                       Controls
                       State Fixed E↵ects                             N         Y          N         N             N           Y           N           N
                         ln Gov./Capita                               N         N          Y         N             N           N           Y           N
                       Bartik                                         N         N          N         Y             N           N           N           Y

      Notes: See notes of Table 5, which is our baseline that uses calibration values ↵ = .3 and      = .9. This table shows results for ↵ = .5 and     = .9. Recall that ↵ is
      the housing expenditure share and can also reflect the influence of local prices, which may be sensitive to increases in the price of housing services (Moretti, 2013).
                                       Table A25: Estimates of Economic Incidence Using Reduced-Form E↵ects (↵ = .65)


                                                                              A. Incidence                               B. Share of Incidence
                                                                    (1)       (2)      (3)          (4)           (1)        (2)       (3)             (4)

                       Workers                                      0.69     0.94*      0.69        0.57         0.20        0.23        0.20         0.33
                                                                   (0.44)    (0.51)    (0.44)      (0.47)       (0.16)      (0.17)      (0.16)       (0.57)

                       Landowners                                   1.17      1.27      1.17        0.32         0.34        0.32        0.34         0.19
                                                                   (1.43)    (1.42)    (1.43)      (1.36)       (0.24)      (0.23)      (0.24)       (0.55)
104




                       Firm Owners                                 1.63*     1.79**    1.63*        0.81       0.47***     0.45***     0.47***       0.48***
                                                                   (0.90)    (0.80)    (0.90)      (1.40)       (0.10)      (0.09)      (0.10)        (0.12)
                       Conventional View Test
                        2 of (S W = 100% and S F = 0%)                                                           108.1       71.0        107.3         3.4
                       P-value                                                                                   0.000       0.000       0.000        0.065

                       Controls
                       State Fixed E↵ects                            N         Y          N          N             N           Y           N            N
                         ln Gov./Capita                              N         N          Y          N             N           N           Y            N
                       Bartik                                        N         N          N          Y             N           N           N            Y

      Notes: See notes of Table 5, which is our baseline that uses calibration values ↵ = .3 and    = .9. This table shows results for ↵ = .65 and    = .9. Recall that ↵ is the
      housing expenditure share. We provide this robustness table for ↵ = .65 to be consistent with estimates from Diamond (2012) in terms of wage-to-rent sensitivity.
                                      Table A26: Estimates of Economic Incidence Using Reduced-Form E↵ects ( = .75)



                                                                             A. Incidence                                B. Share of Incidence
                                                                    (1)      (2)      (3)           (4)           (1)        (2)        (3)          (4)

                       Workers                                    1.10*     1.38**     1.10*        0.68       0.27***     0.30***     0.27***       0.33
                                                                  (0.59)    (0.59)     (0.59)      (0.52)       (0.08)      (0.10)      (0.08)      (0.29)

                       Landowners                                  1.17      1.27       1.17        0.32         0.29        0.28        0.29        0.16
                                                                  (1.43)    (1.42)     (1.43)      (1.36)       (0.20)      (0.18)      (0.20)      (0.47)
105




                       Firm Owners                                1.80**    1.93**     1.80**       1.04       0.44***     0.42***     0.44***      0.51**
                                                                  (0.90)    (0.83)     (0.90)      (1.19)       (0.14)      (0.12)      (0.14)      (0.17)
                       Conventional View Test
                        2 of (S W = 100% and S F = 0%)                                                          83.0        89.9         81.9        87.4
                       P-value                                                                                  0.000       0.000       0.000       0.000

                       Controls
                       State Fixed E↵ects                           N          Y         N           N            N           Y           N           N
                         ln Gov./Capita                             N          N         Y           N            N           N           Y           N
                       Bartik                                       N          N         N           Y            N           N           N           Y

      Notes: See notes of Table 5, which is our baseline that uses calibration values ↵ = .3 and    = .9. This table shows results for ↵ = .3 and   = .75.
                                       Table A27: Estimates of Economic Incidence Using Reduced-Form E↵ects ( = .5)



                                                                             A. Incidence                                B. Share of Incidence
                                                                    (1)      (2)      (3)           (4)           (1)        (2)        (3)          (4)

                       Workers                                    1.10*     1.38**     1.10*        0.68       0.25***     0.29***     0.25***       0.28
                                                                  (0.59)    (0.59)     (0.59)      (0.52)       (0.07)      (0.09)      (0.07)      (0.17)

                       Landowners                                  1.17      1.27       1.17        0.32         0.27        0.26        0.27        0.13
                                                                  (1.43)    (1.42)     (1.43)      (1.36)       (0.20)      (0.18)      (0.20)      (0.44)
106




                       Firm Owners                                2.08**    2.16**     2.08**       1.42       0.48***     0.45***     0.48***      0.59**
                                                                  (0.95)    (0.89)     (0.95)      (0.96)       (0.17)      (0.13)      (0.17)      (0.29)
                       Conventional View Test
                        2 of (S W = 100% and S F = 0%)                                                          48.8        68.5         48.3        48.4
                       P-value                                                                                  0.000       0.000       0.000       0.000

                       Controls
                       State Fixed E↵ects                           N          Y         N           N            N           Y           N           N
                         ln Gov./Capita                             N          N         Y           N            N           N           Y           N
                       Bartik                                       N          N         N           Y            N           N           N           Y

      Notes: See notes of Table 5, which is our baseline that uses calibration values ↵ = .3 and    = .9. This table shows results for ↵ = .3 and   = .5.
                     Table A28: Estimates of Economic Incidence Using Reduced-Form E↵ects (Controlling for Lagged GDP growth)


                                                                                 A. Incidence                            B. Share of Incidence
                                                                       (1)        (2)     (3)           (4)          (1)     (2)       (3)     (4)

                         Workers                                     1.2**      1.6***     1.21**     .78*         .26***    .29***     .26***      .28**
                                                                      (.55)      (.56)      (.55)     (.47)         (.07)     (.09)      (.07)      (.12)
                         Landowners                                   1.74        2.1       1.74       .84         .37***    .38***     .37***       .31
                                                                     (1.11)     (1.44)     (1.11)     (.94)         (.12)     (.13)      (.12)       (.2)
                         Firmowners                                  1.71**     1.79**     1.71**     1.12*        .37***    .33***     .37***     .41***
107




                                                                      (.85)      (.77)      (.85)     (.63)         (.09)     (.08)      (.09)      (.08)
                         Conventional View Test
                          2 of (S W = 100% and S F = 0%)                                                           98.57      96.65      97.65     262.52
                         P-value                                                                                   0.000      0.000      0.000      0.000

                         Controls
                         State Fixed E↵ects                             N          Y         N          N            N          Y          N          N
                           ln Gov./Capita                               N          N         Y          N            N          N          Y          N
                         Bartik                                         N          N         N          Y            N          N          N          Y
                         Lagged State GDP Growth                        Y          Y         Y          Y            Y          Y          Y          Y

      Notes: See notes of Table 5, which is our baseline that uses calibration values ↵ = .3 and    = .9. This table shows results from the same specifications as the baseline
      table, but with controls for two lags of state GDP growth.
                               Table A29: Estimates of Economic Incidence Using Reduced-Form E↵ects (Dropping 1980-1990)


                                                                                 A. Incidence                           B. Share of Incidence
                                                                       (1)       (2)      (3)          (4)          (1)     (2)      (3)      (4)

                         Workers                                     1.49**     2.15**    1.51**      .99*         .35**        .72     .35**       .33
                                                                      (.66)      (.89)     (.65)      (.56)        (.16)      (.93)     (.16)      (.27)
                         Landowners                                    .91        -.82      .93        .62          .21        -.28      .21        .21
                                                                     (1.66)     (3.06)    (1.65)     (1.79)        (.27)     (1.43)     (.27)      (.42)
                         Firmowners                                   1.89*      1.64      1.9*       1.36        .44***        .55    .44***     .46***
108




                                                                      (.98)     (1.16)     (.97)     (1.08)        (.14)      (.54)     (.14)      (.16)
                         Conventional View Test
                          2 of (S W = 100% and S F = 0%)                                                           68.57     2.72       67.76      70.65
                         P-value                                                                                   0.000     0.100      0.000      0.000

                         Controls
                         State Fixed E↵ects                             N          Y         N          N            N          Y         N          N
                           ln Gov./Capita                               N          N         Y          N            N          N         Y          N
                         Bartik                                         N          N         N          Y            N          N         N          Y

      Notes: See notes of Table 5, which is our baseline that uses calibration values ↵ = .3 and   = .9. This table shows results from the same specifications as the baseline
      table, but without the 490 observations for the change from 1980-1990. There are 980 observations in each specification. We provide this table to address potential
      concerns regarding the sensitivity of the results to the Tax Reform Act of 1986.
        Table A30: Incidence Estimates Using Reduced-Form E↵ects with Tax Rate Controls

                                              Panel (a) Incidence
                                                           (1)           (2)        (3)       (4)

                Workers ẇ      ↵ṙ                       1.1*   1.49**            1.1*     1.59**
                                                         (.61)    (.59)            (.61)     (.66)
                Landowners ṙ                             1.07    1.15             1.21       1.2
                                                        (1.48) (1.52)             (1.25)     (1.6)
                Firmowners ⇡˙                            1.56* 1.69**             1.64*     1.75*
                                                         (.91)    (.76)            (.88)      (.9)
                                        Panel (b) Shares of Incidence
                                                          (1)      (2)              (3)       (4)

                Worker Share                                .29***     .34***     .28***    .35***
                                                             (.11)      (.13)      (.09)     (.12)
                Landowner Share                               .29        .27       .31*       .26
                                                             (.21)      (.22)      (.16)     (.23)
                Firmowner Share                             .42***     .39***     .42***    .39***
                                                             (.13)      (.12)      (.11)     (.14)

                Conventional View Test
                 2 of (S W = 100% and S F = 0%)              130.8      83.3       104        69.7
                                                             0.000      0.000     0.000      0.000
                Specifications

                State Sales Tax Rate                           Y          N         N          Y
                State Individual Income Tax Rate               N          Y         N          Y
                State Property Tax Rate                        N          N         Y          Y


Notes: See notes of Table 5, which is our baseline that uses calibration values ↵ = .3 and      = .9. This table shows
results from the same specifications as the baseline table, but with controls for di↵erent state tax rates. See Table A4
for notes on data sources.




                                                         109
   Table A31: Incidence Estimates Using Reduced-Form E↵ects with Tax Rate Change Controls

                                              Panel (a) Incidence
                                                          (1)     (2)              (3)         (4)

               Workers ẇ      ↵ṙ                      1.1*     1.08*          1.13***     1.12***
                                                        (.59)    (.59)            (.37)       (.37)
               Landowners ṙ                            1.15      1.21            1.24         1.3
                                                       (1.43)    (1.4)           (1.15)       (1.1)
               Firmowners ⇡˙                           1.63*     1.65*           1.67**      1.72**
                                                         (.9)    (.93)            (.69)       (.73)
                                        Panel (b) Shares of Incidence
                                                         (1)      (2)              (3)         (4)

               Worker Share                                .28***     .27***     .28***      .27***
                                                            (.09)      (.09)      (.09)       (.08)
               Landowner Share                                .3       .31*       .31*        .31**
                                                            (.19)      (.17)      (.17)       (.15)
               Firmowner Share                             .42***     .42***     .41***      .41***
                                                            (.12)      (.11)      (.11)       (.09)

               Conventional View Test
                2 of (S W = 100% and S F = 0%)              137.7     141.6       139.8      154.7
                                                            0.000     0.000       0.000      0.000
               Specifications

                  State Sales Tax Rate                         Y        N           N           Y
                  State Income Tax Rate                        N        Y           N           Y
                  State Property Tax Rate                      N        N           Y           Y


Notes: See notes of Table 5, which is our baseline that uses calibration values ↵ = .3 and      = .9. This table shows
results from the same specifications as the baseline table, but with controls for di↵erent state tax rates. See Table A4
for notes on data sources.




                                                         110
                            Table A32: Empirical and Predicted Moments from Structural Model

                                                  Panel (a) Business Tax Shock
                                              Population    Wage      Rent                      Establishments
                 Empirical Moments
                 Business Tax           4.275***    1.451    1.172                                  4.074**
                                         (1.642)   (0.938)  (1.428)                                 (1.815)
                 A. Predicted Moments ( = .15, "P D = 2.5)
                 Business Tax             3.514     0.839    0.591                                    4.542
                           Over-id Test                    Test: E =                       N     ( ("P D + 1)      1)   W
                  2 -Stat                 2.453            T-stat                                    -1.566
                  2 -P-Value              0.117            P-value                                   0.117

                                                       Panel (b) All Shocks
                                              Population   Wage        Rent                     Establishments
                 Empirical Moments
                 Business Tax                    1.516          1.534        1.857                    1.749
                                                (1.915)        (1.117)      (1.562)                  (1.540)

                 Bartik                         0.446**       0.554***     0.697***                 0.600***
                                                (0.183)        (0.079)      (0.257)                  (0.189)

                 Personal Tax           1.731        -0.588                  -1.192                   1.247
                                       (1.247)      (0.728)                 (1.173)                  (1.420)
                 B. Predicted Moments ( = .15, "P D = 2.5)
                 Business Tax           0.736        0.944                   1.111                    1.893

                 Bartik                          0.424          0.571        0.730                    0.479

                 Personal Tax                    1.052         -0.596       -1.559                   0.322
                 Over-id Test                                              Test: E =       N     ( ("P D + 1)      1)   W
                  2 -Stat                        4.665                     T-stat                    -1.217
                  2 -P-Value                     0.458                     P-value                   0.224

                 C. Predicted Moments ( = .15, ↵ = .30) and estimated "P D
                 Business Tax           0.583       0.646      0.420                                  1.589

                 Bartik                          0.397          0.572        0.725                    0.447

                 Personal Tax                    1.053         -0.359       -0.996                   0.495
                 Over-id Test                                              Test: E =       N     ( ("P D + 1)      1)   W
                  2 -Stat                        5.378                     T-stat                    -1.334
                  2 -P-Value                     0.251                     P-value                   0.182

Notes: This table shows the estimated reduced forms used in our minimum distance estimation as well as the models
predicted by our model. The reduced forms are estimated via a system OLS. The data are decade changes from
1980-1990, 1990-2000, and 2000-2010 for 490 county-groups. See Section 4 for data sources. All parameters assume
    = 0.9 ⇥        and ↵ = 0.3. In addition, Panel (a) presents estimates of the model using only the tax shock for parameters
                   PD
(       = .15, "        =   2.5); panel (b) uses the business tax shock, the Bartik shock and the personal income tax shock
for parameters ( = .15, "P D =               2.5); and Panel (c) uses
                                                                   111all shocks, calibrates   = .15 and estimates "P D . Results
             2
of the           test of over identifying restrictions are below each model along with the result of the test of the restriction
    E       N
        =          ( ("P D + 1)    1)   W
                                            that is implied by calibrating "P D . See Section 6 for more details on the estimation.
Regressions use initial population as weights and include year fixed e↵ects and dummies for states in the industrial
midwest in the 1980s. Standard errors clustered by state are in parentheses and *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
                               Table A33: Estimates of Structural Parameters


                                       (1)         (2)                    (3)         (4)                  (5)     (6)
                                        Worker Location                     Housing Supply                Firm Location
                                       OLS         IV                     OLS          IV                 OLS     CMD

 Idiosyncratic Location              2.312***        0.717***
 Preference Dispersion       W        (0.767)         (0.277)

 Elasticity of Housing                                                 0.963***           0.834*
 Supply ⌘                                                               (0.208)           (0.432)

 Idiosyncratic Location                                                                                 0.331*     0.097*
 Productivity Dispersion         F                                                                      (0.174)    (0.058)

 Output Elasticity                                                                                       -0.316
 of Labor                                                                                               (0.225)

 N                                     1470           1470                1470            1470            1470       1470
 Instrument                                       Bartik & Tax                        Bartik & Tax
 First Stage F-stat                                  46.718                               15.32
 Calibrated Parameters:
 "P D                                                                                                     -2.5       -2.5
                                                                                                                     0.15
     W                                                                                                                0.7
 ⌘                                                                                                                   1.75

Notes: This table shows the estimated coefficients of the parameters in our structural model. The data are decade
changes from 1980-1990, 1990-2000, and 2000-2010 for 490 county-groups. See Section 4 for data sources. Col (1)-(2)
                                                          W
estimate the parameter of worker preference dispersion        , Col (3)-(4) the parameter of the housing supply equation
                                                                          F
⌘, and Col (5)-(6) the parameters of the firm location equation     and       . Col (1)-(5) are estimated via OLS or IV as
noted and the parameters are recovered via delta-method calculations. Col (6) is recovered using a classical minimum
distance approach. See Section 6 for more details on the specific equations and calibration choices. "P D denotes the
elasticity of product demand. Regressions use initial population as weights and include year fixed e↵ects and dummies
for states in the industrial midwest in the 1980s. Standard errors clustered by state are in parentheses and *** p<0.01,
** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                         112
                   Table A34: Policy Probit of Payroll Apportionment Weight Changes

               Independent Variables                                    Coefficient    Standard Error
               Mean Payroll Weight of Other States                      -.3608***           (.114)
               Mean Payroll Weight of Other States (t             1)        .2737          (.1947)
               Mean Payroll Weight of Other States (t             2)        .0491          (.1368)
               Corporate Tax Rate                                          -.1225          (.2548)
               Corporate Tax Rate (t 1)                                    .2714           (.2813)
               Corporate Tax Rate (t 2)                                     -.128          (.1115)
               Individual Income Tax Rate                                   .2006          (.2853)
               Individual Income Tax Rate (t 1)                            -.4287          (.3978)
               Individual Income Tax Rate (t 2)                             .2957          (.2492)
               State Income Growth (t 1)                                  -1.4585         (1.5766)
               State Income Growth (t 2)                                   -1.194         (1.5084)
               National Unemployment Rate (t 1)                            -.0792          (.0776)
               National Unemployment Rate (t 2)                             .0716          (.0938)

Notes: This table shows how observable economic and tax policy conditions relate to apportionment formula changes.
The specification is the same as the policy probit in Goolsbee and Maydew (2000). The dependent variable is an
indicator that equals one if payroll apportionment weights are changed. The analysis is at the state-year level for years
from 1978 through 2010. There are 1500 observations due to the lags. State income growth is the log di↵erence in per
capita GDP from BEA and the national unemployment rate is from BLS. Robust standard errors are in parentheses
and *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.


                   Table A35: Policy Probit of Statutory State Corporate Tax Changes

           Independent Variables                                            Coefficient   Standard Error
           Mean Corporate Tax Rate of Other States                          2.7234***         (.9537)
           Mean Corporate Tax Rate of Other States (t                  1)   -3.9527***        (.9882)
           Mean Corporate Tax Rate of Other States (t                  2)       .7191        (1.0997)
           Payroll Weight                                                      -.0227         (.0185)
           Payroll Weight (t 1)                                                 .0056         (.0271)
           Payroll Weight (t 2)                                                 .0312         (.0209)
           Individual Income Tax Rate                                          -.2777         (.3036)
           Individual Income Tax Rate (t 1)                                     .1707         (.3773)
           Individual Income Tax Rate (t 2)                                     .0875          (.223)
           State Income Growth (t 1)                                           -.6771        (1.2064)
           State Income Growth (t 2)                                            .1552        (1.5484)
           National Unemployment Rate (t 1)                                    -.0539          (.089)
           National Unemployment Rate (t 2)                                    .0783          (.0779)

Notes: This table shows how observable economic and tax policy conditions relate to statutory state corporate tax
rate changes. The specification is the same as the policy probit in Goolsbee and Maydew (2000), but with a di↵erent
dependent variable. The dependent variable is an indicator that equals one if the statutory state corporate tax rate
change exceeds 0.5 percentage points. The analysis is at the state-year level for years from 1978 through 2010. There
are 1500 observations due to the lags. State income growth is the log di↵erence in per capita GDP from BEA and
the national unemployment rate is from BLS. Robust standard errors are in parentheses and *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
p<0.1.


                                                          113
                     Table A36: Revenue-Maximizing Corporate Tax Rates By State
                    Establishment    Revenue Ratio     Sales Apport.    Corporate     Revenue Max. Corp. Rate
 State              Share Es         revpers
                                        s    /revC
                                                 s     Weight ✓sx      Tax Rate ⌧s    ⌧s⇤   ⌧s⇤⇤  ⌧s⇤⇤ /(1 ✓sx )
 Alabama                 1.4              16.4               33            6.5        30.6   2.2        3.3
 Alaska                  0.3               0.4               33            9.4        32.3 24.1         36.1
 Arizona                 1.8              22.1               80            7.0        30.0   1.7         8.3
 Arkansas                0.9              15.0               50            6.5        30.7   2.4         4.7
 California             11.7               9.2               50            8.8        32.0   3.7         7.4
 Colorado                2.1              21.1              100            4.6        31.0   1.7
 Connecticut             1.2              21.9               50            7.5        31.0   1.7         3.3
 Delaware                0.3               9.2               33            8.7        29.6   3.7         5.5
 Florida                 6.7              14.6               50            5.5        31.2   2.4         4.9
 Georgia                 3.0              19.8              100            6.0        29.6   1.8
 Hawaii                  0.4              57.3               33            6.4        28.6   0.7         1.0
 Idaho                   0.6              26.2               50            7.6        33.8   1.4         2.8
 Illinois                4.3               9.0              100            7.3        31.6   3.8
 Indiana                 2.0              20.7               90            8.5        32.9   1.8        17.7
 Iowa                    1.1              30.4              100           12.0        32.0   1.2
 Kansas                  1.0              16.0               33            7.1        30.6   2.2         3.4
 Kentucky                1.2              20.4               50            6.0        31.3   1.8         3.6
 Louisiana               1.4              18.1              100            8.0        32.2   2.0
 Maine                   0.6              16.9              100            8.9        34.0   2.1
 Maryland                1.8              14.0               50            8.3        31.6   2.5         5.1
 Massachusetts           2.3               9.2               50            8.8        31.9   3.7        7.4
 Michigan                3.0              26.4              100            4.9        31.5   1.4
 Minnesota               2.0              19.9               87            9.8        33.2   1.8        14.1
 Mississippi             0.8              17.2               33            5.0        30.5   2.1        3.1
 Missouri                2.1              42.8               33            6.3        31.2   0.9         1.3
 Montana                 0.5              13.4               33            6.8        36.8   2.7         4.0
 Nebraska                0.7              22.1              100            7.8        31.6   1.7
 Nevada                  0.8                                100            0.0        29.2
 New Hampshire           0.5               2.0               50            8.5        31.2 12.1         24.1
 New Jersey              3.1              10.6               50            9.0        31.0   3.3         6.5
 New Mexico              0.6              26.1               33            7.6        32.0   1.4         2.1
 New York                7.1              14.3              100            7.1        34.6   2.5
 North Carolina          3.0              14.3               50            6.9        31.3   2.5         5.0
 North Dakota            0.3              14.2               33            6.4        35.3   2.5         3.8
 Ohio                    3.5              141.5              60            8.5        31.4   0.3         0.7
 Oklahoma                1.2               24.0              33            6.0        31.7   1.5         2.3
 Oregon                  1.5              16.8              100            7.9        32.8   2.1
 Pennsylvania            4.1               15.1              90           10.0        33.2   2.4        23.9
 Rhode Island            0.4              19.0               33            9.0        34.5   1.9        2.9
 South Carolina          1.4              45.1              100            5.0        30.6   0.8
 South Dakota            0.4              34.7              100            0.0        36.5   1.1
 Tennessee               1.8               9.1               50            6.5        29.4   3.7         7.4
 Texas                   7.2                                100            0.0        30.3
 Utah                    0.9              18.3               50            5.0        31.4   2.0        4.0
 Vermont                 0.3              15.7               50            8.5        34.7   2.3         4.6
 Virginia                1.5              18.4               50            6.0        30.1   2.0         3.9
 Washington              2.4                                100            0.0        31.9
 West Virginia           0.5              16.3               50            8.5        30.8   2.2         4.4
 Wisconsin               1.9              14.7              100            7.9        32.8   2.4
Notes: This table shows the corporate tax revenue-maximizing corporate tax rate ⌧s⇤ and the total tax revenue-
maximizing corporate tax rate ⌧s⇤⇤ , which accounts for some fiscal externalities. These calculations are based on 2010
data and average national parameter estimates and do not incorporate heterogeneous housing markets. See
Section 7 and Section D in the appendix for details. Sources: U.S. Census ASG and those in Section 4.




                                                         114
Figure A1: Time Series of State Corporate Tax Rates by State




                            115
Figure A2: State Corporate Tax Apportionment Rules in 2012


        A. Payroll Apportionment Rate by State




                                                             25.00 − 33.33
                                                             22.50 − 25.00
                                                             0.00 − 22.50
                                                             0.00 − 0.00
         B. Sales Apportionment Rate by State




                                                              55.0 − 100.0
                                                              33.3 − 50.0
                                                              33.3 − 33.3



                           116
Figure A3: 30 Year Change State Corporate Tax Rates and Rules: 1980-2010


               A. Corporate Tax Rate Changes by State




                                                                     2.00 − 5.50
                                                                     1.00 − 2.00
                                                                     0.35 − 1.00
                                                                     0.00 − 0.35
                                                                     -0.51 − 0.00
                                                                     -3.03 − -0.51
            B. Sales Apportionment Rate Changes by State




                                                                     16.66 − 66.66
                                                                     0.00 − 16.66
                                                                     0.00 − 0.00



                                  117
Figure A4: Shares of Total U.S. Establishments and Population in 2010


                 A. Establishment Share by State




                                                                        2.96 − 11.49
                                                                        1.96 − 2.96
                                                                        1.34 − 1.96
                                                                        0.80 − 1.34
                                                                        0.43 − 0.80
                                                                        0.27 − 0.43
                   B. Population Share by State




                                                                         1.68 − 6.38
                                                                         1.12 − 1.68
                                                                         0.76 − 1.12
                                                                         0.48 − 0.76
                                                                         0.26 − 0.48
                                                                         0.12 − 0.26



                                118
Figure A5: 30 Year Change in Share of Establishments and Population: 1980-2010


                 A. Change in Establishment Share by State




                                                                       21.51 − 68.67
                                                                       6.82 − 21.51
                                                                       -4.76 − 6.82
                                                                       -11.43 − -4.76
                                                                       -18.42 − -11.43
                                                                       -29.87 − -18.42
                  B. Change in Population Share by State




                                                                        29.76 − 80.21
                                                                        17.09 − 29.76
                                                                        6.17 − 17.09
                                                                        1.39 − 6.17
                                                                        -6.20 − 1.39
                                                                        -16.02 − -6.20



                                     119
                                   Figure A6: Decadal Changes in State Corporate Tax Policy

                                                  Panel (a) Corporate Tax Rate Changes



                             150
                             100
                 Frequency
                             50
                             0




                                   -.04           -.02           0             .02           .04      .06
                                              Ten Year Change in Statutory State Corporate Tax Rate

                                          Panel (b) Payroll Apportionment Weight Changes
                          150250
                             200
                   Frequency
                 100         50
                             0




                                            -.3                   -.2                   -.1           0
                                                   Ten Year Change in Payroll Apportionment Weight



Notes: These figures show changes in corporate tax policy in the baseline PUMA-decade sample of 490 PUMAs over
1980-1990, 1990-2000, and 2000-2010. Panel (a) is a histogram showing the distribution of non-zero changes in corporate
tax rates in the pooled sample. Panel (b) is a similar figure for payroll apportionment weights.




                                                                     120
                                                      Figure A7: Testing for Concomitant Tax Base Changes
                                    2
                                    1
   Change in State Corporate Rate
                                    0
                                    −1
                                    −2
                                    −3




                                         0                 2                  4                 6                 8                 10
                                                                              Change in State ITC

                                                                95% CI                   Linear Fit        Binned Data
                                         Data from Wilson and Chirinko (2008). 10 Yr Changes. D.Corp= 0.2 + 0.026 (D.ITC), with se=.06



Notes: This figure, which uses data generously provided by Chirinko and Wilson (2008), illustrates that there is no
detectable relationship between corporate tax rate changes and investment tax credit changes. It shows the average
state corporate tax rate change for di↵erent bins of state investment credit changes. The estimated relationship is
  c
 ⌧s,t = 0.2 + 0.026 IT Cs,t , with se=0.06 and R2 = .001. Changes are measured over ten-year periods.




                                                                                  121
               Figure A8: Cumulative E↵ects of Business Tax Cuts on Population Growth
      15
      10
   Percent
      5
      0
      -5




             -10                    -5                      0                        5                      10
                                                            Year

                         Cumulative Effect no leads                             Cumulative Effect w/ leads
                         Long Difference Point Estimate                         95 % Confidence Interval



Notes: This figure shows the cumulative annual e↵ects of local business tax cuts on local population growth over
di↵erent time horizons with pre-trends. It plots the analogous estimates as Figure 4. See Section 4 for data sources and
Section E for estimation details.




                                                         122
    Figure A9: Cumulative E↵ects of Business Tax Cuts on Growth in Gross Operating Surplus
      10  5
    Percent
   0  -5




                F-test all leads are 0 has p-value= 0.84         F-test all lags are 0 has p-value= 0.0005
      -10




              -10                    -5                      0                       5                      10
                                                             Year

                           Cumulative Effect no leads                           Cumulative Effect w/ leads
                           Long Difference Point Estimate                       95 % Confidence Interval



Notes: This figure shows the cumulative annual e↵ects of local business tax cuts on state gross operating surplus over
di↵erent time horizons with pre-trends. It plots the analogous estimates as Figure 4. See Section 4 for data sources and
Section E for estimation details.




                                                           123
                                          Figure A10: E↵ect of Business Tax Cut on Establishment Growth over 10 Years
                     .25
   10 Year Log Change in Establishments
                             .2




                                                                                                     Slope= 3.94 (1.61)
             .15     .1




                                           -.02           -.015         -.01          -.005          0                  .005
                                                         10 Year Log Change in Net of Business Tax Rate


Notes: This figure shows the mean log change in the number of establishments over 10 years by bin of log change in
the net-of-business-tax rate ⌧ b over 10 years. The data are unweighted, at the county-group level, and are only adjusted
for year fixed e↵ects. Standard errors clustered by state are in parentheses and *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                                             124
                                      Figure A11: E↵ect of Business Tax Cut on Population Growth over 10 Years
                   .2
   10 Year Log Change in Population
                        .15




                                                                                               Slope= 3.94 (1.57)
         .1        .05




                                      -.02          -.015         -.01          -.005          0                 .005
                                                   10 Year Log Change in Net of Business Tax Rate


Notes: This figure shows the mean log change in the population over 10 years by bin of log change in the net-of-
business-tax rate ⌧ b over 10 years. The data are unweighted, at the county-group level, and are only adjusted for year
fixed e↵ects. Standard errors clustered by state are in parentheses and *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                                        125
                                                           Figure A12: E↵ect of Business Tax Cut on Wage Growth over 10 Years
                                                   .05
       10 Year Log Change in Composition Adj. Wages
                                   0




                                                                                                                   Slope= 1.78 (.72)
   -.1              -.05




                                                         -.02          -.015         -.01          -.005          0              .005
                                                                      10 Year Log Change in Net of Business Tax Rate


Notes: This figure shows the mean log change in wages over 10 years by bin of log change in the net-of-business-tax
rate ⌧ b over 10 years. The data are unweighted, at the county-group level, and are only adjusted for year fixed e↵ects.
As in the main text, wages are a composition constant index. Standard errors clustered by state are in parentheses and
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                                                          126
                                                          Figure A13: E↵ect of Business Tax Cut on Rental Cost Growth over 10 Years
                                                    .15
        10 Year Log Change in Composition Adj Rents
                            .05         .1




                                                                                                                     Slope= 2.16 (1.4)
   -.05          0




                                                          -.02           -.015         -.01          -.005          0                 .005
                                                                        10 Year Log Change in Net of Business Tax Rate


Notes: This figure shows the mean log change in rents over 10 years by bin of log change in the net-of-business-tax rate
⌧ b over 10 years. The data are unweighted, at the county-group level, and are only adjusted for year fixed e↵ects. As
in the main text, rental costs are a composition constant index. Standard errors clustered by state are in parentheses
and *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                                                            127
          Figure A14: E↵ect of Business Tax Cut on Growth in GOS per Establishment over 10 Years
                                                   .55
       10 Year Log Change in GOS per Establishment
                           .45         .5




                                                                                                           Slope= 3.53 (1.76)
   .35          .4




                                                         -.02    -.015         -.01          -.005          0                     .005
                                                                10 Year Log Change in Net of Business Tax Rate


Notes: This figure shows the mean log change in state gross operating surplus per establishment over 10 years by bin
of log change in the net-of-business-tax rate ⌧ b over 10 years. The data are unweighted, at the county-group level, and
are only adjust for year fixed e↵ects. To account for the consumption of fixed capital, which is 44% of GOS on average
during the sample period of 1980 to 2010 (NIPA Table 1.14), one needs to multiply this point estimate by (1-.44).
In particular, the point estimate implies an estimated e↵ect of (1                         .44) ⇥ 3.53 = 1.98 on net operating surplus per
establishment. Standard errors clustered by state are in parentheses and *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                                                  128
            Figure A15: E↵ect of Business Tax Cut on Growth in Sales Tax Revenue per Establishment
                                                  .6
   10 Yr Log Chg in Sales Tax Rev per Establishment
                                   .5




                                                                                                     Slope= 2.12 (3.04)
   .3              .4




                                                       -.02   -.015         -.01           -.005          0         .005
                                                              10 Year Log Change in Net of Business Tax Rate


Notes: This figure shows the mean log change in state sales tax revenue per establishment over 10 years by bin of log
change in the net-of-business-tax rate ⌧ b over 10 years. The data are unweighted, at the county-group level, and are
only adjust for year fixed e↵ects. Standard errors clustered by state are in parentheses and *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
p<0.1.




                                                                                129
                                    Figure A16: Estimates of Worker Location Equation
               .1




                                                                                        σIVW = 0.72** (0.28)
   Log Change in Population
             0        .05




                                                                                      σOLSW = 2.31*** (0.77)
    -.05       -.1




                              -.1         -.05              0                         .05                       .1
                                                  Log Change in Real Wage

                                    Binned Pop Growth                    Binned FS Fit of Pop Growth
                                    OLS                                 IV



Notes: This figure illustrates the importance of accounting for regional amenities when estimating the parameters
that govern worker mobility. Ignoring amenity changes attenuates the e↵ects of wage changes on population changes.
In particular, the figure shows the mean log change in population by bin of log change in real wage as well as the
fitted values of a first stage regression of real wage on the Bartik shock and the tax shock. Using these fitted values
illustrates how real wage changes (that are orthogonal to amenity changes) relate to population changes. The fitted
lines in the figure plot the associated estimates via OLS and IV from Table A33. Standard errors clustered by state are
in parentheses and *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                          130
                 .1                      Figure A17: Estimates of Establishment Location Equation
   Log Change in Establishments




                                                                                       σCMDF = 0.1** (0.06)
                          .05




                                                                                      σOLSF = 0.331*** (0.17)
     -.05       0-.1




                                  -.02            -.01                0                   .01                    .02
                                                         Log Change in Net of Bus Tax

                                                Binned Est Growth                 OLS
                                                CMD                               Conventional Wisdom



Notes: This figure illustrates how establishment location choices relate to business taxes. The conventional view on
corporate taxation in an open economy, which is based on models that neither incorporate the location decisions of
business nor the possibility that a business’s productivity can di↵er across locations, e↵ectively implies that business
location will be very responsive to tax di↵erentials over the long-run (Gordon and Hines, 2002). This figure shows how
this conventional wisdom on responsiveness compares to the empirical responsiveness of location decisions to business
tax changes over a ten-year period. In particular, it shows the mean log change in establishments by bin of log change
in the net-of-business-tax rate. The fitted lines plot the associated estimates via OLS and classical minimum distance
(CMD) from Table A33 Col. 5 and 6, respectively (see Section E.6.4 for more detail). The OLS line shows the
relationship between log changes in net-of-business-taxes and establishment growth. The positive slope indicates that
tax cuts increase the number of local establishments over a ten-year period. However, ignoring equilibrium e↵ects of
tax changes on wages attenuates the e↵ects of business tax changes on establishment growth. The CMD line shows
that accounting for these impacts increases estimated responsiveness. Nonetheless, accounting for equilibrium impacts
still yields substantially lower responsiveness to tax changes than the conventional wisdom implies. Section 2 quantifies
how lower responsiveness a↵ects the incidence and efficiency of corporate taxation. Standard errors clustered by state
are in parentheses and *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. See Appendix Figure A16 for the analogous figure for worker
location.




                                                                   131
                                                                Figure A18: Robustness of Economic Incidence

                                               Panel (a)
            Landowner’s Share of Incidence for ↵ = 0.3 and Calibrated Values of                                                                             and "P D



                                    -2
                                                                                                                        .9

                                                                            *Baseline                                   .8
                   Elasticity of Product Demand: εPD


                                                                                                                        .7




                                                                                                                              Share to Land Owners
                                           -3




                                                                                                                        .6

                                                                                                                        .5

                                                                                                                        .4
                           -4




                                                                                                                        .3
                                    -5




                                                            0       .1         .2            .3          .4    .5
                                                                         Output Elasticity of Labor: γ


                                                                                        Panel (b)
            Landowner’s Share of Incidence for                                            = .15 and Calibrated Values of ↵ and "P D
                                          -2




                                                                                                                         .9

                                                                 Baseline
                                                                  *                                                      .8
                        Elasticity of Product Demand: εPD




                                                                                                                         .7
                                                                                                                                     Share to Land Owners
                                                -3




                                                                                                                         .6

                                                                                                                         .5

                                                                                                                         .4
                                -4




                                                                                                                         .3
                                          -5




                                                            0       .2          .4         .6         .8        1
                                                                         Housing Expenditure Share: α



Notes: This figure, which is analogous to Figure 5 for landowners instead of firm owners, shows how our estimates
of landowner incidence vary across the parameter space. Specifically, the figures plot landowner incidence shares for
a variety of parameter values relative to our baseline parameters values of                                   = 0.15, "P D =                                2.5, and ↵ = .3. See
Section 6 for more detail.




                                                                                           132
                                                                Figure A19: Robustness of Economic Incidence

                                                Panel (a)
               Workers’ Share of Incidence for ↵ = 0.3 and Calibrated Values of                                                               and "P D



                                    -2
                                                                                                                                .9

                                                                            *Baseline                                           .8
                   Elasticity of Product Demand: εPD


                                                                                                                                .7
                                           -3




                                                                                                                                      Share to Workers
                                                                                                                                .6

                                                                                                                                .5

                                                                                                                                .4
                           -4




                                                                                                                                .3
                                    -5




                                                            0       .1         .2            .3          .4       .5
                                                                         Output Elasticity of Labor: γ


                                                                                        Panel (b)
               Workers’ Share of Incidence for                                          = .15 and Calibrated Values of ↵ and "P D
                                          -2




                                                                                                                                 .9

                                                                 Baseline
                                                                  *                                                              .8
                        Elasticity of Product Demand: εPD




                                                                                                                                 .7
                                                -3




                                                                                                                                            Share to Workers


                                                                                                                                 .6

                                                                                                                                 .5

                                                                                                                                 .4
                                -4




                                                                                                                                 .3
                                          -5




                                                            0       .2          .4         .6         .8              1
                                                                         Housing Expenditure Share: α



Notes: This figure, which is analogous to Figure 5 for workers instead of firm owners, shows how our estimates of
worker incidence vary across the parameter space. Specifically, the figures plot worker incidence shares for a variety of
parameter values relative to our baseline parameters values of                                       = 0.15, "P D =       2.5, and ↵ = .3. See Section 6 for
more detail.




                                                                                           133
               Figure A20: Robustness of Economic Incidence (Using Employment E↵ects)

                                              Panel (a)
           Firm Owner’s Share of Incidence for ↵ = 0.3 and Calibrated Values of                                                                                 and "P D


                                    -2
                                                                                                                            .9

                                                                      *Baseline
                                                                                                                            .8
                   Elasticity of Product Demand: εPD




                                                                                                                                  Share to Firm Owners
                                           -3




                                                                                                                            .7


                                                                                                                            .6


                                                                                                                            .5
                           -4




                                                                                                                            .4


                                                                                                                            .3
                                    -5




                                                            0   .1         .2            .3          .4       .5
                                                                     Output Elasticity of Labor: γ


                                              Panel (b)
           Firm Owner’s Share of Incidence for = .15 and Calibrated Values of ↵ and "P D
                                          -2




                                                                       * Baseline                                            .7
                        Elasticity of Product Demand: εPD




                                                                                                                                         Share to Firm Owners
                                                -3




                                                                                                                             .6


                                                                                                                             .5


                                                                                                                             .4
                                -4




                                                                                                                             .3


                                                                                                                             .2
                                          -5




                                                            0   .2          .4         .6         .8              1
                                                                     Housing Expenditure Share: α



Notes: This figure, which is analogous to Figure 5 for firm owners based on employment changes rather than based
on population changes (i.e., using the estimates in Table A9 instead of A6), shows how our estimates of firm owner
incidence vary across the parameter space. Specifically, the figures plot firm owner incidence shares for a variety of
parameter values relative to our baseline parameters values of                                   = 0.15, "P D =       2.5, and ↵ = .3. See Section 6 for
more detail.


                                                                                       134
                                           Figure A21: Robustness of Economic Incidence

                             Share of Incidence for Calibrated Values of            and Estimated "P D



                          80      60
                 Share of Incidence
                       40 20
                          0




                                       0         .1          .2                .3          .4            .5
                                                         Output Elasticity of Labor: γ

                                                      Firms             Workers             Land




Notes: This figure shows that the shares of incidence to firm owners, workers, and landowners are independent of
the calibrated values for the output elasticity of labor . Similar to Part A of Figure 5, it indicates that our baseline
empirical result – that firm owners bear a substantial share of incidence – is robust to using a variety of calibrated
parameter values. Appendix Figure A22 shows the relationship between calibration values and estimates as well as their
implications for markups. See Section 3 for more detail.




                                                                 135
                   Figure A22: Estimates of "P D and Associated Markups for Values of

                                                                    Panel (a) Estimates of "P D



                                    -3.5
                   Elasticity of Product Demand: εPD
                         -4.5       -5     -4




                                                       0       .1           .2                .3             .4             .5
                                                                        Output Elasticity of Labor: γ


                                                            Panel (b) Estimates of Product Markups
                                    35
                    Markup (%)
                        30          25




                                                       -5               -4.5                     -4                        -3.5
                                                                      Elasticity of Product Demand: εPD



Notes: These figures show the estimated value of "P D for di↵erent values of                            in Panel (a). These estimates correspond
to di↵erent version of the CMD model with two shocks as in Panel (b) of Table 6. Panel (b) plots the associated markup
for a given value of "P D .




                                                                                 136
