NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HOTELLING UNDER PRESSURE
Soren T. Anderson
Ryan Kellogg
Stephen W. Salant
Working Paper 20280
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20280
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2014

For helpful comments and suggestions, we are grateful to Ying Fan, Cloé Garnache, Stephen Holland,
Lutz Kilian, Mar Reguant, Dick Vail, Jinhua Zhao, and seminar and conference audiences at AERE,
Case Western Reserve University, the Energy Institute at Haas Energy Camp, the Kansas City Federal
Reserve, the MSU/UM Energy and Environmental Economics Summer Workshop, Michigan State
University, NBER EEE/IO, the Occasional California Workshop in Environmental and Resource Economics,
the University of Michigan, and the University of Montreal. Excellent research assistance was provided
by Dana Beuschel and Sam Haltenhof. Part of this research was performed while Kellogg was at UC
Berkeley's Energy Institute at Haas. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Soren T. Anderson, Ryan Kellogg, and Stephen W. Salant. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Hotelling Under Pressure
Soren T. Anderson, Ryan Kellogg, and Stephen W. Salant
NBER Working Paper No. 20280
July 2014
JEL No. E22,L71,Q3,Q4
ABSTRACT
We show that oil production from existing wells in Texas does not respond to price incentives. Drilling
activity and costs, however, do respond strongly to prices. To explain these facts, we reformulate
Hotelling's (1931) classic model of exhaustible resource extraction as a drilling problem: firms choose
when to drill, but production from existing wells is constrained by reservoir pressure, which decays
as oil is extracted. The model implies a modified Hotelling rule for drilling revenues net of costs and
explains why production is typically constrained. It also rationalizes regional production peaks and
observed patterns of price expectations following demand shocks.
Soren T. Anderson
Department of Economics
Marshall - Adams Hall, Office 18C
Michigan State University
East Lansing, MI 48824-1038
and NBER
sta@msu.edu
Ryan Kellogg
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
238 Lorch Hall
611 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
and NBER
kelloggr@umich.edu

Stephen W. Salant
University of Michigan
Department of Economics
611 Tappan
254 Lorch Hall
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
and Resources for the Future (RFF)
ssalant@umich.edu

1

Introduction

Hotelling’s (1931) classic model of exhaustible resource extraction—featuring forward-looking
resource owners that maximize wealth by trading off extraction today versus extraction in
the future—holds great conceptual appeal. Ever since, economists have modeled the optimal
extraction of an exhaustible resource as a cake-eating problem in which resource owners are
able to reallocate extraction across different periods without constraint. A common application of Hotelling’s logic is to production from an oil reserve. In this paper, however, we argue
that observed patterns of oil production and prices are not compatible with Hotelling (1931)
nor any of its modifications in the literature. Instead, we show that to replicate structurally
the dynamics of oil supply, economists should account for geological constraints on well-level
oil production and recast the Hotelling model as a well-drilling investment problem—or as
a keg-tapping problem, if one wishes to maintain an analogy to food and drink.
Using data from Texas over 1990–2007, we show that oil production from drilled wells
declines asymptotically toward zero and is not affected by shocks to spot or expected future
oil prices, even during 1998–1999 when oil spot prices were very low and oil futures markets implied that prices were expected to rise (temporarily) faster than the interest rate.
This behavior is inconsistent with most extraction models in the literature, and we show
empirically that it is not driven by common-pool problems, oil lease contract provisions, or
other institutional factors. Instead, we argue that the production decline is rationalized by
the cost structure of the oil industry and by the loss of underground reservoir pressure that
results from cumulative extraction.
When a well is first drilled, the pressure in the underground oil reservoir is high. Production may therefore initially be rapid, since the maximum rate of fluid flow is roughly
proportional to the pressure available to drive the oil through the reservoir, into the well,
and then up to the surface. Over time, however, extraction reduces the reservoir pressure, so
that the well’s maximum flow decays toward zero as the reserves are depleted. We hypothesize that the asymptotic decline in production in the Texas data occurs because extractors
1

never cut production below their declining capacity constraints, even though doing so would
conserve pressure that is valuable in the future.
While production from drilled wells is insensitive to oil prices, our Texas data show that
the drilling of new oil wells and the rental price of drilling rigs both respond strongly to oil
price shocks. These results motivate us to recast Hotelling’s (1931) canonical model as a
drilling problem rather than a production problem. Extractors in our model choose when to
drill their wells (or tap their kegs, per our analogy above), but the maximum flow from these
wells is (like the libation from a keg) constrained due to pressure and decays asymptotically
toward zero as more oil is extracted. In addition, the marginal cost of drilling in our model
strictly increases with the rate of drilling, consistent with our data on rig rental prices and
the notion that there is an upward-sloping supply curve for rig rentals.
We first characterize the extraction incentives implied by our model and explain why
producing at the flow constraint can be optimal even when prices are expected to rise faster
than the rate of interest and then plateau, as in 1998–1999. A well owner that attempts to
arbitrage such prices by producing below his constraint cannot entirely recover the deferred
production at the instant prices reach their zenith in present value terms. Instead, the
pressure constraint forces him to recover this production gradually over the entire remaining
life of the well, which will include periods when prices are lower in present value than today’s
price. Accordingly, our model implies that producers with price expectations matching those
implied by futures markets never had an incentive to produce below their constraint in our
sample, including 1998–1999 (the only exception being wells with very low production rates,
for which fixed operating costs can generate an incentive to shut down). Our model also
suggests that this outcome was not a historical fluke: mild sufficient conditions on primitives
guarantee that production will be constrained along the entire equilibrium path.
We then characterize optimal drilling, showing that understanding investment incentives
is central to understanding dynamics in oil markets. In the canonical Hotelling model, price
net of marginal extraction cost rises at the rate of interest whenever production occurs

2

(“Hotelling’s Rule”). In our reformulated model, a modified Hotelling Rule holds: whenever
drilling occurs, the discounted revenue stream that flows to the marginal well, net of the
marginal drilling cost, rises at the rate of interest. In the limiting case with no resource
scarcity, our model closely resembles a macroeconomic “Q-theory” model of investment,
whose dynamics lead to a steady state in which the marginal discounted revenue stream
from investing in a well equals the marginal cost of drilling a well.
We then show that the equilibrium dynamics implied by our model easily and naturally
replicate a wide range of the crude oil extraction industry’s most salient qualitative features.
First, our model implies that the flow constraint will typically bind in equilibrium so that
production from drilled wells will be unresponsive to shocks, as we observe in our data. Thus,
aggregate production will evolve gradually over time, following changes in the drilling rate,
and will only respond to shocks with a significant lag. This result provides a foundation for a
macro-empirical literature showing that aggregate oil production is price inelastic, at least in
the short run (Griffin 1985; Hogan 1989; Jones 1990; Dahl and Yucel 1991; Ramcharran 2002;
Güntner forthcoming).1 This inelasticity has important implications for the macroeconomic
effects of oil supply and demand shocks, since inelastic supply and demand lead to volatile
oil prices (see Hamilton (2009) and Kilian (2009)). Second, within oil-producing regions,
the model predicts the commonly observed phenomenon (Hamilton 2013) that production
initially rises as drilling ramps up but then peaks and eventually declines as drilling slows
and the flow from existing wells decays. Third, we show that positive global demand shocks
lead to an immediate increase in oil prices, drilling activity, and rig rental prices, and that oil
prices may subsequently be expected to fall if the increased rate of drilling causes production
to increase. These results are reversed for negative demand shocks, which can—if large
enough—lead to the expectation that oil prices will rise faster than the rate of interest
following the initial drop in price. These predicted responses to demand shocks match our
data on drilling activity, rig rental prices, and oil futures markets.
1

Rao (2010), however, finds evidence using well-level data that firms can shift production across wells in
response to well-specific taxes.

3

We conclude by discussing how our model relates to the broader Hotelling literature and
why prior work cannot explain the full array of real-world oil market phenomena that we document. In short, oil extractors face a keg-tapping problem, not a cake-eating problem. Thus,
while we retain Hotelling’s (1931) conceptually appealing framework of forward-looking,
wealth-maximizing agents, our core innovation is to impose the constraint that oil flow is
limited by reservoir pressure (which declines with cumulative production), while allowing
for convex costs of investment in new wells. Extraction decisions are therefore made wellby-well, not barrel-by-barrel. Our main contribution then is to show that a Hotelling-style
model thus grounded in the actual cost structure of the oil industry can give predictions that
are empirically valid. Our hope is that these results will renew interest in using Hotelling
models to understand and predict the behavior of oil extractors and markets.

2

Empirical evidence from Texas

In this section we study how oil production and drilling in Texas respond to incentives
generated by changes in current and expected future oil prices, as revealed in futures markets.
We show that oil production exhibits nearly zero response to price shocks, whereas drilling
activity—along with the cost of renting drilling rigs—responds strongly. We then discuss
how these results derive from the fundamental technology of crude oil extraction.

2.1

Data sources

Our crude oil drilling and production data for 1990–2007 come from the Texas Railroad
Commission (TRRC). The drilling data come from the TRRC’s “Drilling Permit Master”
dataset, which provides the date, county, and lease name for every well drilled in Texas. A
lease is land upon which an oil production company has obtained—from the (usually private)
mineral rights owner—the right to drill for and produce oil and gas. Over 1990–2007, a total

4

of 157,271 new wells were drilled, along with 42,893 “re-entries” of existing wells.2
The production data come from the TRRC’s “Oil and Gas Annuals” dataset, which
records monthly crude oil production at the lease-level.3 Individual wells are not flowmetered.4 Thus, we generally cannot observe well-level production, though for some analyses
we will isolate the sample to leases that have a single flowing well.
Our analysis of the production data focuses on whether firms respond to oil price shocks
by adjusting the flow rates of their existing wells, possibly all the way to zero, which is known
as “shutting in” a well.5 Such adjustment would typically be accomplished by slowing down
or speeding up the pumping unit.6 To distinguish these actions from investments in new
production, such as drilling a new well, we discard leases in which any rig work took place.7
In the remaining data, there exist 16,148 leases for which production data are not missing
for any month from 1990–2007 and production is non-zero for at least one month, yielding
3,487,968 lease-month observations. The typical oil lease in Texas has a fairly low rate of
2

A re-entry occurs when a rig is used to deepen a well, drill a “sidetrack” off an existing well bore, or
stimulate production by fracturing the oil reservoir. These interventions are all similar to drilling a new well
in that they require a substantial up-front investment and provide access to new oil-bearing rock. A small
share (< 10%) of the new wells were drilled to inject water or gas into the reservoir rather than extract oil.
These injection investments can mitigate, but not eliminate, the rate of production decline that we document
here. We abstract away from differences between new drilling, re-entries, and injection well drilling in our
analysis.
3
Due to false zeros for some leases in 1996 and December 2004-2007, we augmented these data by scraping
information from the TRRC’s online production query tool, verifying that the two sources match for leases
and months not affected by the data error.
4
Direct production includes oil, gas, and often water. Separation of these products typically occurs at a
single facility serving the entire lease, with the oil flowing from the separation facility into storage tanks. Oil
is metered leaving the storage tank for delivery to a pipeline or tanker truck for sale. Although firms often
assess well-level productivity by diverting each well’s flow into a small “test separator,” these data are not
available from TRRC, nor would they give a particularly accurate measure of a well’s monthly flow.
5
Throughout our analysis, we assume that oil price movements are exogenous to actions undertaken by
Texas oil producers. This treatment is plausible given that Texas firms are a small share of the world oil
market (1.3% in 2007) and evidence that oil price shocks during our sample were primarily driven by global
demand shocks and (to a lesser extent) international rather than U.S. supply shocks (Kilian 2009). Moreover,
the positive covariance between drilling activity and oil prices apparent in figure 4 strongly suggests that
Texas drilling activity is responding to price shocks rather than vice-versa.
6
The vast majority of the wells in the dataset are pumped and do not flow naturally. The average
lease-month in the data has 2.02 pumped wells and 0.06 naturally flowing wells.
7
Discarding these leases requires matching the drilling dataset to the production dataset. Since lease
names are not consistent across the two datasets, we conservatively identify all county-firm pairs in which
rig work took place and then discard all leases corresponding to such pairs (unlike leases, counties and firms
are consistently identified with numeric codes in both datasets).

5

production, reflecting the fact that most oil fields in Texas are mature and have been heavily
produced in the past. The average daily lease production in the data is 3.6 barrels of oil
per day (bbl/d), with a standard deviation of 18.2 bbl/d. A total of 1,070,632 (31%) of the
observed lease-months have zero production, while the maximum is 9,510 bbl/d.
Our oil price data come from the New York Mercantile Exchange (NYMEX) and measure
prices for West Texas Intermediate (WTI) crude oil delivered in Cushing, Oklahoma—the
most common benchmark for crude oil prices in North America—from 1990–2007. We use the
Bureau of Labor Statistics’s All Urban, All Goods Consumer Price Index (CPI) to convert
all prices to December 2007 dollars. We use the front-month (upcoming month) futures price
as our measure of the spot price of crude oil and use prices for longer-term futures contracts
to measure firms’ price expectations.8
Figure 1 shows the time series of crude oil spot prices (solid black line) as well as the
futures curves as of December in each year (dashed colored lines).9 For example, the leftmost dashed line shows prices in December 1990 for futures contracts with delivery dates
from January 1991 through December 1992. As is clear from the figure, the futures market
for crude oil is often backwardated (meaning that the futures price is lower than the spot
price) and was strongly backwardated during the mid-2000s when the spot price was rapidly
increasing. Kilian (2009) and Kilian and Hicks (2013) attribute the increase in spot prices
8

The use of futures prices as measures of price expectations is not without controversy. Alquist and Kilian
(2010), for example, shows that futures markets do not out-perform a simple no-change forecast in out-ofsample forecasting over 1991-2007. We use futures markets here for several reasons. First, NYMEX futures
are liquidly traded at the horizons we consider here, and with many deep-pocketed, risk-neutral traders, the
futures price should equal the expected future spot price. Second, a majority of oil producers in Texas claim
to use futures prices in making their own price projections (Society of Petroleum Evaluation Engineers 1995).
Third, Kellogg (2014) shows that firms’ drilling activity in Texas is more consistent with price expectations
based on the futures market than with a no-change forecast. Finally, as we show in appendix A, we find
that firms’ on-lease above-ground oil stockpiles increase when futures prices are high relative to spot prices,
as one would expect if firms’ expectations aligned with the market.
9
We have converted all of the price data so that the slopes of the futures curves in figure 1 and the
expected rates of price change used in our analysis reflect real rather than nominal changes. To convert the
futures curves from nominal to real, we adjust for both the trade date’s CPI and for expected annualized
inflation of 2.50% between the trade date and delivery date (the average annual inflation rate from January
1990 to December 2007 is 2.50%, and inflation varies little over the sample). For example, we convert the
nominal prices for futures contracts traded in December 1990 to real price expectations by multiplying by
the December 2007 CPI, dividing by the December 1990 CPI, and then dividing each contract price by
1.025t/12 , where t is the number of months between the trade date and the delivery date.

6

0

20

Oil Price ($/bbl)
40
60
80

100

120

Figure 1: Crude oil spot prices and futures curves

Jan 90

Jan 95

Jan 00

Jan 05

Jan 10

Jan 15

Note: This figure shows crude oil front month (“spot”) and futures prices, all in
real $2007. The solid black line is the spot price of oil. The dashed lines are the
futures curves as of December in each year. See text for details.

during this period to a series of large, positive, and unanticipated shocks to the demand for
oil, primarily from emerging Asian markets.
Figure 1 also reveals several periods of contango (meaning that the futures price is higher
than the spot price) during the sample, particularly during 1998–1999 when the oil price was
quite low. Kilian (2009) attributes the low oil prices during this period to a negative demand
shock arising from the Asian financial crisis.
Finally, we obtained information on rental prices (“dayrates”) for drilling rigs from RigData (1990–2013), a firm that collects information on U.S. onshore drilling activity and
publishes rig rental rates in its Day Rate Report. As discussed in Kellogg (2011), the oil
production companies that make drilling and production decisions do not drill their own wells
but rather contract drilling out to independent service companies that own rigs. Paying to
rent a rig and its crew is typically the largest line-item in the overall cost of a well. The

7

Expected price increase

-40
-20
0
20
40
Expected annual rate of price increase, percent

Front month price
Production

-60

Average oil production (bbl/d) and front month price ($10/bbl)
0
2
4
6
8
10

Figure 2: Crude oil prices and production from existing wells in Texas

Jan90 Jan92 Jan94 Jan96 Jan98 Jan00 Jan02 Jan04 Jan06 Jan08

Note: This figure presents crude oil front month (“spot”) prices and the expected
percentage change in prices over one year, as well as daily average lease-level
production from leases on which there was no rig activity (so that all production
comes from pre-existing wells). All prices are real $2007, and expected price
changes are net of inflation. See text for details.

data provided by RigData are quarterly, covering Q4 1990 through Q4 2007, and are broken
out by region and rig depth rating. We use dayrates for rigs with depth ratings between
6,000 and 9,999 feet (the average well depth in our drilling data is 7,425 feet) for the Gulf
Coast / South Texas region. Observed dayrates range from $6,315 to $15,327 per day, with
an average of $8,008 (all real December 2007 dollars).

2.2

Production from existing wells does not respond to prices

Our main empirical results focus on production from leases on which there was no rig activity
from 1990–2007, so that all production comes from pre-existing wells. Figure 2 presents daily
average production (in bbl/d) for these leases in each month, along with monthly crude
oil spot prices and the expected percentage change in spot prices over one year (i.e., the

8

percentage difference between the 12-month futures price and the spot price). Production is
dominated by a long-run downward trend, with little response either to the spot price of oil
or to expected future price changes. In appendix A, we present regression results confirming
the lack of response to price incentives. In addition, we show that the pattern shown in figure
2 holds for subsamples of leases that have relatively high production volumes (in excess of
100 bbl/d) and for production from wells that are drilled during the sample period. Thus,
our results are not specific only to the low-volume wells that are the norm in Texas.
These results contrast sharply with predictions from standard Hotelling models, which
would predict a complete shutdown of oil production during periods such as 1998–1999
when spot prices are lower than expected future prices in present value terms. Moreover,
under a commonly used assumption of increasing marginal extraction costs, standard models
will predict that production should increase following positive price shocks and decrease
following negative price shocks. None of these predictions appears strongly in the time series
of production from pre-existing wells.
Figure 2 does suggest that production may have deviated slightly from the long-run trend
during the 1998–1999 period in which the spot price fell below $20/bbl and the expected
percentage price change over one year exceeded 10% (and sometimes 20%). In particular, it
appears that production accelerated its decline rate in 1998 while prices were falling, leveled
off in 1999 while prices were rising, and then resumed its usual decline in 2000.
To assess whether this deviation is real and what mechanism lay behind it, we study
whether it arose from wells being shut in or from changes in production on the intensive
margin. We first isolate the sample to leases that had no more than one flowing well over
1994–2004,10 so that observed lease-level production during this time can be interpreted as
well-level production. We then split this sample into two groups: wells that are never shut
in over 1994–2004 and “intermittent” wells that are shut in for at least one calendar month.
Figure 3 plots the time series of production from these two samples. This figure makes clear
10

We use a shorter sample window to increase the number of qualifying leases in the sample and to improve
the visualization of the 1998–1999 period in figure 3.

9

3
6
9
12
Production from wells that are never shut in (bbl/d)

Production from wells that never shut in

Jan94

Front month price

Production from intermittent wells

0

Production from intermittent wells (bbl/d), oil price ($10/bbl)
0
2
4
6

Figure 3: Intermittent wells versus wells never shut in

Jan96

Jan98

Jan00

Jan02

Jan04

Note: This figure shows production from wells that shut in at least once during
1994–2004 versus production from wells that never shut in during 1994–2004.
Production data come from leases that had no more than one productive well and
never experienced a rig intervention over 1994–2004. Oil prices are real $2007.
See text for details.

that the 1998 deviation from trend was driven entirely by low-volume “marginal” wells that
sometimes have zero production. For wells that always produce, there is no adjustment
on the intensive margin, even though firms are able to adjust their pumping rate (see Rao
(2010)). It appears that when prices fell in 1998, an unusually large number of marginal wells
were shut in, temporarily accelerating the decline. Then, when prices recovered during 1999,
many of these wells were returned to production, temporarily slowing the decline. Apart
from these deviations, a significant response of production to price signals does not appear
anywhere in the data. In particular, the most productive wells show no price response (see
appendix A).

10

Figure 4: Texas rig activity versus crude oil spot prices
(b) Rig dayrates
100

1200

100

16000

(a) Drilling of new wells

6000

20

Jan90 Jan92 Jan94 Jan96 Jan98 Jan00 Jan02 Jan04 Jan06 Jan08

20

Rig dayrate ($ per rig per day)
8000
10000
12000
14000

40
60
80
Oil front month price, $/bbl

Wells drilled per month
600
800
1000
400
200

Front month price

Front month price

40
60
80
Oil front month price, $/bbl

Rig dayrate
Drilling activity

Jan90 Jan92 Jan94 Jan96 Jan98 Jan00 Jan02 Jan04 Jan06 Jan08

Note: Panel (a) shows the total number of new wells drilled across all leases in our dataset. Panel (b) shows
dayrates for the Gulf Coast / South Texas region, for rigs with depth ratings between 6,000 and 9,999 feet.
The dayrate data are quarterly rather than monthly. Data are available beginning in Q4 1990, and data for
Q4 1992 are missing. See text for details.

2.3

Rig activity does respond to price incentives

These no-response results based on existing wells starkly contrast with new drilling activity
in Texas. Figure 4(a) shows the total number of new wells drilled across all leases in our
dataset, along with the spot price for crude oil. There is a pronounced positive correlation
between oil prices and new drilling activity. Appendix A presents related regression results
indicating that the elasticity of the monthly drilling rate with respect to the crude oil spot
price is about 0.6 and statistically different from zero. We have also found that the use of
rigs to re-enter old wells correlates with oil prices, though not as strongly as the drilling of
new wells.
When oil production companies drill more wells in response to an increase in oil prices,
more rigs (and crews) must be put into service to drill them. Figure 4(b) shows that these
fluctuations in rig demand are reflected in a positive covariance between rig dayrates and oil
prices. Regressions confirm that the elasticity of the rig rental rate with respect to oil prices

11

is large (0.79) and statistically significant. Thus, as the industry collectively wishes to drill
more wells within a given time frame, the marginal cost of drilling those wells increases.

2.4

Industry cost structure explains these price responses

The analysis above documents two empirical facts about oil production and drilling in Texas
from 1990–2007. First, production from drilled wells is almost completely unresponsive to
changes in spot or expected future oil prices, with an exception being an increased rate of
shut-ins during the 1998 oil price crash. Second, drilling of new wells responds strongly
to oil price changes, and rig dayrates respond commensurately. Here, we argue that these
empirical results reflect an industry cost structure with the following characteristics:11
1. The rate of production from a well is physically constrained, and this constraint declines
asymptotically toward zero as a function of cumulative production. This function is
known in the engineering literature (Hyne 2001) as a well’s production decline curve.
2. The marginal cost of production below a given well’s capacity constraint, consisting of
energy input to the pump (if there is one) and the cost of transporting oil off the lease,
is very small relative to observed oil prices.
3. The fixed costs of operating a producing well are non-zero. There may also be costs
for restarting a shut-in well, but they are not too large to be overcome.
4. Drilling rigs and crews are a relatively fixed resource, at least in the short run. Higher
rental prices are required to attract more rigs into active use, leading to an upwardsloping supply curve of drilling rigs for rent.
The capacity constraint and low marginal production cost relate to the observation that
production from existing wells steadily declines while not responding to oil price shocks.
11

For a particularly cogent discussion within the economics literature, see Thompson (2001).

12

Because oil production firms in Texas are price-takers,12 production will be unresponsive to
price shocks, as the data reflect, only if the oil price intersects marginal cost at a vertical,
capacity-constrained section of the curve. While the marginal cost of production below
the capacity constraint is not necessarily zero, it must be well below the range of oil prices
observed in the data. There remains the question of why producers did not reduce production
during 1998–1999 when oil prices were forecast to rise more quickly than the rate of interest.
Section 3.2 discusses why the declining capacity constraint precluded firms from taking
advantage of this seeming intertemporal arbitrage opportunity.
The existence of a capacity constraint for well-level production is consistent not only
with the data presented above but also with standard petroleum geology and engineering.13
As noted recently in the economics literature by Mason and van’t Veld (2013), the flow
of fluid through reservoir rock to the well bore is governed by Darcy’s Law (Darcy 1856),
which stipulates that the rate of flow is proportional to the pressure differential between
the reservoir and the well. In the simplest model of reservoir flow, the reservoir pressure is
proportional to the volume of fluid in the reservoir. In this case, the maximum flow rate is
proportional to the remaining reserves, consistent with the stylized fact reported in Mason
and van’t Veld (2013) that U.S. production has remained close to 10% of proven reserves since
the industry’s infancy, despite large changes in production over time. This proportionality
yields an exponential production decline curve for drilled wells. More complex cases, which
might involve the presence of gas, water, or fractures in the reservoir, may yield a more
general hyperbolic decline. Regardless, the physical laws governing fluid flow place a limit
on the rate at which oil can be extracted from a reservoir, and this limit declines with the
volume of oil remaining.14
12

The market for crude oil is global, and Texas as a whole (let alone a single firm) constitutes only 1.3%
of world oil production (Texas and world oil production data for 2007 from the U.S. Energy Information
Administration); thus, the exercise of market power by Texas oil producers is implausible.
13
We give the geologic and engineering basis for well-level capacity constraints only a brief treatment here.
For a fuller discussion of fluid flow and production decline curves, Hyne (2001) is an excellent source that
does not require a geology or engineering background.
14
Darcy’s law governs oil flowing through the reservoir and into the bottom of the wellbore. Installing a
pump on a well effectively eliminates the need for the oil to overcome gravity as it rises up the well, but

13

Per figure 3, some relatively low-volume wells were shut in during 1998. These shut-ins
are consistent with the existence of fixed production costs, which intuitively arise from the
need to monitor and maintain surface facilities such as pumps, flowlines, and separators so
long as production is non-zero. When the oil price fell in 1998, production from these wells
may no longer have been sufficient to cover their fixed costs, explaining the decision to shut
in.15 When oil prices subsequently recovered, many (though not all) of these wells restarted,
suggesting that start-up costs can be overcome.
In appendix A, we consider and rule out alternative explanations for the lack of response
of oil production to oil prices. We show that the overall lack of price response cannot be
explained by: (1) leasing agreements that require non-zero production (because multiple-well
leases show the same results); (2) races-to-oil induced by open-access externalities within oil
fields (because fields controlled by a single operator show the same results); (3) well-specific
production quotas (because production quotas are not binding); or (4) producer myopia or
price expectations that are not aligned with the futures market (because producers respond
to high futures prices by stockpiling oil above ground).
While appropriate for most crude oil extraction, our model is not applicable to resources
such as coal, metal ores, or oil sands that are mined rather than produced through wells.
For these resources, fluid flow is not important, and marginal extraction costs are likely to
be substantial and increasing with the production rate, so that modeling extraction requires
a very different approach than that presented here.
it does not negate Darcy’s Law, implying that one could never drain all of the oil in finite time, even if
the pump pulled a vacuum on the bottom of the well. Enhanced oil recovery through the use of injection
wells can slow the pressure decline in the reservoir, but again oil production must inevitably decline as the
production wells produce more and more of the injected fluids rather than oil.
15
These shut ins may also in part be explained by an incentive to postpone production (and the payment
of fixed costs) to future periods when oil prices were expected to be higher. We discuss these arbitrage
incentives in detail in section 3.2, noting their potential interaction with fixed costs in footnote 27.

14

3

Recasting Hotelling as a drilling problem

In this section, we develop a theory of optimal oil drilling and extraction that closely follows
the industry cost structure described above. After setting up the problem, we derive and
interpret conditions that necessarily hold at any optimum, focusing first on incentives to
produce at the capacity constraint and then on incentives to drill new wells.

3.1

Planner’s problem and necessary conditions

Because there are millions of operating oil wells in the world, we formulate our model as a
decision problem in which there is a continuum of infinitesimally small wells to be drilled. We
use continuous time to facilitate interpretation of the necessary conditions and the analysis
of equilibrium dynamics. The planner’s problem is given by:
Z

∞

max
F (t),a(t)

e−rt [U (F (t)) − D(a(t))] dt

(1)

t=0

subject to

0 ≤ F (t) ≤ K(t)

(2)

a(t) ≥ 0

(3)

Ṙ(t) = −a(t), R0 given

(4)

K̇(t) = a(t)X − λF (t), K0 given,

(5)

where F (t) is the rate of oil flow at time t (a choice variable), a(t) is the rate at which
new wells are drilled (a choice variable), K(t) is the capacity constraint on oil flow (a state
variable), and R(t) is the measure of wells that remain untapped (a state variable). The instantaneous utility derived from oil flow is given by U (F (t)), where U (·) is strictly increasing
and weakly concave; we normalize U (0) = 0. The total instantaneous cost of drilling wells
at rate a(t) is given by D(a(t)), where D(·) is strictly increasing and weakly convex, and
15

D(0) = 0. We denote the derivative of the total drilling cost function as d(a(t)) and assume
that d(0) ≥ 0. Utility and drilling costs are discounted at rate r.
Consistent with our empirical results from Texas, we assume a trivially low (i.e., zero)
marginal cost of extraction up to the constraint.16 We ignore any fixed costs for operating,
shutting in, or restarting wells because such costs are only relevant for marginally productive
wells or when oil prices are very low.17 These costs should therefore not substantially affect
drilling incentives, as newly drilled wells will typically only become marginal many years
after drilling.
Condition (4) describes how the stock of untapped wells R(t) evolves over time. The
planning period begins with a continuum of untapped wells of measure R0 , and the stock
thereafter declines one-for-one with the rate of drilling. Condition (5) describes how the oil
flow capacity constraint K(t) evolves over time. The planning period begins with a capacity
constraint K0 inherited from previously tapped wells. The maximum rate of oil flow from a
tapped well depends on the pressure in the well and is proportional, with factor λ, to the oil
that remains underground. Thus, oil flow F (t) erodes capacity at rate λF (t). The planner
can, however, rebuild capacity by drilling new wells. The rate of drilling a(t) relaxes the
capacity constraint at rate X, where we interpret X as the maximum flow from a newly
drilled well (or to be more precise, a unit mass of newly drilled wells).18 If no new wells are
being drilled at t (a(t) = 0) and production is set at the constraint (F (t) = K(t)), then oil
flow decays exponentially toward zero at rate λ.
The total amount of oil in untapped wells is given by R(t)X/λ, so that the total amount
16

As indicated above, marginal extraction costs are not literally zero. We ignore per-barrel extraction
costs from existing wells because the lack of response to oil prices for such wells implies that marginal costs
are low relative to oil prices.
17
Accounting for these costs would complicate the analysis substantially. We would need to model, at each
t, how the quantity of oil reserves remaining in tapped wells is distributed across the continuum of tapped
wells, along with the shadow opportunity cost associated with extracting more oil from every point in this
distribution.
18
If the drilling cost function D(a) is strictly convex, the planner would never find it optimal to set up
a mass of wells instantaneously at t = 0—or at any other time—and the stock of untapped wells and oil
flow capacity constraint would both evolve continuously over time. When the drilling cost is linear, however,
such “pulsing” behavior may be optimal, leading to discontinuous changes in these state variables.

16

of oil underground at the outset of the planning period is given by Q0 = (K0 + R0 X)/λ.19
Because the flow capacity constraint is proportional to the remaining reserves, the total
underground stock of oil will never be exhausted in finite time.
We assume that there is no above-ground storage of oil to focus our analysis and discussion
on the implications of our model for extraction and drilling dynamics. Extending the model
to include above-ground storage with an iceberg storage cost is straightforward, and we do
so in appendix F.20
The solution to our planner’s problem can, via the First Welfare Theorem, also be interpreted as the competitive equilibrium that would arise in a decentralized problem with
continua of infinitesimally small consumers and private well owners (and no common pool
problems), each of whom discounts utility or profit flows at the rate r. In a market context,
marginal utility U 0 (F (t)) is equivalent to the oil price, which we denote by P (F (t)), and the
marginal drilling cost d(a(t)) is determined by the rental rate for drilling rigs.21 Consumers
have an inverse demand function P (F ) (equal to U 0 (F )) for oil, and well owners maximize
their profits by deciding when to drill their wells, taking as given the time paths of the
oil price and the rig rental rate.22 We abstract away from modeling drilling rig owners and
simply assume that they rent out their scarce equipment until the marginal cost of supplying
additional rentals equals the rental rate.23 In the discussion below, we will primarily use the
19

A mathematically equivalent formulation of our problem would involve imposing resource scarcity
directly on the recoverable oil stock remaining by replacing condition (4) with Q̇(t) = −F (t), where
Q(t) = (K(t) + R(t)X)/λ is the total amount of oil remaining underground at time t. We find that our
current formulation leads to necessary conditions that are easier to interpret and manipulate.
20
Intuitively, the presence of costly above-ground storage places an upper bound on the rate at which the
oil price may be expected to increase in equilibrium. Appendix F demonstrates that our main results—most
notably the weak sufficient conditions necessary to guarantee capacity constrained production on the optimal
path—hold when costly above-ground storage is available.
21
There do exist non-rig costs associated with drilling; e.g., materials and engineering costs. Thus, d(a(t))
can be viewed as the sum of these costs, which are invariant to a(t), with the drilling rig rental cost.
22
The price-taking assumption on both sides of the market is reasonable for onshore Texas, given the
existence of thousands of oil producing firms. In other areas, such as the deepwater Gulf of Mexico, only
very large “major” firms participate, and these firms may be able to exert monopsony power in the rig
market even if they are oil price takers. Finally, large OPEC nations such as Saudi Arabia can potentially
exert market power in the global oil market.
23
A richer model would allow for investment in durable drilling rigs or explicitly model rig heterogeneity;
we save this extension for future work.

17

language of the planner’s maximization problem, though we will find it convenient to use
the competitive equilibrium language (and the notation P (F ) rather than U 0 (F )) when we
discuss well owners’ production incentives, taking the oil price path as given.
Following Léonard and Long (1992), the current-value Hamiltonian-Lagrangean of the
planner’s maximization problem is given by:

H = U (F (t)) − D(a(t)) + θ(t)[a(t)X − λF (t)] + γ(t)[−a(t)] + φ(t)[K(t) − F (t)],

(6)

where θ(t) and γ(t) are the co-state variables on the two state variables K(t) and R(t), and
φ(t) is the shadow cost of the oil flow capacity constraint.
Necessary conditions are given by equations (7) through (14) and are interpreted in
sections 3.2 and 3.3 below:

F (t) ≥ 0, U 0 (F (t)) − λθ(t) − φ(t) ≤ 0, comp. slackness (c.s.)

(7)

F (t) ≤ K(t), φ(t) ≥ 0, c.s.

(8)

a(t) ≥ 0, θ(t)X − d(a(t)) − γ(t) ≤ 0, c.s.

(9)

Ṙ(t) = −a(t), R0 given

(10)

γ̇(t) = rγ(t)

(11)

K̇(t) = a(t)X − λF (t), K0 given

3.2

(12)

θ̇(t) = −φ(t) + rθ(t)

(13)

K(t)θ(t)e−rt → 0 and R(t)γ(t)e−rt → 0 as t → ∞.

(14)

Implications of necessary conditions for production

We begin by focusing on condition (7), which characterizes production incentives. This
condition involves the co-state variable θ(t), which denotes the marginal value of capacity
at time t. This value is derived from the stream of future utility obtained by optimally

18

producing oil from the capacity. If the optimal program calls for the capacity constraint to
be binding for all times τ ≥ t, then θ(t) is simply given by the value of the stream of future
marginal utilities U 0 (τ ) discounted at the rate r + λ. If, on the other hand, it is optimal
to produce below the constraint either immediately or at some point the future, then this
stream of discounted marginal utilities serves as a lower bound on θ(t). Thus, we have:24
Z
θ(t) ≥

∞

U 0 (F (τ ))e−(r+λ)(τ −t) dτ, holding with equality if F (τ ) = K(τ ) ∀τ ≥ t.

(15)

t

Intuitively, owners of existing capacity can do no worse than produce from their capacity as
rapidly as possible. If it is optimal for them to defer production, it must be that doing so
enhances the value of their capacity.
This understanding of θ(t) facilitates the interpretation of condition (7). Increasing
production at time t reduces the underground pressure and hence tightens the constraint on
future oil flow at rate λ. Thus, the product λθ(t) captures the opportunity cost of increased
flow at t in terms of forgone future utility. When the constraint on oil flow is binding,
condition (7) intuitively states that the marginal utility of increased oil flow strictly exceeds
the marginal cost of the diminished capacity (U 0 (F (t)) > λθ(t)), so that there is no incentive
to reduce production.
From the perspective of an individual extraction firm taking the expected future oil
price path as given, it is intuitive that the capacity constraint will bind whenever prices
are expected to rise strictly slower than the rate of interest r. Formally, it is clear from
equation (15) that P (F (t)) > λθ(t) in this case (substituting P (F (t)) for U 0 (F (t)) in (15)).
But what if the oil price is expected to rise strictly faster than r? If this rate of price
increase is expected to persist forever, then equation (15) makes clear that we would have
P (F (t)) < λθ(t), so that the firm would reduce its production (in fact, since all firms would
have this incentive, equilibrium prices would adjust so that P (F (t)) = λθ(t)).
24

Derivation: Use equation (7) to eliminate φ(t) in equation (13). The resulting linear first-order differential
equation, in conjunction with the endpoint condition (14), can then be solved to obtain (15).

19

What if the oil price is expected to temporarily rise faster than r and then level off, as was
the case during 1998–1999? In this case, the firm has an incentive to defer production to the
point in time at which future prices are expected to be greatest in present value. However,
the capacity constraint does not allow this arbitrage: any production that is deferred today
cannot be completely recovered at the instant it is expected to be most valuable.25 Instead,
it must be recovered over the full remaining life of the well, including the time period when
the oil price is expected to be lower than the current price in present value. Thus, the length
of time for which the oil price is expected to rise faster than r must be fairly large in order
for unconstrained oil production to be value-maximizing.
To verify that producers never had an incentive to set F (t) < K(t) during our 1990–2007
sample, we use the futures price data and equation (15) to calculate θ(t) for each month of the
sample. This calculation is carried out via a backward recursion procedure and is discussed in
detail in appendix B.26 Figure 5 plots our calculation of λθ(t), the marginal value of deferred
production, along with the spot price of oil from 1990–2007. At no time during the sample
was withholding production for subsequent sale value-maximizing, including 1998–1999.
Thus, our model explains why producers did not respond on the intensive margin to
in-sample expectations that the oil price would temporarily rise faster than r.27 In general,
however, our model does not rule out the possibility that, given appropriate initial conditions
and functional forms for U (F ) and d(a), unconstrained production may be optimal in the
25

Suppose that production is reduced below the constraint by an amount  > 0 for a time interval of length
δ > 0. Then, the total amount of oil production deferred equals δ, and the available production capacity
after this time interval will be λδ greater than it otherwise would have been. This additional capacity is
not infinite, so the entire deferred volume cannot be extracted immediately. The fastest way to extract the
deferred production is to produce at the capacity constraint, in which case the rate of production declines
exponentially at rate λ, and the deferred production is only completely recovered in the limit as t → ∞.
26
The backward recursion procedure takes account of the possibility that firms may find producing below
the constraint to be optimal at some future date. We use a value of 10% for both λ and r. Setting λ = 0.1 is
consistent with our main empirical results and stylized facts reported in Thompson (2001) and Mason and
van’t Veld (2013). Setting r = 0.1 is consistent with a survey of oil producers during our sample period (see
Society of Petroleum Evaluation Engineers (1995) and the discussion in Kellogg (2014)).
27
Non-zero fixed operating costs can rationalize shutting in production of wells with very low production
rates when oil prices are low, as observed in 1998–1999. In this case, these wells’ production revenue may
not have been sufficient to cover their fixed costs. Alternatively, even if the fixed costs were covered, their
presence may have made shutting in low-volume wells profitable by arbitraging the expected increase in
future oil prices (given sufficiently low costs of re-starting production in the future).

20

Current price and deferment value, real $/bbl
20
40
60
80

100

Figure 5: Selling a barrel of oil vs. deferring its production

Current price

0

Deferment value

Jan90 Jan92 Jan94 Jan96 Jan98 Jan00 Jan02 Jan04 Jan06 Jan08

Note: This figure shows the crude oil front month (“spot”) price and the value of
one barrel of deferred production in each month, all in real 2007 dollars. See text
and appendix B for details.

solution to the planner’s problem. For instance, suppose that K0 > 0, there are no new wells
remaining to be drilled, and oil demand is constant elasticity, with an elasticity sufficiently
small that if production declines exponentially at rate λ, marginal utility rises faster than
r. In this case, it is optimal to produce below the constraint forever, following the standard
Hotelling path.28 In section 4.2, we discuss conditions on primitives—such as the value of
K0 and the shape of the oil demand curve—under which production is optimally constrained
throughout the entire equilibrium path.
Note that whenever the constraint on oil flow is slack (assuming F (t) > 0), we have
φ(t) = 0, so that the marginal utility of increased oil flow exactly equals the marginal
opportunity cost of increased extraction (U 0 (F (t)) = λθ(t)). Moreover, condition (13) then
By assumption, U 0 (F ) = aF −η , where ηλ > r. If production is always unconstrained, U̇ 0 /U 0 = r,
requiring F (t) = F (0)e−rt/η . This production program is optimal if all reserves are extracted in the limit
and F (t) ≤ K(t) for all t. Complete extraction in the limit requires that K0 /λ = F0 η/r, which implies that
F0 < K0 . This argument applies at any given starting time t0 , so this production program is optimal.
28

21

implies that θ̇(t) = rθ(t), so that θ(t) rises at r, and then by condition (7) we have U 0 (F (t))
rising at r as well. Thus, whenever production is unconstrained, marginal utility rises at the
discount rate as in the standard Hotelling model with zero extraction costs.

3.3

Implications of the necessary conditions for drilling: a modified Hotelling rule

Condition (9) characterizes drilling incentives. The θ(t)X term is the value of the X units of
capacity created by drilling a new well, and the d(a(t)) term is the marginal cost of drilling
a well at time t when the rate of drilling is a(t). The term γ(t) can be interpreted as the
shadow value of the marginal undrilled well at t. Condition (11) implies that γ(t) = γ0 ert ,
where γ0 ≥ 0 is a constant. Intuitively, the stock of undrilled wells acts as a store of value,
so that the value of the marginal undrilled well must increase at the discount rate. Thus,
when drilling occurs (a(t) > 0), conditions (9) and (11) together imply that the marginal
return to drilling must rise at r:

θ(t)X − d(a(t)) = γ0 ert .

(16)

Condition (9) is analogous to the standard Hotelling rule, which states that, constrained to
a fixed volume of oil, the planner should extract so that the net marginal value of extracting
barrels rises at the rate of interest. Thus, every barrel extracted yields the same net payoff
in present-value terms. Since this is a drilling problem, however, the Hotelling-like intuition
applies to wells, not to barrels.
Equation (16) holds whenever drilling occurs. If the right-hand side is strictly larger
than the left-hand side when a(t) = 0, it is optimal to refrain from drilling. A mundane
way in which this situation may occur is if d(0) is large relative to U 0 (0). However, even if
d(0) is small relative to U 0 (0), drilling must cease in finite time whenever marginal utility
is bounded (as in the case of a substitutable backstop technology), for in that case we have
22

e−rt [θ(t)X − d(0)] → 0 < γ0 as t → ∞.
Intuitively, if the marginal drilling cost is strictly positive, it seems that production
should be capacity constrained whenever drilling is occurring: why spend resources to create capacity if that capacity is not being used? However, our model permits the oil flow
constraint to be slack during drilling if the marginal drilling cost is increasing at r. To see
this result, combine equation (16) with the result from section 3.2 that θ(t) must increase
at r when production is unconstrained. In this scenario, the planner is indifferent between
drilling immediately versus in the future, even though the new capacity is not fully utilized.
Conversely, whenever d(a(t)) is rising at a rate strictly slower than r on the optimal path,
production must be at capacity as the new wells come on line.29
For the remainder of this section we focus on the empirically relevant case in which
production is constrained during drilling. In this case, the necessary conditions can be
manipulated to yield:30

(r + λ)d(a(t)) d0 (a(t))ȧ(t)
λγ0 rt
U (F (t)) −
−
=
e .
X
X
X
0



(17)

Equation (17) holds whenever production is constrained and a(t) > 0, and it can be interpreted as the modified per-barrel Hotelling rule for our model. On the right-hand side of
(17) we have the shadow value of wells (γ0 ert ) divided by the total amount of oil stored in a
unit mass of untapped wells (X/λ), which we can interpret as the per-barrel shadow value of
oil in untapped wells. On the left-hand side is the marginal utility of oil less a term in square
brackets reflecting the cost of the additional production. The first term in square brackets is
the amortized, per-barrel marginal cost of drilling a well at time t.31 The last term in square
29

In this case, condition (16) implies that θ̇(t)/θ(t) < r, and (13) then implies that we must have φ(t) > 0.
Derivation: If F (t) is strictly positive, conditions (7) and (13) allow us to eliminate φ(t) from the system
and obtain expression (i): θ̇(t) = −U 0 (F (t)) + (r + λ)θ(t). Differentiating condition (9) with respect to time
0
and solving for θ̇(t) yields expression (ii): θ̇(t) = rγ(t)+d X(a(t))ȧ(t) . Finally, we substitute for θ(t) and then
θ̇(t) in condition (16) using expressions (i) and then (ii), and assuming a(t) > 0, to yield equation (17).
31
¯ If the planner drills
To clarify, consider the special case of constant marginal drilling costs: d(a(t)) = d.
one well (or rather, she marginally increases the rate of drilling) she obtains a marginal increase in oil flow
h instants later of Xe−λh , assuming oil flow is set to the maximum. If each barrel of flow has imputed cost
30

23

brackets captures the opportunity cost of drilling now versus waiting, which arises due to the
convexity in the drilling cost function. When ȧ(t) < 0, drilling activity and marginal drilling
costs are falling over time, so that drilling immediately incurs an additional opportunity cost
relative to delaying. One implication of this term is that, in contrast to standard Hotelling
models in which production must decline over time (with the marginal extraction cost also
declining if extraction costs are convex), oil flow in our model can increase over intervals
during which the marginal cost of drilling is falling (i.e., Ḟ (t) > 0 and ȧ(t) < 0 holding
simultaneously is possible).
If drilling costs are affine rather than strictly convex, so that the last term in square
brackets drops out of equation (17), then this equation becomes the Hotelling Rule for
a standard barrel-by-barrel extraction model with a constant marginal extraction cost of
(r + λ)d/X. In fact, appendix C shows that if d0 (a) = 0, and if a(t) > 0 and F (t) = K(t)
throughout the entire optimal path, then our model and the standard Hotelling model yield
identical production and marginal utility paths.
A standard Hotelling model can therefore yield the same predictions as our reformulated
model, but the conditions necessary for this equivalence are not realistic. First, equivalence
requires the absence of unanticipated shocks along the equilibrium path. Oil production will
immediately respond to such shocks in a standard Hotelling model, but the binding capacity
constraint precludes this response in our model (as we discuss in section 4.3). Second, the
assumption that d0 (a) = 0 is clearly at odds with the data on rig rental prices shown in
figure 4. In addition, the requirement that a(t) > 0 throughout the entire optimal path
requires that U 0 (F ) be unbounded—an assumption seemingly in conflict with the existence
of alternative fuels and technologies.32 For the remainder of the paper, we therefore focus
our attention on the dynamics of production, drilling, and prices assuming that d0 (a) > 0
of c at that time, then at the time the well is drilled, the flow at h wouldR have an imputed cost cXe−(r+λ)h .
∞
Since such flows continue indefinitely, we want to find c such that d¯ = h=0 cXe−(r+λ)h dh. Integrating, we
¯
¯
obtain d = cX/(r + λ). Solving for c, we conclude: c = d(r + λ)/X.
32
Appendix C discusses two additional necessary conditions for this special case—K0 must be sufficiently
small and λ must be sufficiently large—that are more likely to be satisfied empirically.

24

and that U 0 (F ) is bounded (with the former being more qualitatively important), obtaining
implications that match the features of the data presented in section 2 and that differ from
those of prior work.

4

Equilibrium production, price, and drilling dynamics

This section characterizes the dynamics implied by the solution to the optimal control problem presented in section 3. Throughout, we interpret our results in terms of a competitive
equilibrium to relate our findings to data on oil prices and rig rental prices. We begin in
section 4.1 by considering an individual oil field that is small relative to the global market,
so that the path of oil prices is exogenous but the local rental market for drilling rigs clears
at each instant. Section 4.2 then endogenizes the oil price path to consider the general
equilibrium dynamics implied by our model.33 Finally, section 4.3 considers the impact of
unexpected demand shocks on equilibrium.

4.1

Exogenous oil prices

This section studies industry supply in isolation. This case is particularly relevant for interpreting drilling and extraction behavior in a small, local region such as Texas. We treat the
time path of oil prices P (t) as given exogenously, while the path of marginal drilling costs
d(a(t)) is endogenously determined by the market-clearing condition for drilling rigs. This
condition is given by equation (16) and requires that well owners be indifferent about when
to drill for all times t such that a(t) > 0 (this intuition also applies in later subsections when
we endogenize the oil price path).
We focus on the case in which the oil price is expected to equal a constant P̄ forever. In
this case, equation (15) implies that θ(t)X =

P̄ X
.
r+λ

Since θ̇(t)/θ(t) = 0 < r, conditions (8)

33
This section is “general” relative to the partial equilibrium analysis in section 4.1; however, like virtually
all of the Hotelling literature, we do not model income effects generated by the rents earned by well owners
(and in our case, by the owners of drilling rigs).

25

and (13) imply that F (t) = K(t) for all t ≥ 0: production is always capacity constrained.
Moreover, drilling activity must cease in finite time.
Substituting for θ(t) in equation (16), the arbitrage condition is given by:

d(a(t)) =

P̄ X
− γ0 ert .
r+λ

(18)

Equation (18) indicates that if drilling for oil is profitable (γ0 > 0), then the marginal drilling
cost must decline over time so that drilling remains equally attractive over all times with
a(t) > 0. Because d0 (a) > 0, the rate of drilling a(t) must therefore decline over time.
Equilibrium also requires that drilling cease (a(t) = 0) when the initial supply R0 of
untapped wells is exhausted, and not beforehand.34 This exhaustion condition determines
the value of γ0 , the present value of an undrilled well.35 Equation (18) implies that the time
of exhaustion T must satisfy d(a(T )) = P̄ X/(r + λ) − γ0 erT , with a(T ) = 0.
Figure 6 illustrates the equilibrium time paths of drilling and production given an initial
capacity of zero (K0 = 0) and an initial stock of undrilled wells R0 > 0. Drilling activity
(a(t)) follows the dynamics prescribed by equation (18) and ceases at T defined above.
Drilling activity is intense at first but declines until it ceases at T , when all wells have been
drilled. Oil production F (t) follows the dynamics prescribed by equation (12): F (t) begins
at zero, initially increases as the stock of drilled wells increases, but then eventually declines
asymptotically toward zero as the remaining volume of oil reserves (and reservoir pressure)
declines. The resulting hump-shaped production profile is a well-known feature of production
in oil fields across the world (Hamilton 2013). We show in section 4.2 below that a similar
“peak oil” result also emerges in the case of endogenous oil prices.
Figure 6 also depicts how the equilibrium dynamics vary with the exogenous oil price
P̄ . Because the total stock of wells is fixed, the oil price can affect the timing of drilling
34

The intuition for this statement is obvious, but we supply a formal proof for the general equilibrium case
as part of appendix D.
35
To see this, observe that a very high value of γ0 will result in the drilling of fewer than R0 wells by
the time T at which a(T ) = 0. In contrast, a low value of γ0 will cause the undrilled well stock R0 to be
exhausted at a time T for which a(T ) > 0.

26

Figure 6: Optimal drilling in a local region
(a) Rate of drilling (a(t))

(b) Oil production (F (t))
4

Oil flow in millions of bbl/year

Drilling rate (wells / year)

15

12

High oil price
9

6

Low oil price
3

0

3

High oil price

2

Low oil price
1

0
0

20

40

60

80

0

Time (years)

20

40

60

80

Time (years)

Note: This figure illustrates the equilibrium time paths of drilling rates (panel a) and oil production (panel
b), with exogenously given constant oil price expectations of $50/bbl (“low oil price”) or $100/bbl (“high oil
price”). The figure assumes an initial extraction capacity of K0 = 0, an initial well stock of R0 = 100, initial
reserves per well of 0.5 million bbl, a decline rate of λ = 0.1, and a discount rate of r = 0.1. The marginal
drilling cost curve is given by d(a) = 1 + 5a, with a in units of wells drilled per year and d in $million/well.

and production but not total cumulative drilling and production. For a relatively high oil
price, the initial rate of drilling (and the rig rental rate) must be relatively high, and γ0 must
therefore also be relatively high to satisfy the exhaustion constraint.36 Thus, a higher oil
price causes the stock of wells to be drilled relatively quickly, shifting oil production earlier
in time (if the marginal drilling cost d(a) is affine, as assumed in figure 6, it can be shown
that peak production occurs sooner with a relatively high oil price). Moreover, because γ0
is greater, a higher oil price increases the aggregate wealth derived from drilling the wells.37
Note that this analysis comparing drilling paths under low and high price scenarios can
be reinterpreted as an analysis of the response of drilling to an unanticipated price shock.
36

To see this, suppose γ0 were unchanged (or reduced) from the low oil price case. In this case, equation
(18) would require a uniformly higher rate of drilling over a longer period. This path would, therefore, call
for more wells to be drilled than the available stock and cannot be an equilibrium. Increasing the value of γ0
above its level in the low price case shortens the time interval over which wells are drilled so that the total
number of wells drilled equals R0 .
37
Each owner of an untapped well is indifferent over when he rents a drilling rig to drill his well. Hence,
the wealth of the owners of the initially untapped wells is γ0 R0 .

27

Suppose that the price of oil is expected to remain low forever but then, at t = 0, suddenly
and unexpectedly increases to a higher level, where it is then expected to persist. Drilling
and rig rental rates immediately jump up at t = 0, as the dynamics switch over to the drilling
path corresponding to a higher oil price. Thus, the model replicates the covariance of oil
prices, drilling, and rig rental rates that we observe in our Texas data.

4.2

Equilibrium dynamics with endogenous oil prices

We now close the model by endogenizing the path of oil prices and requiring that at every
instant demand equals supply. We begin by characterizing the dynamics of oil production,
drilling activity, oil prices, and marginal drilling costs using an intuitive phase diagram
analysis. We then present two theorems that establish sufficient conditions under which the
dynamics are well-behaved and production is always capacity constrained. After illustrating
these equilibrium dynamics using a specific numerical example, we discuss the limiting case
of the model in which the total number of wells to be drilled is infinite.

4.2.1

Phase diagram characterization of the equilibrium dynamics

We construct our phase diagram in (K, a) space. The first step in this analysis is to identify
the loci of points for which ȧ(t) = 0 or K̇(t) = 0. We assume that inverse demand (P (F ))
is strictly decreasing, that drilling supply (d(a)) is strictly increasing, that both functions
are continuously differentiable, and that drilling occurs (a(t) > 0 for at least some t) in
equilibrium (we discuss sufficient conditions for this last assumption in section 4.2.2 below).
Given a(t) > 0 and F (t) > 0, we can deduce from conditions (12) and (17) equations that
describe the ȧ(t) = 0 and K̇(t) = 0 loci:38

−1



ȧ(t) = 0 : a(t) = d

λγ0 rt
XP (F (t))
−
e
r+λ
r+λ

K̇(t) = 0 : a(t) = λF (t)/X.
38


(19)
(20)

We may use equation (17) here because production must be capacity constrained whenever ȧ(t) = 0.

28

Figure 7: Phase diagrams for endogenous price model
a (t )

a (t )

Region I

a (t  0)  0
a (t  0)  0

Region I

a (t  0)  0
a (t  0)  0

K (t )  0

Region II

K (t )  0

Region II

Region IV

Region IV

Region III

Region III

K (t )

K (t )

Note: This figure shows phase diagrams for the general equilibrium model. The left panel sketches a potential
equilibrium drilling and extraction path starting from K0 = 0, while the right panel sketches a path starting
from a relatively large inherited capacity. See text for details.

Phase diagrams depicting these two loci, along with sketches of equilibrium paths, are
presented in figure 7. The left panel depicts a path starting from K0 = 0, while the right
panel depicts a path starting from a relatively large K0 .39 Note that production must be
capacity constrained along the ȧ(t) = 0 locus, since a(t) > 0 and d(a) cannot be rising at
the interest rate. Thus, we can replace F (t) with K(t) in equation (19), revealing that the
ȧ(t) = 0 locus must be downward sloping in (K, a) space (since P (F ) is strictly decreasing).40
This locus is not time-stationary. The presence of the γ0 ert term in equation (19) causes the
ȧ(t) = 0 locus to shift downward over time, as shown in the figure. Below the ȧ(t) = 0 locus
we have ȧ < 0, while above the ȧ(t) = 0 locus we have ȧ > 0.
The K̇(t) = 0 locus is given by an upward-sloping ray from the origin, as shown, whenever
capacity is constrained. Note that capacity must be constrained when the K̇(t) = 0 locus is
below the ȧ(t) = 0 locus, since drilling costs are decreasing in this region. Above the ȧ(t) = 0
locus, if F (t) < K(t) then the K̇(t) = 0 locus will curve to the right of the ray depicted in
39

Historically, we must of course have K0 = 0. However, a sufficiently large negative demand shock could
interrupt the original equilibrium path, causing the new path to begin in region II, region III, or even on the
a(t) = 0 axis.
40
The ȧ(t) = 0 locus will be linear, as shown, under linear demand and marginal drilling costs.

29

figure 7. Below the K̇(t) = 0 locus we have K̇ < 0, while above the K̇(t) = 0 locus we have
K̇ > 0.
The ȧ(t) = 0 and K̇(t) = 0 loci, along with the axes, form boundaries that divide the
phase diagram into four interior regions. Equilibrium dynamics are dictated by behavior at
the boundaries and within these regions. Intuitively, neither region I nor its boundaries can
be entered in equilibrium, since in this case drilling and capacity increase without bound,
leading to a violation of the necessary conditions once all wells are drilled. Thus, starting
from K0 ≥ 0 sufficiently small, as depicted in the left panel of figure 7, the equilibrium
path begins in region IV (and on the K = 0 axis if K0 = 0). The rate of drilling a(t) is
initially high but decreases over time as the extraction rate builds (and the oil price falls).
Eventually, once the drilling rate becomes sufficiently small, region III is entered, and the
extraction rate decreases while the oil price rises. Thus, there is a peak in oil production.
Eventually, all wells are drilled (since P (0) is finite), and the dynamics follow the a = 0 axis
to the origin as capacity is gradually exhausted. If, on the other hand, K0 is large, then the
equilibrium dynamics will begin in region II or region III. If region II, the rate of drilling
will initially increase over time as capacity falls, as shown in the right panel of figure 7.
Eventually, however, the dynamics must enter region III, with drilling activity falling until
all wells are drilled.
Note that this model nests the exogenous, constant oil price case from section 4.1. In
this special case, the ȧ = 0 locus becomes a horizontal line that shifts downward over time.
Region II can never be entered, so that we always have ȧ < 0, no matter the initial capacity
K0 . In fact, K0 does not affect the time path of drilling at all when price is exogenous; all
that matters is the initial stock of wells remaining to be drilled.

4.2.2

Formal rules governing the equilibrium dynamics

We formalize the restrictions (or “rules”) that equilibrium imposes on the dynamics of oil
drilling, production, and prices in two theorems. These theorems establish sufficient con-

30

ditions under which equilibrium drilling and extraction paths are well-behaved and follow
either the path sketched in the left panel of figure 7 with production constrained throughout, or in the right panel with production constrained beginning from some time before the
drilling rate reaches its zenith. Here, we provide the key intuition for these results. See
appendices D and E for formal proofs.
Theorem 1 only requires strict monotonicity and continuous differentiability of inverse
oil demand and marginal drilling costs, along with an assumption that drilling costs are
sufficiently small that drilling will actually occur. Formally, we assume that: (i) the marginal
cost of drilling d(a) is continuously differentiable, with d0 (a) > 0 and d(0) > 0; (ii) the
inverse demand for oil is given by P (F ) ≥ 0, with P (0) > 0, P (F ) continuous for F > 0
(and continuous at F = 0 if P (0) < ∞), P (F ) → 0 as F → ∞, and P (F ) continuously
differentiable, with P 0 (F ) < 0, whenever P (F ) > 0; (iii) inverse demand and drilling supply
are such that XP (0)/(λ + r) > d(0); and (iv) initial conditions are such that ∞ > R0 > 0
and ∞ > K0 ≥ 0. Then the following rules hold:
Rule 1: γ(t), γ̇(t), θ(t), θ̇(t), R(t), Ṙ(t), K(t), K̇(t), a(t), F (t), P (t), and φ(t) are
continuous for all t > 0, as is ȧ(t) when a(t) > 0. Continuity of these variables generally
follows from the strict monotonicity and continuous differentiability of P (F ) and d(a) and
in some cases follows directly from the necessary conditions (e.g., for θ, γ and γ̇).41
Rule 2: Capacity K(t) must go to zero in the limit as t → ∞. This rule follows from the
fact that demand is strictly positive while the marginal extraction cost is zero. Thus, it is
not optimal to let capacity be unused in the limit.
Rule 3: The drilling rate a(t) and capacity K(t) cannot both be weakly increasing (i.e.,
in the phase diagram, neither the interior of region I nor its boundaries defined by the ȧ = 0
and K̇ = 0 loci may be entered), nor can a(t) and F (t) both be weakly increasing. This
41

In many phase portraits, the costate variable is on the vertical axis. Since the Pontryagin necessary
conditions for optimality require that the costate variables be continuous functions of time, there can be
no vertical jumps in an optimal trajectory depicted in the phase portrait. In our case, however, a choice
variable a(t) is on the vertical axis and we must prove that it is a continuous function of time to rule out
such vertical jumps.

31

rule follows from the fact that region I cannot be escaped in the phase diagram without
generating a discontinuity in drilling at the moment the last well is drilled.42
Rule 4: All available wells will be drilled in the limit as t → ∞. This rule follows
immediately from rule 2 and the fact that strictly positive drilling is always strictly profitable
as production approaches zero, since P (0)X/(r + λ) > d(0).
Rule 5: At any time that drilling ceases, production must be constrained for a measurable
period afterward. This rule follows from the intuition that it would be sub-optimal to drill
a costly well and then not fully utilize that well’s capacity immediately after drilling.
Rule 6: Given demand P (F ), marginal drilling costs d(a), and initial reserves R0 , there
exists δ > 0 such that if the initial capacity K0 < δ, then drilling will begin instantly and
will initially be strictly decreasing over time. This rule follows from the fact that, with initial
capacity sufficiently low, we must begin in region IV of the phase diagram.
Together, rules 1–6 imply that if K0 ≥ 0 is sufficiently small, then the drilling and
extraction paths must start in region IV and then transition to region III. In both of these
regions, production must be constrained. However, it is not clear whether production may
enter region II from region III (since the ȧ(t) = 0 locus is shifting inward) and, if so, whether
production is unconstrained while in region II. It is also not clear whether, once drilling
ceases, production is constrained thereafter. Similarly, a path that begins in region II with
K0 > 0 sufficiently large must transition to region III, but it is unclear whether it could ever
reenter region II for an interval.
Theorem 2 allows us to resolve these remaining questions with only a modest assumption
on the shape of the demand curve. In addition to the assumptions of theorem 1, we assume
0

(F )
is weakly increasing in F
that the inverse elasticity of demand given by η(F ) ≡ −F PP (F
)

(i.e., the inverse demand curve is weakly concave in logs). This property is satisfied by nearly
all single-product demand curves used in applied work.43 Given this additional assumption,
42

In appendix D, we show that region I cannot be entered even if reserves are infinite: entering region I
must ultimately lead either to a violation of the transversality condition or to a discontinuity in F (t), neither
of which is possible in equilibrium.
43
In particular, it is easy to verify that this property is satisfied by any inverse demand curve of the form

32

the following rules hold:
Rule 7: If at any time production is constrained, then production must be constrained
forever after. This rule follows intuitively from the fact that, if production is ever constrained
in the optimal program, the incentive to defer production will only subsequently diminish.
To see this, consider a special case in which production is constrained and no drilling occurs,
such that Ṗ /P = λη(K). In this case, as capacity declines over time, the demand assumption
implies that the inverse demand elasticity will also decline, so that the rate of price increase
declines and the incentive to defer production diminishes.
Rule 8: Given demand P (F ), marginal drilling costs d(a), and initial reserves R0 , there
exists δ > 0 such that if initial capacity K0 < δ, then production is constrained along the
entire optimal path (so production is always constrained trivially if K0 = 0). This rule
follows immediately from rules 6 and 7.
Rule 9: Once the rate of drilling strictly declines it can never subsequently strictly
increase, further implying that once drilling stops it cannot restart. This rule follows from
the intuition that once the drilling and production path is in region III, the decline in the
inverse demand elasticity provides no incentive to subsequently increase drilling, so that
region II will not be entered.
Rule 10: Drilling will end in finite time if and only if there exists an F > 0 such that
λη(F ) < r. This final rule follows from the demand assumption and the previous rules, which
imply that capacity and production must approach zero in the limit. If price is constrained
to eventually rise more slowly than the rate of interest as production declines (as must be
true if P (0) is finite), then all of the wells will be drilled in finite time. Otherwise, it is
optimal to drag drilling out indefinitely.44
Together, rules 1–10 imply that for K0 ≥ 0 sufficiently small, production must be conP (F ) = α − βF δ , with either α > 0, β > 0, δ > 0 or α ≤ 0, β < 0, δ < 0. The first set of parameters encompasses a wide array of concave and convex demands with a finite P (0), while the second set of parameters
allows for P (0) to be infinite (and if α = 0, demand is constant elasticity).
44
Note that while we emphasize the empirically relevant case of P (0) < ∞, rule 10 and the other rules
proven in the appendix actually permit the case of P (0) = ∞, which is sometimes considered in the literature.

33

strained throughout the entire equilibrium path depicted in the left panel of figure 7. In
the right panel, with K0 > 0 sufficiently large, it may be that production is initially unconstrained in region II. However, production must become constrained before the path enters
region III, and from that point production will be constrained forever.

4.2.3

A specific example with linear demand and marginal drilling costs

Figure 8 depicts equilibrium dynamics for a specific example with K0 = 0, linear demand,
and linear marginal drilling costs, satisfying the conditions of theorem 2. This model does
not permit an analytic solution, so we solve the model computationally using value function
iteration; see appendix G for details. The model assumes r = λ = 0.1, consistent with
survey evidence from Society of Petroleum Evaluation Engineers (1995) and with the decline
rate estimated from our Texas dataset. The inverse demand curve is given by P (F ) =
200 − 200F (with F measured in million bbl/day), and marginal drilling costs are given by
d(a) = 1 + 5a (with d in million $/well and a in wells/year). We simulate the optimal drilling
and production of an initial well stock of R0 = 100, with 0.5 million bbl of reserves per well.
Panel (a) illustrates that the rate of drilling is initially high but decreases rapidly. The
rate of decrease slows to near-zero between years 10 and 40, but then accelerates so that all
drilling is completed in year 61. Thus, the rate of oil production rapidly rises from zero at
t = 0 to a plateau-like peak and then enters a decline as the drilling rate falls to zero. The
path of oil prices is therefore U-shaped.
Panel (b) depicts the time path of drilling incentives. The marginal discounted revenue
from drilling θ(t)X initially falls as the oil price falls but then rises, asymptotically approaching $50 million per well (equal to the asymptotic oil price of $200/bbl multiplied by
X = 0.05 million bbl/d and divided by r + λ). Marginal drilling costs d(a(t)) fall with the
rate of drilling so that the marginal profit per well (equal to θ(t)X − d(a(t))) rises at the
interest rate until drilling ceases, adhering to necessary condition (16).

34

Figure 8: Equilibrium paths with linear demand and marginal drilling costs
(a) Drilling, production, and oil price
Drilling rate (wells / yr),
Oil flow (million bbl/yr)

(b) Drilling incentives
$million per well

Oil price ($/bbl)

5.0

250.0
50

4.0

200.0
40

Oil price
3.0

Marginal discounted
revenue from drilling (θX)

150.0
30

2.0

100.0

Drilling rate

20

Marginal profit per well
increases at r until drilling stops
1.0

Oil flow rate

50.0

10

0.0

0

Marginal cost of drilling
0.0
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

100

0

10

20

30

Time (years)

40

50

60

70

80

90

100

Time (years)

Note: This figure illustrates the equilibrium time paths of drilling, oil production, and prices for a model
with a linear inverse demand curve given by P (F ) = 200 − 200F (F in million bbl/d) and marginal drilling
costs given by d(a) = 1 + 5a (with d in million $/well and a in wells/year). The initial well stock is R0 = 100,
with 0.5 million barrels of reserves per well, and r = λ = 0.1. See text and appendix G for details.

4.2.4

Equilibrium dynamics with an unlimited number of wells

In the specific example depicted in figure 8, the period of nearly constant drilling and production between years 10 and 40 is driven by the fact that the initial reserves are large
relative to the profitability of drilling. γ0 is therefore very small so that, for small values of t,
our modified Hotelling condition (16) can hold with nearly constant drilling and production
rates. This outcome is closely related to the behavior of our model in the limit as R0 → ∞.
In this limit, γ0 → 0 so that the ȧ(t) = 0 locus is stationary in our phase diagram. Thus,
there is a steady state, with strictly positive and constant drilling and production rates, at
the intersection of the ȧ(t) = 0 locus with the K̇(t) = 0 locus.
The left panel of figure 9 presents a phase diagram depicting this steady state and the
equilibrium dynamics for this limiting case. Since the production constraint binds when
ȧ = 0, we can use equation (19) to solve for marginal drilling costs in the steady state,
obtaining d(a∗ ) = P (F ∗ )X/(r + λ), where the stars denote steady-state values. On the right
we have the discounted stream of revenues generated by a well at constant price P (F ∗ ).
35

Figure 9: Phase diagrams for endogenous price model with infinite well stock
a (t )

a (t )

a (t )  0

a (t )  0

K (t )  0

K (t )  0
Region I

Region I

B

Region II

Region II

Region IV

Region IV

Region III

Stable arm

A

Stable arm

Region III

K (t )

K (t )

Note: This figure shows phase diagrams for the general equilibrium model in which there is an
infinite supply of wells and therefore γ(t) = 0. The panel on the left shows the ȧ = 0 and K̇ = 0
loci, the steady state located at the intersection of these loci, the directions of motion within each
region, and the stable arms leading to the steady state. The panel on the right illustrates the
equilibrium path following a positive shift in oil demand P (F ). Such a shift causes the ȧ(t) = 0
locus to shift outward, moving the steady state from its original position at point A to point B,
and causing the stable arm to shift outward. See text for details.

Thus, the marginal well earns just enough revenue to cover its drilling cost, and the market
is in a long-run equilibrium.
Figure 9 also depicts the stable arm (saddle path) running northwest to southeast through
the steady state. In equilibrium, from any initial K0 , drilling and capacity will follow this
stable arm to the steady state.45
Finally, note that with an unlimited stock of wells our model bears a strong resemblance to
a standard macroeconomic Q-theory model of optimal investment in an industry with convex
adjustment costs, where K is capital and F is production. Both models feature a steady
state in which the marginal cost of investment equals the marginal value of installed capital,
which is derived from the capital’s discounted marginal revenue stream. The key differences
45

A path starting above the stable arm will ultimately lead drilling and capacity into region I, from which
there is no escape. A path starting below the stable arm will ultimately lead to a cessation of drilling and
(0)
movement along the horizontal axis toward the origin. Given our assumption that d(0) < XP
r+λ , any such
path will eventually violate the condition that, in the absence of drilling, d(0) ≥ θX (this last point follows
from equation (15), since on any such path θ → P (0)/(r + λ)).

36

are that: (1) production in the macroeconomic model typically features diminishing returns
to capital, whereas in our model F = K (there is no labor input); (2) in the macroeconomic
model there is never a reason to produce less than what the available inputs permit; and (3)
in our model capital depreciates with use rather than deterministically over time. This last
difference effectively vanishes when production in our model is constrained.

4.3

Impacts of unanticipated demand shocks

In this section, we explore how persistent, unanticipated shocks to oil demand affect drilling,
production, and prices in equilibrium. Our motivation derives from the large historical
changes in oil prices shown in figure 1, which prior work has attributed primarily to demand
shocks (Kilian 2009; Kilian and Hicks 2013). Our empirical analysis indicated that positive
shocks are associated with increases in drilling activity and drilling costs and with backwardated price expectations, while the reverse holds for negative demand shocks. In either case,
production from existing wells is unaffected. Here, we demonstrate how our model naturally
explains these phenomena.
Consider first the limiting case of an unbounded well stock, which is useful for building
intuition. Suppose we are initially in a steady state, depicted by point A in the phase
diagram in the right panel of figure 9. Then suppose there is a permanent, unanticipated
increase in oil demand that shifts the ȧ(t) = 0 locus up and right, yielding a new steady
state at point B. The optimal transition dynamics imply that we jump immediately to the
new stable arm and then follow it gradually toward the new steady state, as depicted in
the figure (thick black arrows). Oil prices, drilling, and rig rental rates therefore all increase
immediately on impact. Oil flow then begins to increase as new wells come on line, causing
prices to gradually fall until the new steady state is reached. These dynamics imply that
following the positive shock, oil price expectations will be backwardated.46 Finally, because
production must be constrained throughout this process, production from existing wells is
46

Note that following the demand shock, price expectations must be backwardated, but the actual path
of future spot prices need not be, since subsequent demand shocks may occur.

37

unaffected by the shock.
For a negative demand shock, the story is reversed. Oil prices, drilling, and rig rental
rates all fall on impact and then rise along the new stable arm to the new steady state. Price
expectations will be in contango following the shock. If the shock is sufficiently large, drilling
will fall substantially, so that the capacity dynamics will be dominated by the exponential
production decline from existing drilled wells. In this case, the expected price path can rise
faster than the interest rate for a brief period following the shock (if oil demand is sufficiently
inelastic).47 This result helps explain the severe contango in oil futures markets in 1998–1999
when the Asian financial crisis led to a sharp fall in oil demand, per Kilian (2009).
Now suppose the stock of wells is finite. In this case, demand shocks will have a qualitatively similar effect on the equilibrium path, although the phase diagram does not permit a
graphical analysis. To see this result, consider a capacity-constrained equilibrium path and
an unexpected, permanent, vertical shift in P (F ) of magnitude Z. Suppose by contradiction
that there is no change in the path of drilling. In this case, the entire path for θ(t) will
increase by Z/(r + λ), per equation (15). This shift implies that, under the original drilling
path, θ(t)X − d(a(t)) rises more slowly than the rate of interest, which is sub-optimal. Thus,
the drilling rate must increase immediately on impact, just as in the no-scarcity case. If the
shock is large enough, the jump in drilling will be sufficient to cause production to increase,
yielding backwardated price expectations (small shocks may not cause backwardation if production was falling prior to the shock). By the opposite mechanism, a negative demand
shock will cause the rate of drilling to immediately decrease and may result in contango,
with prices expected to rise at a rate potentially greater than r.
To illustrate these predicted responses, we expose the numerical model used to generate
figure 8 to a series of three demand shocks: one negative shock followed by two positive
47

For an extremely large negative demand shock, production may actually fall below the capacity constraint
upon impact, with the oil price and marginal cost of drilling both subsequently rising at the rate of interest.
The fact that oil production from previously drilled wells does not respond to shocks during our 1990–
2007 sample suggests that negative oil demand shocks during this period were not large enough to induce
unconstrained production. The analysis underlying figure 5 confirms this result.

38

Figure 10: Impacts of unexpected demand shocks from the equilibrium model
with linear demand, linear marginal drilling costs, and a finite well stock

Drilling Rate
(wells/yr)

2.4
2.0
1.6
1.2
0.8

20

25

30

35

40

20

25

30

35

40

20

25

30

35

40

Flow Rate
(million bbl/yr)

0.90
0.85
0.80
0.75
0.70

Oil price
($/bbl)

70
55
40

25
10

Time (years)

Note: This figure uses the demand, drilling cost, and parameter specifications from figure 8. At
time t = 25, demand is decreased from P = 200 − 200F to P = 180 − 200F . At t = 30, demand
is increased to P = 200 − 200F . Finally, at t = 35, demand is increased to P = 220 − 200F . See
text for details.

shocks. See figure 10 for the results. The top panel shows that drilling “jumps” on impact
for each shock. The middle panel illustrates that production does not jump following any
shock but rather responds gradually to changes in the rate of drilling. The bottom panel
shows that after the negative demand shock, the oil price jumps down on impact but then
gradually rises, consistent with price expectations being in contango immediately following
the shock. Moreover, in this example the oil price initially rises at a rate greater than r while
production remains constrained, as observed in 1998–1999. Finally, following the positive
demand shocks, the oil price initially jumps up but then declines as production increases,
so that price expectations would be backwardated immediately following each shock. This
result relates to the increases in spot prices and the backwardation of oil futures markets

39

throughout the mid-2000s, as the oil market was repeatedly shocked by demand increases
from emerging Asian markets, per Kilian (2009) and Kilian and Hicks (2013).

5

Our model’s relationship to the Hotelling literature

Within the Hotelling literature, our model is most closely related to models in which firms
face convex investment costs to expand reserves and thereby reduce their marginal extraction
costs (Pindyck 1978; Livernois and Uhler 1987; Holland 2008; Venables 2012), and to models
in which production is directly constrained and firms face convex costs to expand production
capacity (Gaudet 1983; Switzer and Salant 1986; Holland 2008).48 Both types of models
can generate initial periods of rising production and falling prices as reserves grow or as
production capacity builds, followed by an inevitable decline (these models, like ours, also
allow for periods of increasing production and backwardated price expectations following
positive demand shocks). In these models, however, the eventual decline in production arises
due to an increasing Hotelling scarcity rent rather than a declining flow constraint. Thus,
whenever production is declining it must be responsive to demand shocks—a prediction
rejected by our data. Moreover, these models do not admit the possibility that forwardlooking market participants may expect the oil price to rise faster than the rate of interest
in equilibrium—something that we actually see in our futures data.
We show that when the capacity constraint declines with cumulative extraction due to the
loss of underground pressure, the constraint will always bind under realistic conditions, even
when production is falling. Thus, our model can explain why production from drilled wells
declines steadily over time yet simultaneously does not respond to price shocks, and why
futures markets sometimes forecast prices to rise faster than the rate of interest. In addition,
our model links capacity expansion to drilling activity and the marginal cost of capacity
expansion to the rental rates on drilling rigs, each of which can be observed empirically.
48

For a review of the theoretical Hotelling literature through the 1970s, see Devarajan and Fisher (1981).
For more recent reviews, see Krautkraemer (1998), Gaudet (2007), and Gaudet and Salant (2014). For an
accessible theoretical primer, see Salant (1995).

40

Other papers in the economics literature are, like ours, premised on the idea of an oil
production constraint that decays with cumulative extraction. To the best of our knowledge,
however, only two recent unpublished papers attempt to characterize equilibrium outcomes
(Okullo, Reynès and Hofkes 2012; Mason and van’t Veld 2013).49 The others all treat oil
prices and drilling costs as exogenous, focusing on the valuation of existing individual reserves
or on the optimal timing and development of new ones (Nystad 1987; Adelman 1990; Davis
and Cairns 1998; Cairns and Davis 2001; Thompson 2001; Smith 2012; Cairns 2014).
Our paper differs in several crucial ways. First, we present empirical results to motivate
every assumption in our model. Our key finding—that oil production from drilled wells is
unresponsive to price shocks, consistent with a binding capacity constraint—has not, to the
best of our knowledge, been documented in prior work. Second, motivated by our empirical
results, we develop a new model that emphasizes the rate of drilling as the central choice
variable rather than the rate of oil production. Third, we use our model to explain why the
production constraint binds empirically. Fourth, we show that Hotelling’s logic still applies
in our model, with the discounted marginal revenue stream from drilling minus the marginal
cost of drilling (i.e., the rig rental price) rising at the interest rate. Finally, we show that
the drilling, production, and price dynamics implied by our model can match those of the
real-world oil extraction industry.
We also contribute to an extensive empirical literature that tests whether the canonical
“Hotelling Rule” holds in practice, generally finding that it does not.50 Rather than test the
precise numerical implications of a model that we know must be unrealistic—particularly
in the presence of shocks along the equilibrium path—we simply ask whether crude oil
production from existing wells responds at all to prices in the way that a model adopting
49

Mason and van’t Veld (2013) only derive equilibrium outcomes in a simplified, two-period version of their
model, while Okullo et al. (2012) focuses primarily on a graphical analysis of a stationary (and therefore
incorrect) phase portrait.
50
Smith (1979), Slade (1982), and Berck and Roberts (1996) find limited evidence for an upward trend in
exhaustible resource prices, but tests based on price alone are not correctly specified unless extraction costs
are negligible. Structural econometric papers estimating in-situ values, including Miller and Upton (1985),
Halvorsen and Smith (1984), Black and LaFrance (1998), and Thompson (2001), find mixed results. See
Krautkraemer (1998) and Slade and Thille (2009) for recent reviews.

41

the cake-eating assumption would predict. Finding that it does not, we then show that our
keg-tapping Hotelling model is capable of rationalizing this result as well as many other
empirical regularities observed in oil markets.

6

Conclusion

Most Hotelling-style models take for granted that extractors are unconstrained in choosing
the rate at which production flows to market. Our analysis of crude oil drilling and production in Texas shows this assumption to be inconsistent with the technology and cost
structure of the oil industry. Oil is not extracted barrel-by-barrel. Instead, extractors drill
wells, and the maximum flow from these wells is geologically constrained by underground
reservoir pressure. Given this constraint, extractors always opt to produce at capacity under
realistic conditions and will respond to oil prices only by varying their rate of drilling. Thus,
crude oil extraction is best modeled as a dynamic drilling investment problem in which the
flow of oil—though technically a control variable—is set equal to production capacity at all
times and therefore behaves like a state variable in equilibrium.
We develop a new model of exhaustible resource extraction that accommodates these important features of the crude oil extraction industry. Our model—uniquely in the Hotelling
literature—replicates several salient observations from oil markets: (1) production from preexisting wells steadily declines over time and does not respond to oil price shocks; (2) drilling
of new wells and drilling rig rental rates strongly co-vary with oil prices; (3) local oilproducing regions and fields exhibit production peaks; and (4) expected future oil prices
can be backwardated after positive demand shocks and can rise faster than the interest rate
(temporarily) following negative demand shocks. A main contribution of our paper is therefore to show that a Hotelling-style model can replicate qualitatively the oil price, extraction,
and drilling dynamics that we observe in the real world, breathing new life into a theoretical
literature that has, until now, largely failed to deliver empirically.

42

Our model could be extended in several logical ways. First, we currently model drilling
costs with a fixed, upward-sloping supply curve. While the stock of drilling rigs and crews is
fixed in the short run, with rigs allocated to their highest-valued use, this stock can change
over time as new rigs are built and crews are trained, as old rigs are scrapped and workers
retire, or as rigs and crews are moved from one region to another. These rig dynamics
could be added to the model to effectively allow for a more elastic long-run drilling supply
curve. Second, the model could incorporate uncertainty about future oil demand, so that
firms rationally expect demand shocks to occur along the equilibrium path. In this case,
each undrilled well would be characterized as a real option (see Kellogg (2014)). Third,
since different locations typically have their own geological features, it would be natural
to consider variation in drilling costs, production decline rates, and resource stocks across
regions—or across individual wells within the same region. Heterogeneity in drilling costs
may be particularly important to consider given our increasing reliance on deeper, more
remote, and unconventional energy resources. We leave these extensions to future work.

References
Adelman, M. A., “Mineral Depletion, with Special Reference to Petroleum,” The Review
of Economics and Statistics, 1990, 72 (1), 1–10.
Alquist, Ron and Lutz Kilian, “What Do We Learn From the Price of Crude Oil Futures?,” Journal of Applied Econometrics, June/July 2010, 25 (4), 539–573.
Benveniste, L. M. and J. A. Scheinkman, “On the Differentiability of the Value Function in Dynamic Models of Economics,” Econometrica, 1979, 47 (3), 727–732.
Berck, Peter and Michael Roberts, “Natural Resource Prices: Will They Ever Turn
Up?,” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 1996, 31, 65–78.

43

Black, Geoffrey and Jeffrey T. LaFrance, “Is Hotelling’s Rule Relevant to Domestic Oil
Production?,” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 1998, 36, 149–169.
Cairns, Robert, “The Green Paradox of the Economics of Exhaustible Resources,” Energy
Policy, February 2014, 65, 78–85.
Cairns, Robert D. and Graham A. Davis, “Adelman’s Rule and the Petroleum Firm,”
The Energy Journal, 2001, 22 (3), 31–54.
Dahl, Carol and Mine Yucel, “Testing Alternative Hypotheses of Oil Producer Behavior,”
The Energy Journal, 1991, 12 (4), 117–138.
Darcy, Henry, Les Fontaines Publiques de la Ville de Dijon 1856.
Davis, Graham A. and Robert D. Cairns, “Simple Analytics of Valuing Producing
Petroleum Reserves,” The Energy Journal, 1998, 19 (4), 133–142.
Devarajan, Shantayanan and Anthony C. Fisher, “Hotelling’s ‘Economics of Exhaustible Resources’: Fifty Years Later,” Journal of Economic Literature, 1981, 19 (1),
65–73.
Elliott, Graham, Thomas J. Rothenberg, and James H. Stock, “Efficient Tests for
an Autoregressive Unit Root,” Econometrica, July 1996, 64 (4), 813–836.
Gaudet, Gérard, “Investissement Optimal et Coûts d’Ajustement dans la Théorie
Économique de la Mine. (Optimal Investment and Adjustment Costs in the Economic
Theory of the Mine. With English summary.),” Canadian Journal of Economics, February 1983, 16 (1), 39–51.
, “Natural Resource Economics Under the Rule of Hotelling,” Canadian Journal of Economics/Revue Canadienne d’Economique, 2007, 40 (4), 1033–1059.

44

and Stephen Salant, “The Hotelling Model with Multiple Demands,” in Robert
Halvorsen and David Layton, eds., Handbook on the Economics of Natural Resources,
Edward Elgar, 2014.
Griffin, James M, “OPEC Behavior: A Test of Alternative Hypotheses,” American Economic Review, December 1985, 75 (5), 954–63.
Güntner, Jochen H. F., “How Do Oil Producers Respond To Oil Demand Shocks?,”
Energy Economics, forthcoming.
Halvorsen, Robert and Tim R. Smith, “On Measuring Natural Resource Scarcity,”
Journal of Political Economy, 1984, 92 (5), 954–964.
Hamilton, James D., “Understanding Crude Oil Prices,” The Energy Journal, 2009, 30
(2), 179–206.
, “Oil Prices, Exhaustible Resources, and Economic Growth,” in Roger Fouquet, ed.,
Handbook of Energy and Climate Change, Cheltenham, United Kingdom: Edward Elgar
Publishing, 2013.
Hogan, William W., “A Dynamic Putty–Semi-putty Model of Aggregate Energy Demand,” Energy Economics, 1989, 11 (1), 53–69.
Holland, Stephen P., “Modeling Peak Oil,” The Energy Journal, 2008, 29 (2), 61–79.
Hotelling, Harold, “The Economics of Exhaustible Resources,” Journal of Political Economy, 1931, 39 (2), 137–175.
Hyne, Norman J., Nontechnical Guide to Petroleum Geology, Exploration, Drilling, and
Production, 2nd edition ed., Tulsa, Oklanhoma: PennWell Corporation, 2001.
Jones, Clifton T., “OPEC Behaviour Under Falling Prices: Implications for Cartel Stability,” The Energy Journal, 1990, 11 (3), 117–130.
45

Kellogg, Ryan, “The Effect of Uncertainty on Investment: Evidence from Texas Oil
Drilling,” American Economic Review, 2014, 104 (6), 1698–1734.
Kilian, Lutz, “Not All Oil Price Shocks Are Alike: Disentangling Demand and Supply
Shocks in the Crude Oil Market,” American Economic Review, 2009, 99 (3), 1053–1069.
and Bruce Hicks, “Did Unexpectedly Strong Economic Growth Cause the Oil Price
Shock of 2003–2008?,” Journal of Forecasting, August 2013, 32, 385–394.
Krautkraemer, Jeffrey A., “Nonrenewable Resource Scarcity,” Journal of Economic Literature, 1998, 36 (4), 2065–2107.
Léonard, Daniel and Ngo van Long, Optimal Control Theory and Static Optimization
in Economics, Cambridge University Press, November 1992.
Livernois, John R. and Russell S. Uhler, “Extraction Costs and the Economics of
Nonrenewable Resources,” Journal of Political Economy, 1987, 95 (1), 195–203.
Mason, Charles F. and Klaas van’t Veld, “Hotelling Meets Darcy: A New Model of Oil
Extraction,” June 2013. Paper presented at the 20th Annual Conference of the European
Association of Environmental and Resource Economists (Toulouse, France).
Miller, Merton H. and Charles W. Upton, “A Test of the Hotelling Valuation Principle,” Journal of Political Economy, 1985, 93 (1), 1–25.
Nystad, Arild N., “Rate Sensitivity and the Optimal Choice of Production Capacity of
Petroleum Reservoirs,” Energy Economics, 1987, 9 (1), 37–45.
Okullo, Samuel Jovan, Frédéric Reynès, and Marjan W. Hofkes, “Modeling Peak
Oil and the Geological Constraints on Oil Production,” March 2012. Technical report,
Institute for Environmental Studies.
Pindyck, Robert S., “The Optimal Exploration and Production of Nonrenewable Resources,” Journal of Political Economy, October 1978, 86 (5), 841–61.
46

Ramcharran, Harri, “Oil Production Responses to Price Changes: An Empirical Application of the Competitive Model to OPEC and Non-OPEC Countries,” Energy economics,
2002, 24 (2), 97–106.
Rao, Nirupama S., “Taxation and the Extraction of Exhaustible Resources: Evidence
from California Oil Production,” April 2010. MIT-CEEPR Working Paper 10-006.
RigData, “Day Rate Report,” 1990–2013. Available from http://www.rigdata.com/newsand-analysis/day-rate-report.aspx (accessed August 27, 2013).
Rincón-Zapatero, Juan Pablo and Manuel S. Santos, “Differentiability of the Value
Function in Continuous-Time Economic Models,” Journal of Mathematical Analysis and
Applications, 2012, 394, 305–323.
Salant, Stephen W., “The Economics of Natural Resource Extraction: A Primer for
Development Economists,” World Bank Research Observer, February 1995, 10 (1), 93–
111.
Slade, Margaret E., “Trends in Natural-resource Commodity Prices: An Analysis in the
Time Domain,” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 1982, 9, 122–137.
and Henry Thille, “Whither Hotelling: Tests of the Theory of Exhaustible Resources,”
Annual Review of Resource Economics, August 2009, 1 (1), 239–259.
Smith, James L., “Modeling the Impact of Taxes on Petroleum Exploration and Development,” 2012. IMF Working Paper No. 12/278.
Smith, V. Kerry, “Natural Resource Scarcity: A Statistical Analysis,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 1979, 61, 423–427.
Society of Petroleum Evaluation Engineers, “Survey of Economic Parameters Used in
Property Evaluations,” 1995.

47

Switzer, Sheldon and Stephen Salant, “Optimal Capacity Expansion by Foresighted
Extractors and Producers,” in G. Gaudet and P. Lasserre, eds., Problèmes de Ressources
Naturelles et Théorie Économique, University of Laval Press, Laval, Québec, 1986.
Thompson, Andrew C., “The Hotelling Principle, Backwardation of Futures Prices and
the Values of Developed Petroleum Reserves—the Production Constraint Hypothesis,”
Resource and Energy Economics, 2001, 23, 133–156.
Venables, Anthony J., “Depletion and Development: Natural Resource Supply with Endogenous Field Opening,” September 2012. OxCarre Research Paper 62.

48

A

Additional empirical results

This empirical appendix has three parts. First, we provide results from regressions that
complement figures 2 and 4 in the main text. Second, we show that the primary features
of figure 2—the deterministic production decline and the lack of response to price shocks—
hold in subsamples of production from relatively high-volume leases and from wells drilled
in-sample. Third, we present results that rule out alternative explanations for the lack of
price response.

A.1

Regression analysis for main production and drilling results

Figure 2 indicates graphically that production from previously drilled wells does not respond
to spot or future oil prices, while figure 4 indicates a strong response of drilling to these prices.
Here, we demonstrate these results more formally via a regression analysis.
As a complement to figure 2, we seek to regress the log of oil production (bbl/day) from
wells drilled before 1990 on both the logged front month price of oil and the expected annual
rate of price increase. The oil production data are monthly, and we average the price data
to the monthly level. We conduct the analysis in first differences because we cannot reject
(using the GLS procedure of Elliott, Rothenberg and Stock (1996)) that both log(production)
and log(front month price) are unit root processes.51
Our main specification is given by:
∆ log(Productiont ) = α + β0 ∆ log(Pricet ) + β1 ∆ log(Pricet−1 ) + δ0 ∆IncreaseRatet
+ δ1 ∆IncreaseRatet−1 + η · Time + errort (21)
We include a lagged difference because doing so minimizes the AIC criterion. Removing
this lag or adding additional lags does not qualitatively change the results. We include a
time trend in our baseline specification to account for the possibility that the pressure-driven
production decline curve is hyperbolic rather than exponential, so that ∆ log(Productiont )
will not be constant over time even if the β and δ coefficients all equal zero (enriching the
trend to a polynomial does not qualitatively affect the results). For inference, we use NeweyWest with four lags (doing so only slightly increases the estimated standard errors; adding
additional lags leaves the estimated errors essentially unchanged).
Column (1) of table 1 presents estimates from the specification in equation (21), while
column (2) presents estimates from a specification that does not include the time trend.
In both specifications, we find that oil price changes have neither an economically nor statistically significant effect on production from pre-existing wells, consistent with figure 2.
In column (1), the sum of the coefficients on the current and lagged difference in log(front
month price) yields an insignificant elasticity of oil production with respect to front month
price of -0.004 (with a standard error of 0.036). The sum of the coefficients on the current
and lagged differences in the expected rate of price increase equals -0.0010, meaning that
51

For log(production), we obtain a test statistic of -0.644 with the optimal 12 lags, relative to a 10%
critical value of -2.548. For log(front month price), we obtain a test statistic of -1.337 with the optimal 11
lags, relative to a 10% critical value of -2.558. Results are similar for all other lags. These results include a
time trend in the test, but results are similar when a trend is excluded.

A-1

Table 1: First-differenced regressions of Texas production and drilling on oil prices
VARIABLES
∆ log(Front-month price)
Lagged ∆ log(Front-month price)

∆ log(Production)
(1)
(2)
0.047
0.058
(0.033)
(0.033)
-0.052
-0.043
(0.037)
(0.037)

2nd lagged ∆ log(Front-month price)
∆ Expected rate of price increase
Lagged ∆ Expected rate of price increase

0.0001
(0.0004)
-0.0010
(0.0005)

0.0002
(0.0004)
-0.0009
(0.0005)

0.0042
(0.0013)
-0.0070
(0.0008)
214
0.096

-0.0071
(0.0009)
214
0.074

2nd lagged ∆ Expected rate of price increase
Time trend (in months)
Constant
N
R2

∆ log(Drilling)
(3)
(4)
0.322
0.315
(0.139)
(0.139)
0.017
0.012
(0.159)
(0.157)
0.264
0.259
(0.165)
(0.162)
0.0036
0.0035
(0.0023)
(0.0023)
-0.0009
-0.0010
(0.0024)
(0.0024)
-0.0006
-0.0007
(0.0027)
(0.0026)
-0.0029
(0.0073)
-0.0005
-0.0004
(0.0045)
(0.0045)
213
213
0.107
0.081

Note: Data are monthly and the same as in figures 2 and 4. The expected rate of price increase is measured
as a percentage. Standard errors in parentheses are Newey-West with 4 lags.

an increase in the expected rate of price increase of 10 percentage points (about one standard deviation) is associated with only a 1% decrease in production. A test against the null
hypothesis that this sum equals zero yields a p-value of 0.102.
In columns (3) and (4) of table 1, we re-estimate equation (21) but use the log of wells
drilled per month as the dependent variable. We also add an additional lag of the independent
variables, minimizing the AIC criterion.52 Column (3) includes a time trend, while column
(4) does not. In either case, the estimates follow what is clear from figure 4: drilling activity
responds strongly to changes in oil prices. For column (3), summing the coefficients on the
current and lagged front month price differences yields an elasticity of drilling with respect
to the front month price of 0.604 (with a standard error of 0.191). The response of drilling
to expected future changes in price, however, is estimated imprecisely (the sum of the three
coefficients equals 0.002, with a standard error of 0.003).

A.2

Production decline in high-volume leases and wells drilled
in-sample

Figure 2 presents average monthly production from all active oil leases in Texas for which
there was no rig activity from 1990–2007. Average lease-level production in Texas is quite
low, raising the question of whether our empirical results extend to higher-volume fields that
52

Intuitively, lags caused by engineering and permitting generate a lag in the response of drilling to price
shocks.

A-2

Figure 11: Production from existing wells in high-volume Texas leases

Jan90 Jan92 Jan94 Jan96 Jan98 Jan00 Jan02 Jan04 Jan06 Jan08

100

200

Oil Price
25
50
75
Front month crude price ($/bbl)

Production

0

0

25
50
75
Front month crude price ($/bbl)

Oil Price

0

Production

Production from top 1% of leases (bbl/d)
50
100
150

80
Production from top 5% of leases (bbl/d)
20
40
60
0

(b) Top 1% of leases
100

(a) Top 5% of leases

Jan90 Jan92 Jan94 Jan96 Jan98 Jan00 Jan02 Jan04 Jan06 Jan08

Note: This figure presents crude oil front month prices and daily average oil production from leases on which
there was no rig activity (so that all production comes from pre-existing wells). All prices are real $2007.
The left panel (a) includes leases that are in the top 5% of total production in the 1990–2007 sample, while
the right panel (b) includes leases that are in the top 1%.

might be found elsewhere in the world.
Figure 11 presents production data from subsamples of relatively high-volume leases in
Texas. For each lease in the dataset, we obtain its total production by summing its production rate over the entire 1990–2007 sample. We then assign each lease to its appropriate
percentile based on total production. The left panel of figure 11 includes leases within the
top 5% of total production, and the right panel includes leases in the top 1%. The average
top 1% lease produces nearly 200 bbl/day at the start of the sample, far larger than the
overall average initial production of about 8 bbl/day shown in figure 2. Nonetheless, in both
panels of figure 11, production declines deterministically and exhibits essentially no response
to price signals. The production declines are steeper in figure 11 than in figure 2, suggesting
either that high-volume leases have relatively high decline rates or that leases typically have
decline curves that are hyperbolic rather than exponential.
We next examine production from wells drilled during the sample. To undertake this
analysis, we first match drilling records, which come from TRRC drilling permits, to the
TRRC lease-level production data. This match must be done based on lease names. Because
naming conventions vary across the two datasets, we are able to match only 67.2% of drilled
oil wells to a lease in the production data.
Because production can only be observed at the lease-level rather than at the well-level,
we isolate the sample to drilled wells that are the only producing well on their lease for
three years after the well was completed. The remaining sample consists of 4,105 wells
drilled between 1990 and 2004 (inclusive). We break these 15 years into five 3-year periods.
Each panel of figure 12 then plots, for wells drilled within a particular period, the average
production for the first three years of the wells’ lives. For each period of drilling, production
A-3

Figure 12: Production from wells drilled during the sample period
(b) Wells drilled from 1993–1995

0

0

Average production in bbl/day
50
100

Average production in bbl/day
50
100

150

150

(a) Wells drilled from 1990–1992

0

10

20
Months since well completion

30

40

0

20
Months since well completion

30

40

Average production in bbl/day
50
100
0

0

Average production in bbl/day
50
100

150

(d) Wells drilled from 1999–2001

150

(c) Wells drilled from 1996–1998

10

0

10

20
Months since well completion

30

40

0

10

20
Months since well completion

30

40

0

Average production in bbl/day
50
100

150

(e) Wells drilled from 2002–2004

0

10

20
Months since well completion

30

40

Note: Each panel plots average monthly production for wells drilled during the indicated time interval. See
text for details.

A-4

from drilled wells declines deterministically over time and again does not indicate any price
responsiveness. Production from wells drilled in later periods is lower, on average, than
production from wells drilled in early periods, suggesting that firms sensibly drill highly
productive wells before drilling less productive wells. Incorporating well-level heterogeneity
into the theoretical model is therefore likely to be a fruitful path for future research.

A.3

Ruling out alternative explanations for production’s lack of
response to price incentives

There are several potential alternative explanations for the lack of price response among
existing oil wells that we need to rule out. First, races to oil created by common-pool externalities in oil fields with multiple lease-holders would diminish the incentive that individual
lease-holders have to defer production when prices are expected to rise, since much of the
deferred production would be extracted by others instead. Figure 13(a) shows, however,
that the long, downward trend in oil production manifests both for oil fields with multiple
operators and for oil fields with just a single operator.
Second, a condition of many leases is that the lease holder produce oil; a firm that
drops lease-level production to zero may therefore risk losing the lease. Figure 13(b) shows,
however, that production from multi-well leases, on which producers may shut in at least
some of their wells without risk of losing the lease, does not respond to price signals.
Third, oil production in Texas is subject to maximum allowable production quotas—
or “allowables”—as determined by the Texas Railroad Commission. This system dates to
the East Texas Oil Boom of the 1930s when a large share of world oil production came
from Texas, and races to oil led to overproduction and collapsing world oil prices. Whether
originally intended to end the race to oil, or simply to cartelize the Texas oil industry and
boost prices, this system persists to this day, and every lease in our data has a monthly
allowable, including on fields with just a single operator. One obvious concern is that these
maximum production quotas are binding, leading to the lack of price response. Figure 13(c)
shows, however, that the average production for leases in our main sample is well below the
average allowable production. Thus, the allowables are not binding and therefore cannot
explain the lack of price response that we observe in our data.
Fourth and finally, one possible concern is that the decision makers whose behavior we
observe in our data could earn profits by delaying production during periods of extreme
contango but do not do so because they dynamically optimize incorrectly or because their
future price expectations are not aligned with the futures market. Figure 13(d) shows,
however, that above-ground storage of crude oil on these leases increased notably during
the 1998–1999 period of extreme contango. Lease-holders responded to this price incentive
by accumulating inventories above-ground, deferring sales—not extraction—to take advantage of the expected increase in prices, and confirming that they appropriately respond to
incentives generated by price expectations aligned with the futures market.

A-5

Figure 13: Graphical evidence ruling out alternative explanations
(b) Production on multi-well leases

Jan90 Jan92 Jan94 Jan96 Jan98 Jan00 Jan02 Jan04 Jan06 Jan08
Date

Jan90 Jan92 Jan94 Jan96 Jan98 Jan00 Jan02 Jan04 Jan06 Jan08

Storage (bbl)

Storage

Jan90 Jan92 Jan94 Jan96 Jan98 Jan00 Jan02 Jan04 Jan06 Jan08

50

0

2

4

Production

Production

100

Production (bbl/d)
6
8

Allowable

150

10

12

200

(d) Production and above-ground storage

20

(c) Actual versus allowable production

Production and allowable, bbl/d
5
10
15

0

0

0

0

Production from multi-well leases

20
40
60
80
Front month crude price ($/bbl)

12

Production from multi-well leases (bbl/d)
5
10
15
20

Production from
sole-operated fields

Front month price

10

Front month price

4
6
8
(mean) lmprodday

Production from
non-sole-operated
fields

2

Multi-owner production (bbl/d)
2
4
6
8

25

100

(a) Single vs. multiple-operator fields

Jan90 Jan92 Jan94 Jan96 Jan98 Jan00 Jan02 Jan04 Jan06 Jan08

Note: Panel (a) shows average daily production on fields with multiple operators as well as on fields with just
a single operator, along with the spot price of crude oil. Panel (b) shows average production for leases with
multiple wells in our main sample. Panel (c) shows average actual production as well as average allowable
production for leases in our main sample. Panel (d) shows average oil production and average above-ground
storage of crude oil on leases in our main sample. See text for details.

A-6

B

Calculations showing that production below the constraint was never warranted

In this appendix we demonstrate that production below the constraint was never warranted
for our sample of Texas oil producers in any of the 216 months between 1990–2007: withholding production in any given month t and selling it optimally over time was never anticipated
to be as valuable as selling the production in month t.
To calculate the value of deferred production reported in figure 5, we assume an exponential production decline rate of 10% annually and a discount rate of 10% annually (see
footnote 26). The corresponding monthly decline rate and monthly real rate of interest are
then given, respectively, by λ = 1 − (1 − 0.10)1/12 and r = (1 + 0.10)1/12 − 1. We assume
that expected real prices at each date follow our futures data, which we describe in detail
in the text. The longest futures contract is typically 60 months. We assume that prices
more than 60 months in the future were expected at time t to plateau at the level of the
60-month futures price.53 This assumption naturally follows from the long-run plateauing of
the futures curves in the data, as is apparent in figure 1.
Given these assumptions, it is straightforward to calculate recursively the value of deferred production at each date t. Since prices were anticipated to plateau after 60 months, it
would be optimal to produce at the constraint from that date onward, and so an additional
unit of production capacity 60 months hence was anticipated at time t to be worth at t + 60:
θ(t, 60) =

P (t, 60)
,
1−δ

where δ = (1 − λ)/(1 + r) and P (t, 60) is the price anticipated at t to prevail after 60 months.
This is simply the value of inheriting one extra barrel of monthly production capacity in 60
months and producing at capacity forever while earning P (t, 60 + j) = P (t, 60) per barrel
for j > 1, all discounted back to time t + 60. Now suppose inductively that the shadow value
on capacity s + 1 months in the future is anticipated at time t to be θ(t, s + 1). Then, the
anticipated shadow value on capacity s months in the future is given by:
θ(t, s) = max {P (t, s) + (1 − λ)θ(t, s + 1)/(1 + r), θ(t, s + 1)/(1 + r)} ,
where the well owner anticipates in month t choosing s months in the future the more
lucrative of the two options: (1) producing at capacity and earning P (t, s) that month and
having fraction 1 − λ of initial capacity remaining in the following month, which is then
valued at θ(t, s + 1); or (2) deferring production until the following month so that the full
inherited capacity is saved until the following month, which is again valued at θ(t, s + 1).
Thus, by backward recursion starting 60 months in the future, we can reconstruct the full
sequence of shadow values, all the way back to θ(t, 1). Note then that it will be optimal to
produce at the constraint at time t whenever P (t, 0) + (1 − λ)θ(t, 1)/(1 + r) > θ(t, 1)/(1 + r),
or equivalently P (t, 0) − λθ(t, 1)/(1 + r) > 0. This condition is the discrete-time analog of
necessary condition (7) in the text. So the benefit from deferring one barrel of production
53

There are also periodic gaps in the futures data, particularly at longer time horizons. We linearly
interpolate prices to fill these gaps.

A-7

at time t is λθ(t, 1)/(1 + r) and the cost of deferring it is P (t, 0) in month t.
Figure 5 in the text plots the marginal value of deferred production in each month based
on these calculations, along with the spot price of oil. As shown in the figure, production
below the constraint was never warranted, for the spot price of oil (P (t, 0)) exceeded the value
of deferred production (λθ(t, 1)/(1 + r)) for every month t in our sample period—although
the value of deferred production came within $4 of the spot price during the 1998–1999
episode.
To test the sensitivity of our conclusions to parameter assumptions, we calculated the
threshold values of r and λ that would lead the value of deferred production to just equal the
spot price during the 1998–1999 episode. We find that if either the discount rate were as low
as 4% annually or the production decline rate were as high as 21% annually, then it would
have been optimal to defer production briefly during the 1998–1999 episode. Similarly, we
calculated a threshold rate of increase in anticipated oil prices beyond the 60-month limit
of our futures data. We find that if anticipated prices were to rise at a rate of 6% annually
from the 60-month futures price, rather than plateau at that level, then it would again have
been optimal to defer production briefly during the 1998–1999 episode. While this may seem
like a small threshold rate of price increase, it is in fact equivalent to having the anticipated
future price beyond the limits of our futures data be $20 higher than what we observe for
the 60-month futures price.54
Finally, note that this analysis does not include any fixed operating costs. As discussed
in the main text, fixed costs can generate an incentive to shut down the production of low
flow rate wells when oil prices are low, as in 1998–1999.

54

Let X be the gap between the spot price and value of deferred production during the 1998–1999 episode.
We are looking for the Z that solves λδ 60 Z/(1 − δ) = X, where again δ = (1 − λ)/(1 + r). On the right,
X is simply the gap between spot price and deferral value under this calculation. On the left, we have the
increase in the deferral value when anticipated prices beyond 60 months plateau Z dollars higher. Given our
assumptions for the values of r and λ, the left side is 0.193Z. Thus, the threshold Z is approximately 5X.
Since the gap between the spot price and deferral value was roughly X = $4 at its narrowest, we conclude
that the anticipated future price beyond 60 months would needed to have been $20 higher.

A-8

C

Standard Hotelling result

In this section, we briefly restate the standard Hotelling result before illustrating the conditions under which the path of Hotelling’s planner and that of our planner coincide.
Assume that oil flow F (t) at time t generates instantaneous utility flow of U (F (t)), with
U (0) = 0, U 0 (·) > 0, and U 00 (·) < 0. Assume that an initial stock of Q0 units of oil can be
extracted at rate F (t) ≥ 0, which is under the complete control of the oil extractor, and
that the cost of this extraction is cF (t), where c ∈ [0, U 0 (0)) is the constant marginal cost of
extraction. Assume the social planner discounts utility and costs continuously at exogenous
rate r and, if wealth maximizing agents are involved, they also discount profit flows at rate
r. To maximize the discounted utility, the planner chooses F (t) so that marginal utility less
marginal cost of extraction grows exponentially at the rate of interest whenever oil flow is
strictly positive:
F (t) ≥ 0, U 0 (F (t)) − c − γ0 ert ≤ 0, with complementary slackness (c.s.).

(22)

where γ0 is a multiplier. Thus, quantity flows according to: F (t) = U 0 −1 (γ0 ert + c) , where
U 0 −1 is the inverse of the first derivative of U (·). In addition,
R ∞ the resource stock must be
completely extracted either in finite time or asymptotically: 0 F (t)dt = Q0 , which uniquely
determines γ0 and therefore the time path of extraction and marginal utilities.
If we assume that marginal utility is unbounded at zero (U 0 (0) = ∞), then marginal
utility must rise forever and the resource stock will only be exhausted in the limit. If we
instead assume that marginal utility is bounded at zero (c < U 0 (0) < ∞), then the resource
stock will be exhausted in finite time at the precise instant that the rising marginal utility
path reaches its upper bound. This is not only the planner’s optimal extraction path, but
it is also the aggregate extraction path that emerges in the competitive equilibrium of a
decentralized market.
The main text discusses two reasons why a planner with the extraction technology described in section 3 would be unlikely to generate Hotelling’s extraction path. First, oil flow
in our model is constrained such that, even if the planner drilled every well immediately and
produced at the maximum possible rate, oil would flow forever. Thus, price cannot rise at
the rate of interest whenever oil is flowing, as Hotelling’s path requires, unless marginal utility is also able to rise forever. Second, in our model, the incentive to drill in a given period
depends, in part, on the cost of drilling in other periods, as captured by the d0 (a(t))ȧ(t) term
in equation (17). One implication is that oil flow in our model can increase over intervals
during which the marginal cost of drilling is falling, whereas the cost of extraction typically
increases with production in standard models.
To overcome the first of these threats, we must assume that marginal utility is unbounded:
U 0 (0) = ∞. To overcome the second, we must assume that the marginal cost of drilling is
constant: d(a) = d¯ for all a ≥ 0. In this case, the imputed per-barrel cost of drilling is
¯ + λ)/X, which we assume is equivalent to the per-barrel
well-defined and is given by c = d(r
extraction cost faced by Hotelling’s planner. Given these two assumptions, condition (17)
implies that the marginal utility of oil flow minus the per-barrel marginal cost of extraction
rises at the rate of interest:
λγ0 rt
e .
(23)
U 0 (F (t)) − c =
X
A-9

Note, however, that we have implicitly assumed that the planner starts drilling wells at
the outset of the planning period and never stops, producing at the constraint throughout,
so that condition (17) always applies. For this to be the case, however, we need two other
conditions to hold. First, the flow from drilled wells must decay sufficiently fast, so that
the planner is able to achieve the Hotelling path via judicious control of the drilling rate
while producing at her constraint. Second, the initial flow capacity K0 cannot be too high,
for otherwise the planner would delay drilling the first well—and may even produce below
her constraint initially. If either of these conditions fails, then the planner is geologically
constrained to an inferior path.
To illustrate the first of these two conditions, we assume for simplicity that drilling costs
are zero (c = 0) and that utility from oil flow takes the constant elasticity form: U (F ) = αF β
for α > 0, β ∈ (0, 1).55 We also assume provisionally that λ(1 − β) > r. The total resource
stock is given by Q0 = (K0 + R0 X)/λ. In this case, the optimal program is given by:
θ(t) =
F (t) =

a(t) =
γ(t) =

αβX
γ0 ert
, where γ0 =
X
λ
r
rQ0 − 1−β
t
e
1−β


r
λ − 1−β
F (t)
X
γ0 ert .



rQ0
1−β

β−1
(24)
(25)

(26)
(27)

Note that the planning period begins with a pulse of drilling such that flow capacity totaling
rQ0 /(1 − β) − K0 is immediately added to the inherited capacity. Equation (26) implies
that a(t) > 0 for all t ≥ 0, since F (t) > 0 and since we have provisionally assumed that
λ(1 − β) − r > 0.56 It is straightforward to verify that this program satisfies each of the
necessary conditions (7)–(13) and is therefore optimal for our planner.57 Since a(t) > 0, it
achieves the same discounted utility as Hotelling’s planner.
However, our planner cannot always accomplish this feat. Suppose that the rate of decay
from drilled wells is too low, with λ(1 − β) < r. To achieve the result in (17) that U 0 (F (t)) =
rU 0 (F (t))
(t)
λγ0 rt
e
,
the
planner
must
set
Ḟ
(t)
=
= − rF
. But then equation (12) implies that
X
U 00 (F (t))
1−β
(t)
a(t)X = λF (t) − rF
. Substituting and simplifying we conclude that a(t)X = F (t)(λ(1−β)−r)
,
1−β
1−β
which violates nonnegativity of a(t). Intuitively, the planner is geologically constrained to a
price path that rises more slowly than the rate of interest. Even if she drills all of the wells
immediately and produces at the maximum possible rate, oil cannot be extracted quickly
enough to satisfy Hotelling’s rule.
So suppose instead that λ(1 − β) > r and that the inherited flow capacity is too high,
55

Note that η, the inverse oil demand elasticity (which we treat as a positive number), is given by 1 − β.
Since we have assumed that drilling and extraction are both costless in this example, any alternative
drilling path such that the production path in (25) is feasible is also optimal. For any positive drilling cost,
however, the planner would produce at the constraint and defer drilling until necessary.
57
Equations (24) and (27) imply that condition (9) holds with equality. Equations (24) and (25) imply
that condition (7) holds. Equation (27) ensures that (11) holds. Finally, equations (25) and (26) ensure that
(12) holds.
56

A-10

with K0 > rQ0 /(1 − β). In this case, the planner will choose not to drill any wells initially,
and production will decline at rate λ until drilling commences (when K(t) = rQ(t)/(1 − β)).
During this time, price will rise at a rate greater than r, and our planner will therefore not
achieve the same utility as Hotelling’s planner.58
To summarize, when the extraction technology involves drilling wells rather than producing barrels, we should not expect the Hotelling path to be optimal, unless four conditions
hold: (1) the marginal cost of drilling a well is constant, (2) marginal utility is unbounded
at zero, (3) the decay in flow from drilled wells is sufficiently fast, and (4) the inherited rate
of oil flow is not too high. While the latter two conditions seem reasonable (given that new
wells are constantly being drilled in the real world) the former two conditions are not tenable.
Our analysis of the Texas data shows clearly that marginal costs rise with the rate of drilling,
while the viability of alternative fuels at current oil prices argues against an unbounded oil
price.

58

Since the planner can produce below the production constraint, the standard Hotelling path can still
be achieved. However, this possibility requires either that drilling is costless or that it is so expensive that
no wells are ever drilled. Otherwise, it can be shown that, given d0 (a) = 0, price would initially rise at the
rate of interest (while production is below the constraint and drilling is zero), would then rise faster than
the rate of interest (after the constraint starts to bind while drilling remains at zero), and finally would rise
more slowly than the rate of interest (after drilling turns positive with the constraint continuing to bind).

A-11

D

Proofs for rules (1)–(6) pertaining to the general
case

This appendix provides the formal statement and proof of theorem 1 discussed in the main
text:
Theorem 1. Assume that the marginal cost of drilling d(a) is continuously differentiable,
with d0 (a) > 0 and d(0) > 0. Assume that the inverse demand for oil is given by U 0 (F ) =
P (F ) ≥ 0, which has the following properties: P (0) > 0; P (F ) is continuous for F > 0
and continuous at F = 0 if P (0) < ∞; P (F ) → 0 as F → ∞; and P (F ) is continuously
differentiable, with P 0 (F ) < 0, whenever P (F ) > 0. Assume that the inverse demand curve
and drilling supply curve satisfy the following: XP (0)/(λ + r) > d(0). Lastly, assume
∞ > R0 > 0 and ∞ > K0 ≥ 0. Then the following rules hold: (1) γ(t), γ̇(t), θ(t), a(t),
R(t), Ṙ(t), K(t), F (t), P (t), φ(t), K̇(t), and θ̇(t) are continuous for all t > 0, as is ȧ(t)
when a(t) > 0; (2) capacity must go to zero in the limit as t → ∞; (3) the drilling rate
and capacity cannot both be weakly increasing (in the phase diagram, neither the interior of
region I nor its boundaries defined by the ȧ = 0 and K̇ = 0 loci may be entered), nor can the
drilling and extraction rates both be weakly increasing; (4) all available wells will be drilled
in the limit as t → ∞; (5) at any time that drilling ceases, production must be constrained
for a measurable period afterward; and (6) given demand P (F ), marginal drilling costs d(a),
and initial reserves R0 , there exists δ > 0 such that if initial capacity K0 < δ, then drilling
will begin instantly and will initially be decreasing over time.
The proof proceeds via the following series of lemmas.
Lemma 1. If K0 = 0 then drilling starts immediately.
Proof. Suppose not. If it is optimal to drill zero wells and produce nothing initially, then the
state of the system (R, K) remains unchanged. Since the problem is stationary, it is therefore
never optimal to drill. This program is dominated, however, under our assumptions that
XP (0)/(r + λ) > d(0) and that P (F ) and d(a) are continuous. There exists an  > 0 and
a δ > 0 such that drilling at rate  for a time interval of length δ and then producing at
capacity generates strictly positive net utility.
Lemma 2. K(t) > 0 for all t > 0.
Proof. Suppose K(t) > 0 for some t. Equation (12) specifies that, if a(s) = 0 for all
s > t, then K(s) declines at a rate that is no greater than that for exponential decay (since
F (s) ≤ K(s)). Such a decline curve will never reach zero in finite time. Moreover, any
drilling activity will only further increase K(s). Thus, once K(t) > 0 for some t, then
K(s) > 0 for all s > t.
All that remains is to show that K becomes positive immediately. If K0 > 0, the proof
is complete. For the K0 = 0 case, note from above that this case results in drilling taking
place immediately, such that a(0) > 0. Further note with K0 = 0 that K̇(0) = a(0)X > 0.
Thus, whether a(0) = ∞ (a pulse of drilling) or a(0) < ∞ and a > 0 for a measurable period
starting at t = 0, it must be that K(t) > 0 for all t > 0.
A-12

Lemma 3. θ(t) > 0 for all t.
Proof. Suppose by contradiction that θ(t) = 0 at some t. By equation (13), and since we
must have θ(t) ≥ 0 for all t, it must then be that φ(τ ) = θ(τ ) = 0 for all τ ≥ t. Then, for
equation (7) to hold, we must have P (F (τ )) = 0 for all τ ≥ t. However, this cannot happen:
since the amount of available production capacity is finite, we must have P (F ) > 0 at some
future date. Once this happens, condition (7) will be violated.
Intuitively, capacity is always valuable because price is strictly positive for a sufficiently
low consumption quantity and because the marginal cost of extraction is zero.
Lemma 4. It is never optimal to set F so high that P (F ) = 0.
Proof. Proceed by contradiction. Whenever P (F (t)) = 0, we have F (t) > 0 such that
equation (7) must hold with equality. This implies θ(t) = 0, violating lemma 3 above.
Lemma 5. γ(t), γ̇(t), θ(t), a(t), R(t), Ṙ(t), K(t), K̇(t), F (t), and P (t) are continuous
whenever K > 0.
Proof. Condition (11) immediately implies that both γ(t) and γ̇(t) are continuous.
Note φ(t) ≥ 0 always, φ(t) = 0 if F (t) = 0, and φ(t) < ∞ if F (t) > 0 (since in this case
equation (7) must hold with equality). Equation (13) then implies that θ̇(t) exists for all t
and therefore that θ(t) is continuous.
Given equation (9), the continuity of θ(t) and the assumption that d0 (a) > 0 is continuous
together imply that a(t) is continuous.
Given equation (10), the continuity of a(t) then immediately implies the continuity of
R(t) and Ṙ(t).
Given equation (12), the continuity of a(t) and the boundedness of F (t) together imply
that K(t) is continuous.
Now suppose by contradiction that F (t) is not continuous. First consider what happens if
K(t) > F (t) > 0 both before and after the discontinuity (“jump”), such that (7) holds with
equality and φ(t) = 0 both before and after the jump. This violates equation (7) because
P (F ) is strictly monotonically decreasing by assumption and because θ(t) is continuous.
Now consider what happens if K(t) > F (t) > 0 before the jump and F = 0 after the jump.
This again violates equation (7) because the jump down in F causes P to jump up, while
θ(t) is continuous and φ(t) is fixed at zero. Now consider what happens if F = 0 before the
jump and K(t) > F (t) > 0 after the jump. This again violates equation (7) because the
jump up in F causes P to jump down, while θ(t) is continuous and φ(t) is fixed at zero.
Now consider what happens when F (t) = K(t) before the jump and F (t) < K(t) after
the jump. This again results in a contradiction. For equation (7) to hold (perhaps with strict
inequality if F = 0 after the jump), the jump down in F (t) must be matched with a jump up
in φ(t), but φ(t) = 0 after the jump. Finally, consider what happens if F (t) < K(t) before
the jump and F (t) = K(t) after the jump. For equation (7) to hold with equality after the
jump, the jump up in F (t) must be matched with a jump down in φ(t), but φ(t) = 0 before
the jump. Since all possible discontinuities in F (t) result in contradictions, F (t) must be
continuous.
The continuity of F (t) immediately implies the continuity of P (t), since P (F ) is continuous, and the continuity of K̇(t) (via equation (12).
A-13

Lemma 6. F (t) = 0 is never optimal whenever K(t) > 0.
Proof. Suppose by contradiction that F (t) = 0. If we assume P (0) = ∞, then equation
(7) is violated, leading to an immediate contradiction. So assume P (0) < ∞ instead. Since
F (t) = 0 < K(t), we must have φ = 0 (equation 8), and therefore by equation (13) that
θ̇(t)/θ(t) = r. Note that we cannot then have that F = 0 forever, since in this case the
transversality condition (equation 14) would be violated. So it must be that production
eventually becomes strictly positive. Denote the time at which this happens by τ , and note
that we must have equation (7) hold with equality at τ . Because F (t) is continuous, we
must have F < K and therefore φ = 0 immediately after τ , while P is decreasing and θ is
increasing (since θ̇(t) is continuous). In this situation, equation (7) cannot hold with equality
immediately after τ , and we have a contradiction.
Lemma 7. φ(t) and θ̇(t) are continuous whenever K > 0, as is ȧ(t) when a(t) > 0.
Proof. The continuity of F (t) and θ(t), along with the fact that equation (7) must always
hold with equality (since F (t) > 0 per lemma 6) implies that φ(t) must also be continuous.
The results above, combined with equations (12) and (13) imply that θ̇(t) is continuous.
Finally, the results above combined with equation (9) and the assumption that d(a) is
continuously differentiable imply that ȧ(t) is continuous when a(t) > 0.
Recall that lemmas 5 and 7 establish the continuity of γ(t), γ̇(t), θ(t), R(t), Ṙ(t), a(t),
K(t), F (t), P (t), φ(t), K̇(t), and θ̇(t) whenever K(t) > 0, while lemma 2 establishes that
K(t) > 0 for all t > 0. Thus, the seven preceding lemmas complete the proof of rule (1)
stated in the theorem.
Lemma 8. Capacity K(t) cannot be bounded away from zero as t → ∞.
Proof. Suppose that, by contradiction, there is some K̂ > 0 and τ > 0 such that K(t) ≥ K̂
for all t > τ . Note that production cannot be bounded away from zero in this case, since
this would cause K(t) to eventually fall below K̂ (since the finite reserves would eventually be exhausted). Thus, production must eventually fall below K̂, and once it does it
will be unconstrained. Unconstrained production requires Ḟ (t) < 0, so production will be
unconstrained forever. This causes θ(t) to rise at the interest rate forever, violating the
transversality condition (14) and generating a contradiction.
Lemma 9. Capacity K(t) must go to zero in the limit as t → ∞ (that is, for all  > 0, there
exists τ > 0 such that if t > τ then K(t) < ).
Proof. First note that if drilling permanently stops at some point in time, lemma 9 follows
immediately from lemma 8, since in this case K can never increase. So suppose we are in a
case in which drilling never stops permanently. Proceeding by contradiction, suppose that
there exists K̂ > 0 such that for all τ > 0, there exists t > τ with K(t) ≥ K̂.
To see that this leads to a contradiction, pick an  ∈ (0, K̂). We know from lemma 8 that
at some time, which we will denote as t1 , we must have K(t1 ) < . Let t2 denote the time at
which capacity has risen to reach K̂, so K(t2 ) = K̂. To achieve this result, wells must have
been drilled with reserves equal to at least (K̂ − )/λ. Now note that after t2 , by lemma 8
there must be another future time, t3 , for which K(t3 ) < , followed by some t4 at which
A-14

K(t4 ) = K̂. Between t3 and t4 , we must also have drilled reserves of at least (K̂ − )/λ.
This process must repeat an infinite number of times, which yields a contradiction because
the available reserves are finite.
Thus, it must be that limt→∞ K(t) = 0 (i.e., it is sub-optimal to leave valuable capacity
unused). Lemmas 8 and 9 complete the proof of rule (2) stated in the theorem.
Lemma 10. The drilling rate and capacity cannot both be strictly increasing (ȧ > 0 and
K̇ > 0 is inadmissible).
Proof. Suppose not. That is, suppose ȧ(t) > 0 and K̇(t) > 0 for some time t. We will
show that, no matter how drilling and production evolve from this point, a contradiction
will result.
First, suppose production is constrained at t. In this case, equation (17) holds, and we
have:


λγ0 rt
(r + λ)d(a(t))
X
− P (F (t)) +
e ,
(28)
ȧ(t) = 0
d (a(t))
X
X
whose sign depends on the term in brackets, which is increasing in a and F . Thus, if ȧ(t) > 0,
K̇(t) > 0, and production is constrained, we will continue to have ȧ > 0 for subsequent times
so long as production is constrained. If production is constrained forever, then the rate of
drilling will be shocked to zero at the time when reserves are exhausted, which contradicts the
continuity of a(t) (lemma 5).59 Thus we cannot have ȧ(t) > 0 and K̇(t) > 0 simultaneously
with production at the constraint forever.
So suppose instead that production is unconstrained at t (similar logic applies if we allow
production to fall below the constraint at some later time). In this case, we must have
˙
Ṗ /P = r and θ̇/θ = r, implying via equation (9) that d(a)/d(a)
= r, in turn implying that
ȧ > 0. Moreover, so long as production is unconstrained, we will continue to have ȧ > 0, and
if production is unconstrained forever, we will again have a discontinuity in a once reserves
are exhausted.60 On the other hand, returning production to the constraint must result in
a discontinuity in F , which contradicts lemma 5. Why? Unconstrained production implies
that Ḟ < 0. But note that since we had K̇(t) > 0, we must continue in this case to have
K̇ > 0 after time t. Thus, the only way to return production to the constraint is to induce
a discontinuity in F .
Thus, if at any time ȧ(t) > 0 and K̇(t) > 0, there must eventually be a discontinuity in
either a or F , either of which is a contradiction.
Lemma 11. The drilling rate and capacity cannot both be weakly increasing (ȧ ≥ 0 and
K̇ ≥ 0 is inadmissible).
Proof. Suppose not. Lemma 10 above handled the case in which both ȧ(t) > 0 and K̇(t) > 0,
so here we only need to consider cases involving equalities. If K̇(t) = 0 and ȧ(t) > 0, then
59

Note that even with infinite reserves, this path will still yield a contradiction. Why? On this path, P
is monotonically decreasing, which means that we must have θ(t) < P (t)/(r + λ). Equation 9 tells us that
θ(t) = d(a(t))/X, so that (r + λ)d(a(t))/X = (r + λ)θ(t) < P (t). However, per equation (28), this result
contradicts the premise that ȧ(t) > 0.
60
Again note that even with infinite reserves, this path will still yield a contradiction. Why? K is forever
increasing on this path, and θ is rising forever at the rate of interest. These contradict the transversality
condition (14).

A-15

equation (12) implies that K(t) must strictly increase immediately after t, leading to a
situation in which both ȧ(t) > 0 and K̇(t) > 0, which cannot happen per lemma 10. If
ȧ(t) = 0 and K(t) ≥ 0, then assuming a > 0 and F > 0, production must be constrained at
t, and equation (28) implies that a must begin rising immediately after t, again leading to a
situation in which both ȧ(t) > 0 and K̇(t) > 0, which cannot happen per lemma 10.61
Lemma 12. The drilling and extraction rates cannot both be strictly increasing (ȧ > 0 and
Ḟ > 0 is inadmissible).
Proof. Suppose not. That is, suppose ȧ(t) > 0 and Ḟ (t) > 0 for some time t. Note that
Ḟ (t) > 0 implies that production is constrained at t. This situation cannot continue forever,
as explained in lemma 10. If production falls below the constraint, there will again be a
contradiction (a discontinuity in either a or F ) for the same reason given in lemma 10.
Lemma 13. The drilling and extraction rates cannot both be weakly increasing (ȧ ≥ 0 and
Ḟ ≥ 0 is inadmissible).
Proof. Here again, we only need to consider cases involving equalities. If Ḟ (t) = 0, then
production must be constrained, such that F (t) = K(t) and therefore K̇(t) = 0 as well.
This, combined with ȧ(t) ≥ 0, gives us the same situation as in lemma 11. Similarly, if
ȧ(t) = 0 and Ḟ (t) ≥ 0, then production again must be constrained, such that K̇(t) ≥ 0, and
we have the same situation as in lemma 11.62
The four preceding lemmas complete the proof of rule (3) in the theorem.
Lemma 14. Once capacity is strictly decreasing over time, it must continue to strictly
decrease.
Proof. Suppose by contradiction that K(t) transitions from being strictly decreasing to
weakly increasing. Because K̇(t) is continuous, any such transition must involve a moment
in which K̇ = 0. Let time t̂ denote this moment.
First, either production is constrained, in which case Ḟ (t̂) = 0, or production is unconstrained, in which case Ḟ (t̂) < 0. Thus, Ḟ (t) ≤ 0.
Second, we cannot have ȧ(t̂) ≥ 0, since this would contradict lemma 11. Thus, ȧ(t̂) < 0.
Third, we cannot have Ḟ (t̂) = 0, since this must lead to a contradiction. Since ȧ(t̂) < 0,
then K̇ would be strictly negative after time t̂ and strictly positive before time t̂, contradicting
the premise that K̇ transitions from strictly negative to positive at t̂. Thus, Ḟ (t) < 0 with
production unconstrained.
So we have narrowed the possibilities to Ḟ (t) < 0 at t̂ with ȧ(t̂) < 0. This, however, is
an immediate contradiction, since we must have ȧ > 0 if production is unconstrained.
Lemma 15. Once production is strictly decreasing over time, it must continue to strictly
decrease.
61

With infinite reserves, it is permissible to have both ȧ(t) = 0 and K̇(t) = 0,
state. However, if either inequality is strict, the dynamics will lead to a situation
and K̇(t) > 0, which cannot happen per lemma 10.
62
With infinite reserves, it is permissible to have both ȧ(t) = 0 and Ḟ (t) = 0,
state. However, if either inequality is strict, the dynamics will lead to a situation
and Ḟ (t) > 0, which cannot happen per lemma 12.

A-16

since this is the steady
in which both ȧ(t) > 0
since this is the steady
in which both ȧ(t) > 0

Proof. Suppose not, and let t̂ denote the time at which production transitions to weakly
increasing. First, production must be constrained at t̂ (since the price will be falling immediately afterward), so it must be that K̇(t̂) ≥ 0 (since K̇(t) is continuous). Thus, by lemma
14 above we cannot have K̇(t) < 0 prior to t̂. But then we also cannot have Ḟ (t) < 0 just
prior to t̂ without generating a discontinuity in F at t̂, contradicting lemma 5.
Lemma 16. γ(t) > 0.
Proof. From lemma 9 above, we know that K(t) approaches zero in the limit. Because
reserves are finite, it must also be that a(t) is not bounded away from zero in the limit. Thus,
(K(t))
> d(a(t)) will hold, with K(τ ) < K(t)
there must eventually be a time t at which XPλ+r
for all τ > t. Recall that θ(t) denotes the shadow value of capacity (which is in turn equal
to λ times the stock of remaining oil in the drilled wells). This value must be, at minimum,
the discounted revenue stream that would be generated by producing the capacity at the
constraint forever (per equation 15), since producing below the constraint is only optimal
when doing so increases discounted revenues and therefore the value of capacity. As K
goes to zero, the discounted revenue from a marginal unit of capacity at t must be at least
P (K(t))/(λ + r). Thus, for sufficiently large t, we must have θ(t)X > d(a(t)), which violates
equation (9) if γ(t) = 0.
Lemma 17. Drilling will always occur at the optimum, and optimality requires complete
exhaustion of reserves in the limit as t → ∞.
Proof. Suppose by contradiction that R is bounded away from zero in the limit. That is,
there exists some R̂ > 0 such that R(t) > R̂ for all t > 0. (Note that R(t) must be weakly
decreasing over time forever. Thus, it suffices to consider and rule out by contradiction the
case in which R(t) is bounded from below.) But since γ0 > 0, this violates the transversality
condition (14).
The preceding lemma completes the proof of rule (4) in the theorem.
Lemma 18. At any time that drilling ceases, production must be constrained for a measurable
period afterward.
Proof. Let t̂ denote the time that drilling stops. To see that production must be constrained
at this time, suppose by contradiction that it is not. In that case, we must have θ̇(t̂) = rθ(t̂)
˙ t̂)) =
(by equation 13), further implying by equation (9) and the continuity of θ̇(t) that d(a(
rd(a(t̂)). Note that d(a) is strictly monotonically increasing and d(0) > 0, implying that the
drilling rate must be rising at t̂. But this is a contradiction, since a(t̂) = 0 and the continuity
of a(t) implies that a(t) must be decreasing at t̂.
So production is constrained at t̂, which is equivalent to P (t̂) > λθ(t̂). Because P (t)
and θ(t) are continuous, it must therefore be the case that production is constrained for a
measurable time period after t̂.
Intuitively, it is sub-optimal to stop drilling and immediately produce below the constraint
because drilling is costly, and this combination of actions effectively wastes the capacity
generated by the final amount of drilling.
The preceding lemma completes the proof of rule (5) in the theorem.
A-17

Lemma 19. Starting from K0 = 0, drilling must initially be strictly decreasing over time.
Proof. We showed in lemmas 1 and 2 that drilling must begin immediately if K0 = 0 and
that capacity must therefore initially be strictly increasing. We also showed in lemma 11
that both drilling and capacity cannot simultaneously be weakly increasing; thus, drilling
must initially be strictly decreasing.
Lemma 20. Given demand P (F ), marginal drilling costs d(a), and initial reserves R0 , there
exists δ > 0 such that if initial capacity K0 < δ, then drilling must begin immediately and
initially be strictly decreasing over time.
Proof. Consider the path beginning from R(0) = R0 and K(0) = 0. Per lemma 19, the
drilling rate must initially be strictly positive and strictly decreasing over time. Consider
drilling until time tδ , at which point K(tδ ) = δ > 0, R(tδ ) = Rδ < R0 , and ȧ(tδ ) < 0 (the
continuity of ȧ(t) guarantees that such a time exists). If the initial conditions of the problem
were such that K(0) = δ and R(0) = Rδ , then the optimal path from t = 0 would simply
be the continuation of the original path beginning from R(0) = R0 and K(0) = 0, so that
we would have a(0) > 0 and ȧ(0) < 0. To complete the proof, we must show that we will
still have a(0) > 0 and ȧ(0) < 0 for the path beginning at K(0) = δ and R(0) = R0 , for δ
sufficiently small.
Note that U (F ) and D(a) are continuously differentiable in their arguments with U (F )
strictly concave and D(a) strictly convex. Meanwhile, the constraints all take the form of
weak inequalities and are continuously differentiable in their arguments. Thus, the value
function (equal to the present value Hamiltonian-Lagrangean evaluated at the optimal control) will be continuously differentiable in the state variables (K, R) in the interior of the
state space (see Benveniste and Scheinkman (1979) and Rincón-Zapatero and Santos (2012)).
Let θ̃(t) = e−rt θ(t) and γ̃(t) = e−rt γ(t) denote the present values of the two co-state
˙ =
variables. By the necessary conditions for an optimal control, we therefore have that θ̃(t)
˙
−∂H/∂K = −φ(t) and γ̃(t)
= −∂H/∂R = 0 are both continuous in the state variables.
˙
The continuity of θ̃ and γ̃˙ then imply the continuity of θ̃ and γ̃, which in turn imply the
continuity of θ and γ. Thus, θ, γ, and φ are all continuous in the state variables. Equation
(9), combined with the continuous differentiability and strict monotonicity of d(a), then
implies that a(K, R) is continuous in (K, R), as is ȧ(K, R) whenever a(K, R) > 0.
It is possible to choose a sufficiently small tδ , and therefore a sufficiently small δ, such
that Rδ can be arbitrarily close to R0 (since R(t) is continuous). The continuity of a(K, R)
and ȧ(K, R) then implies that the optimal path starting from initial conditions of K(0) = δ
and R(0) = R0 will have a(0) > 0 and ȧ(0) < 0.
Lemma 20 completes the proof of rule (6) in the theorem. With rules (1)-(6) proven, the
proof of the theorem itself is also now complete.

A-18

E

Proofs for rules (7)–(10) pertaining to the general
case (including sufficient conditions for a binding
flow constraint)

This appendix provides the formal statement and proof for theorem 2 discussed in the main
text:
Theorem 2. In addition0 to the assumptions of theorem 1, assume that the inverse elasticity
(F )
is weakly increasing in F . Then the following rules hold: (7) if
of demand η(F ) ≡ −F PP (F
)
at any time t̂ production is constrained, then production must be constrained at all subsequent
t > t̂; (8) given demand P (F ), marginal drilling costs d(a), and initial reserves R0 , there
exists δ > 0 such that if initial capacity K0 < δ, then production is constrained along the
entire optimal path (so production is always constrained trivially if K0 = 0); (9) once the
rate of drilling strictly declines it can never subsequently strictly increase, further implying
that once drilling stops it cannot restart; and (10) drilling will end in finite time if and only
if there exists an F > 0 such that λη(F ) < r.
The proof proceeds via the following series of lemmas.
Lemma 21. Suppose for some F ∗ > 0 that λη(F ) < r whenever F < F ∗ . Further suppose
that at some time t∗ , K(t∗ ) ≤ F ∗ (such times must exist since K(t) goes to zero in the limit).
Then production must be constrained at t∗ .
Proof. First note that if K̇(t∗ ) ≥ 0, then ȧ(t∗ ) < 0 (per lemma 11), such that production
must be constrained at t∗ for (9) to hold. So consider the case in which K̇(t∗ ) < 0. Suppose,
by contradiction, that production is unconstrained at t∗ . Then P (t) must rise at rate r, so
we have P 0 (F )Ḟ /P (F ) = r. Rearranging and substituting in the inverse demand elasticity,
we have Ḟ = −rF/η(F ) < −λF , where the inequality follows from the fact that r/η(F ) > λ.
Meanwhile, K̇ ≥ −λF (holding with equality in the absence of drilling at t∗ ). Thus, we have
F declining faster than K, so that production must be unconstrained forever (since F (t) is
continuous), Rdeclining at rate r/η(F ). Thus, total cumulative production from t∗ onward
∞
equals F (t∗ ) t∗ e−rt/η(F (t)) dt. This value is strictly less than the remaining stock of oil that
can be produced from the existing capacity at t∗ , which is given by K(t∗ )/λ. Thus, capacity
does not go to zero in the limit, violating lemma 9.
Lemma 22. Suppose that production is constrained at some time t̂. Then production must
also be constrained for all t > t̂.
Proof. We first consider the case in which K̇(t̂) < 0. Note that if demand is such that
λη(F ) < r for all F < K(t̂), then by lemma 21 above production must be constrained at t̂
and, because K must continue to strictly decrease, for all subsequent t. Thus, we need only
consider the sub-case in which there exists F < K(t̂) such that λη(F ) ≥ r.
Proceed by contradiction, and let t̃ > t̂ denote the time at which production becomes
unconstrained. At and immediately after t̃ we have that Ḟ (t) < K̇(t) (that is, for production
to fall below the constraint, the rate of production must decrease more quickly than capacity
decreases). Note that throughout the period in which production is unconstrained, we must
A-19

have K sufficiently large that λη(K) ≥ r (by lemma 21). Just before t̃, when production is
constrained, there are two possibilities: either Ṗ /P < r or Ṗ /P ≥ r.
First consider the possibility that Ṗ /P < r, which requires strictly positive drilling at t̃
because when production is constrained and a = 0, Ṗ /P = λη(K) ≥ r. Moreover, since we
have assumed that production is unconstrained, we must have ȧ(t̃) > 0. The rate of drilling
cannot strictly increase forever, and both a(t) and ȧ(t) are continuous while a > 0, so there
must be some future time at which production becomes constrained again.
Since we must therefore eventually have F = K, since neither K nor F may ever increase,
and since K must be sufficiently large that λη(K) ≥ r throughout the period in which
production is unconstrained, we must therefore have that F is sufficiently large that λη(F ) ≥
r throughout the period in which production is unconstrained (since K must eventually
decrease to meet any F that is reached).
During the period in which production is unconstrained, we have that Ḟ = −rF/η(F )
and K̇ = aX − λF . Then, since Ḟ (t̃) < K̇(t̃), and since, throughout the unconstrained
period, a(t) is strictly increasing, λ ≥ r/η(F ), and F is strictly decreasing, it must be
that Ḟ (t) < K̇(t) throughout the unconstrained period (K̇(t) − Ḟ (t) is actually increasing
throughout the period as F decreases). This result yields a contradiction, since in this case
production can never again become constrained without inducing a discontinuity in F (t).
Thus, we cannot have production become unconstrained immediately after a period in which
Ṗ /P < r.
Now consider the second possibility, in which Ṗ /P ≥ r just before t̃, and consider the
object P (t)−λθ(t). At t̃, since production is unconstrained, we must have P (t̃)−λθ(t̃) = 0 by
equation (7). In addition, we have θ̇(t̃) = rθ(t̃) and (from lemma 7) that θ̇(t) is continuous.
Further, for times t just before t̃, production is constrained, so P (t) − λθ(t) > 0.
The above facts generate a contradiction. To have P (t) − λθ(t) > 0 for t just prior to t̃,
P (t̃) − λθ(t̃) = 0, θ̇(t̃) = rθ(t̃), and θ̇(t) continuous, it must be the case that Ṗ (t)/P (t) < r.
However, for times just before t̃, we have assumed that P (t) must be rising at a rate weakly
greater than r. Thus, we have a contradiction, and we therefore cannot have production
become unconstrained immediately after a period in which Ṗ /P ≥ r.
We have now shown that, if production is constrained at t̂ and K̇(t̂) < 0, then production
cannot subsequently become unconstrained, regardless of whether Ṗ /P < r or Ṗ /P ≥ r at
and after t̂. Intuitively, the demand elasticity assumption in the theorem implies that the
incentive to produce below the constraint increases with K. Thus, if production is already
constrained at some time while capacity is decreasing, the incentive to produce below the
constraint will only diminish as K decreases further.
We now consider the case in which K̇(t̂) ≥ 0. This condition requires that a(t̂) > 0
and ȧ(t̂) < 0. Production can never be unconstrained so long as a(t) > 0 and ȧ(t) ≤ 0.
There are two ways this situation can end: either drilling may cease, or the rate of drilling
may start to strictly increase. If drilling ceases, then production must be constrained at the
time drilling ceases per lemma 18. At this time, we have K̇ < 0, so that production must
always subsequently be constrained per the results above. If, on the other hand, a(t) remains
strictly positive and ȧ(t) eventually becomes strictly positive, the continuity of ȧ(t) implies
the existence of a time t0 at which ȧ(t0 ) = 0. At this time, capacity must be constrained,
with K̇(t0 ) < 0 (per lemma 11), so that the results above apply, and production must always
subsequently be constrained.
A-20

The preceding lemma proves rule (7) in the theorem.
Lemma 23. Given demand P (F ), marginal drilling costs d(a), and initial reserves R0 , there
exists δ > 0 such that if initial capacity K0 < δ, then production is constrained along the
entire optimal path.
Proof. With K0 sufficiently small, we know from rule (6) that drilling will begin instantly
and must initially be strictly decreasing over time, implying that production must initially
be capacity-constrained. Rule (7) then implies that all subsequent production must be
constrained as well.
The preceding lemma proves rule (8) in the theorem.
Lemma 24. Over any interval in which a(t) > 0, once the rate of drilling strictly declines
it can never subsequently strictly increase.
Proof. We will again proceed by contradiction. We already showed in rule (3) that the
rate of drilling and the rate of extraction (along with capacity) cannot weakly increase
simultaneously. Thus, for ȧ(t) to transition from being strictly negative to strictly positive,
capacity and production must be strictly declining both at the transition itself and during any
measurable interval in which ȧ(t) ≥ 0. Since we also know that a(t) cannot monotonically
increase in the limit as t → ∞, we must additionally have a subsequent transition in which
ȧ(t) changes from strictly positive to negative.
Let t1 denote the time of the first transition, when ȧ(t) < 0 before t1 and ȧ(t) ≥ 0 after
t1 . Let t2 > t1 denote the time of the second transition, when ȧ(t) > 0 before t2 and ȧ(t) ≤ 0
after t2 . At t1 , production must be constrained, so by rule (7) it must be constrained through
t2 and beyond. We therefore also have that Ḟ (t) and Ṗ (t) are continuous, as is ä(t) (via
differentiating equation (28)).
Since ȧ(t1 ) = ȧ(t2 ) = 0, equation (28) implies that the following two equations must
hold:
(r + λ)d(a(t1 )) λγ0 rt1
+
e = P (t1 )
X
X
(r + λ)d(a(t2 )) λγ0 rt2
+
e = P (t2 ),
X
X

(29)
(30)

where a(t2 ) > a(t1 ) and P (t2 ) > P (t1 ).
Moreover, since ȧ(t) < 0 before t1 and ȧ(t) ≥ 0 after t1 , it must be that ä(t1 ) ≥ 0. So if
we differentiate equation (28) at t1 and divide through by P (t1 ), we must have that:
rλγ0 ert1
Ṗ (t1 )
≥
.
XP (t1 )
P (t1 )

(31)

On the other hand, by similar arguments, at t2 we must have:
rλγ0 ert2
Ṗ (t2 )
≤
.
XP (t2 )
P (t2 )

A-21

(32)

Given our functional form assumption for P (F ), it must be the case that Ṗ (t2 )/P (t2 ) ≤
Ṗ (t1 )/P (t1 ), implying that ert1 /P (t1 ) ≥ ert2 /P (t2 ). Why? Note that, when production
is constrained and no drilling is taking place, the rate at which P (t) increases is given by
Ṗ (t)/P (t) = λη(K(t)). Since K(t2 ) < K(t1 ) and a(t2 ) > a(t1 ), it must be that Ṗ (t2 )/P (t2 ) ≤
Ṗ (t1 )/P (t1 ), since we have assumed that η(F ) is weakly increasing.
Thus, for equations (31) and (32) to hold, we must have that price rises, on average,
weakly faster than r between t1 and t2 . However, this means that equations (29) and (30)
cannot both hold, since d(a(t)) cannot rise faster than r and must be rising strictly slower
than r in the neighborhoods of t1 and t2 (implying that d(a(t)) must be rising strictly slower
than r, on average, between t1 and t2 ). Thus, we have a contradiction.
Intuitively, it would only make sense for the planner to increase the rate of drilling, after
it had been decreasing, if a substantial increase in the rate of price increase is expected in
the near future. The assumption that the inverse demand elasticity decreases as production
decreases rules this possibility out.
Lemma 25. Once drilling stops, it cannot restart. Thus, in general, once the rate of drilling
strictly declines it can never subsequently strictly increase.
Proof. This proof uses similar arguments as in lemma 24. We begin by showing that once
drilling stops, it cannot restart. Proceed by contradiction. Let t̂ denote the time that drilling
stops, and let t̃ denote the time that drilling restarts.
At t̂ we must have ȧ(t̂) ≤ 0, and at t̃ we must have that ȧ(t̃) ≥ 0. Thus, by equation
(28) the following two equations must hold:
(r + λ)d(0) λγ0 rt̂
+
e ≤ P (t̂)
X
X
(r + λ)d(0) λγ0 rt̃
+
e ≥ P (t̃)
X
X

(33)
(34)

By the continuity of P (t), there must exist a t1 ∈ (t̂, t̃) such that:
(r + λ)d(0) λγ0 rt1
+
e = P (t1 ).
X
X

(35)

Since a(t) cannot be monotonically increasing in the limit as t → ∞, there must exist
some time t2 after t̃ at which ȧ(t) changes from strictly positive to negative. At t2 , we must
have ȧ(t2 ) = 0 and therefore by equation 28 that
(r + λ)d(a(t2 )) λγ0 rt2
+
e = P (t2 ).
X
X

(36)

Production must be constrained at both t1 and t2 . Thus, P (t) is continuously differentiable at both t1 and t2 (since K(t) and P (F ) are continuously differentiable), and following

A-22

the logic of lemma 24 we have:
rλγ0 ert1
Ṗ (t1 )
≥
XP (t1 )
P (t1 )
rλγ0 ert2
Ṗ (t2 )
≤
.
XP (t2 )
P (t2 )

(37)
(38)

Because production is constrained at both t1 and t2 and because K(t1 ) > K(t2 ), we have
that Ṗ (t2 )/P (t2 ) ≤ Ṗ (t1 )/P (t1 ), which implies that ert2 /P (t2 ) ≤ ert1 /P (t1 ). Then, per the
arguments given in lemma 24, equations (35), (36), (37), and (38) cannot simultaneously
hold, and we have a contradiction. Thus, once drilling stops, it cannot subsequently restart.
The preceding lemma proves rule (9) in the theorem.
Lemma 26. Suppose that, for some F ∗ > 0, if F < F ∗ then λη(F ) < r. (Note that such an
F ∗ must exist for any inverse demand function that satisfies the conditions of the theorem
and has P (0) finite. However, the converse is not true; that is, the existence of F ∗ does not
imply that P (0) is finite.) Then drilling must stop in finite time.
Proof. Suppose, by contradiction, that drilling does not stop in finite time. We know that
both a(t) and K(t) must approach zero in the limit, so there must be a point at which K(t) <
F ∗ and both a(t) and K(t) are decreasing forever (by rule 9 and lemma 14 respectively).
Because a(t) is decreasing, production must be constrained forever.
Note that, when production is constrained and no drilling is taking place, the rate at
which P (t) increases is given by Ṗ (t)/P (t) = λη(t). Thus, when K < F ∗ , it must be
the case that P (t) is rising strictly more slowly than r (with or without drilling activity).
Necessary conditions (7) and (13) then jointly imply that θ(t) must also be rising strictly
more slowly than r. Then, because γ(t) rises at r, we must have that for t sufficiently large,
γ(t) > θ(t)X. This is a contradiction, however, since we must have γ(t) < θ(t)X for drilling
to occur, per equation (9).
Intuitively, if demand is such that price eventually must rise more slowly than the rate
of interest while production declines, then all of the wells must be drilled in finite time.
Lemma 27. Suppose that λη(F ) ≥ r for all F > 0. (Note that this condition implies that
P (0) is infinite, though again the converse is not true.) Then drilling will not stop in finite
time.
Proof. Suppose, by contradiction, that drilling stops in finite time. Denote the time drilling
stops by t̂. First, consider the case in which the inequality is strict; that is, λη(F ) > r for
all F > 0. At t̂, it cannot be optimal to produce at the constraint. Why? Doing so causes
P (t) to rise at the rate λη(t) > r. Moreover, at any future time, price must rise at a rate
weakly greater than r (with a strict inequality any time production is constrained). Thus,
it is profitable to deviate at t̂ by producing less at t̂ and producing more later. However,
producing below the constraint immediately after drilling contradicts rule (5), so we have a
contradiction.
A-23

Now consider the case in which there exists F ∗ > 0 such that λη(F ) = r for all F < F ∗ .
If drilling ceases at some capacity level K(t̂) > F ∗ , then it will be optimal immediately to
produce below the constraint, and we again have the contradiction above. What if drilling
ceases at a capacity level K(t̂) ≤ F ∗ ? In this case, producing at the constraint causes P (t)
to rise at exactly r. Rule (5) tells us that production must be at the constraint at t̂ and
for a measurable period afterward. Note that production must in fact always be at the
constraint in this case: the continuity of F (t) implies that if production were to fall below
the constraint, P (t) would have to at least briefly rise faster than r, which cannot happen
when production is unconstrained.
Thus, from t̂ onward, it must be that production is at the constraint and that P (t) rises at
r forever. For equations (7) and (13) both to hold forever, it must also be the case that θ(t)
rises at r forever, and in particular that it rises at r at t̂. But this leads to a contradiction:
if both θ(t) and γ(t) are rising at r at t̂, then by equation (9) we have that d(a(t)) must also
be rising at r at t̂. However, the fact that a(t̂) = 0 and the continuity of a(t) imply that
a(t) must be decreasing at t̂. Thus, if λη(F ) ≥ r for all F > 0, then drilling will not stop in
finite time.
The two preceding lemmas together prove rule (10). With rules (7)-(10) proven, the proof
of the theorem itself is also now complete.

A-24

F

Extending the drilling model to allow for costly aboveground storage (including the proof that production
is always constrained in such a model)

We have shown that our dynamics imply that it is possible, on the equilibrium path, for price
temporarily to rise at a rate faster than the rate of interest while production is constrained.
However, this result has not taken into account the possibility that oil may be stored aboveground. This appendix therefore asks how the availability of costly above-ground storage
would affect our conclusions.63
For tractability, we assume that storage costs take the form of an iceberg storage cost—
that is, a continuous, proportional erosion at rate m of the quantity (and therefore the value)
of stored oil. In this case, a stockpiler receiving capital gains but no convenience yield would
be indifferent between buying or selling oil if the oil price is expected to rise at the constant
percentage rate of m + r.
Below, we derive and briefly interpret the necessary conditions of this model. We then
argue that allowing for costly storage does not affect our main conclusions from theorem 2:
once production is capacity constrained, it must always subsequently be constrained, and
if initial capacity is sufficiently low, production is always constrained along the equilibrium
path. Intuitively, storage offers a substitute means by which consumption can be deferred to
the future, so introducing storage into the model will not increase the incentive to produce
below the available capacity constraint.
Note that this model still accommodates the possibility that the oil price can rise more
quickly than r on the equilibrium path while production is constrained. In fact, during
any measurable interval over which storage is occurring (and therefore the oil price is rising
at the rate m + r), production must be constrained. Why? As we have seen, whenever
production is unconstrained, the oil price must be rising at r, not r + m. Hence, even if
aboveground storage is possible, the equilibrium may still involve intervals over which price
rises in percentage terms at rate r + m, and production must be at capacity throughout each
of these intervals. Such a steep rise in expected prices actually occurred in winter 1998–1999
(see figure 1) and was in fact accompanied by a surge in above-ground storage (see figure 13
in appendix A).
However, as figure 13 indicates, aboveground storage also occurred when expected capital
gains were significantly smaller. This suggests that aboveground storage also provides a
convenience yield that makes carrying inventory attractive to at least some stockpilers even
when capital gains do not cover their interest and storage costs.64 If we amend our account
to include heterogeneous stockpilers, each with a convenience yield that is strictly concave
in the amount stored, then aboveground storage would still put a ceiling on capital gains
63

It is clear that, if storage were costless and limitless, then the oil price could never be expected to rise
more quickly than r. Real-world logistical costs and storage constraints argue against this hypothetical,
as does the fact that we observe instances in futures market data when the price is expected to rise more
quickly than r.
64
A convenience yield naturally arises in our setting from the fact that many leases are not connected to
the pipeline network but instead sell their produced oil via tanker truck. Firms must store produced oil in
on-site storage tanks between truck pick-ups.

A-25

of r + m and would still be accompanied by production at the constraint whenever the
percentage change in the oil price differs from r; however, because of the convenience yields,
storage could occur even when holding inventory results in net capital losses.

F.1

Necessary conditions and their implications

We now formally present the Hamiltonian-Lagrangean corresponding to the social planner’s
problem with costly storage and derive and interpret the implied necessary conditions. With
storage, let the choice variable C(t) denote oil consumption generating instantaneous utility
flow of U (C(t)). Let S(t) ≥ 0 denote a new state variable representing the quantity of
oil stored at time t. The equation of motion for S with an iceberg storage cost of m is
then Ṡ(t) = F (t) − C(t) − mS(t), where F (t) is still the choice variable representing oil
production, as above. The other variables and constraints—the drilling rate and drilling
costs, production capacity and its equation of motion, and the stock of remaining wells and
its equation of motion—are all the same as above.
The current-value Hamiltonian-Lagrangean of this maximization problem is then given
by:
H = U (C(t)) − D(a(t)) + θ(t)[a(t)X − λF (t)] + γ(t)[−a(t)]
+ φ(t)[K(t) − F (t)] + µ(t)[F (t) − C(t) − mS(t)], (39)
where µ(t) is a new co-state variable on S(t).
Necessary conditions are given by the following (re-numbering some conditions that match
those from the original problem without storage):
C(t) ≥ 0, U 0 (C(t)) − µ(t) ≤ 0, c.s.
F (t) ≥ 0, µ(t) − λθ(t) − φ(t) ≤ 0, c.s.
F (t) ≤ K(t), φ(t) ≥ 0, c.s.
a(t) ≥ 0, θ(t)X − d(a(t)) − γ(t) ≤ 0, c.s.

(40)
(41)
(42)
(43)

Ṙ(t) = −a(t), R0 given
γ̇(t) = rγ(t)

(44)
(45)

K̇(t) = a(t)X − λF (t), K0 given

(46)

θ̇(t) = −φ(t) + rθ(t)

(47)

Ṡ(t) = F (t) − C(t) − mS(t), S0 = 0
µ̇(t) ≤ (r + m)µ(t), S(t) ≥ 0, c.s.
K(t)θ(t)e−rt → 0, R(t)γ(t)e−rt → 0, and S(t)µ(t)e−rt → 0 as t → ∞.

(48)
(49)
(50)

These necessary conditions differ in two main ways from those presented above. First,
we now have necessary conditions that characterize production and consumption incentives
separately. Condition (40) says that the price of oil will equal the shadow value on storage
capacity whenever consumption is strictly positive and will be strictly less than this value
when consumption is zero. Meanwhile, condition (41) is the same as above, but with the

A-26

price of oil replaced by the shadow value of storage µ(t). When consumption is strictly
positive (and it always will be, as we show below), then µ(t) can be eliminated to yield
the same condition characterizing production incentives that we had before. Second, the
necessary conditions now include (48), which is the new equation of motion for storage,
along with condition (49), which characterizes the evolution of its co-state variable. Since
consumption is always strictly positive, this latter condition says that price must rise at rate
r + m during any interval over which storage occurs. Thus, during any such interval, the
production constraint must bind.

F.2

Proof extending main theorems to the case of costly storage

We now prove that the assumptions of theorems 1 and 2 are sufficient to guarantee that
once production is constrained, all subsequent production must also be constrained and that
there exists a δ > 0 (which depends on parameters) such that for any K0 < δ, production is
constrained along the entire optimal path.
Formally, we present the following theorem:
Theorem 3. Maintain the assumptions of theorems 1 and 2. In addition, suppose that
above-ground storage technology is available, with an iceberg storage cost of m > 0 and an
initial storage quantity of S0 = 0. In this case, rules (1)-(2), (4)-(5), and (7)-(8) continue
to hold.
We prove the theorem by proceeding through nearly the same set of lemmas as were
used to prove theorems 1 and 2. Most of these lemmas will go through with only minor or
no changes. The proofs of lemmas 5 and 6 require more substantial modifications. Rules
(3) and (6) no longer hold with storage, and the statements of lemmas 10 through 15 and
lemmas 19 and 20 must therefore be modified.
We will also henceforth refer to U 0 (C(t)) as P (C(t)).
Lemma 1 goes through using identical arguments: in a system that starts with K0 =
S0 = 0, if drilling does not start immediately, then drilling will never occur, violating our
assumption that P (0)X/(r + λ) > d(0).
Lemma 2 is as stated and proven without any changes.
Lemma 3 goes through with only a minor modification. Once we have φ(τ ) = 0 and
θ(τ ) = 0 for all τ , it follows from equation (41) that µ(τ ) = 0 for all τ . It must then also
be the case, via equation (40), that P (C(t)) = 0 for all τ . As in the original lemma 3, this
cannot happen, since the amount of available production capacity is finite, and at some point
production and consumption must decline to a point at which P (C) > 0.
The statement of lemma 4 now becomes: it is never optimal to set C so high that
P (C) = 0. Proceed by contradiction. Whenever P (C(t)) = 0, we have C(t) > 0 such that
equation (40) must hold with equality and µ(t) = 0. Equation (49) then implies that µ is
thereafter always zero. Then, for equation (41) to hold without having θ = 0, it must be that
F = 0 forever. Then we have a contradiction. Why? Note that P (C(t)) can never rise above
zero, since this would violate condition (40) (since µ = 0 forever). But if P (C(t)) = 0 forever,
then C(t) is bounded away from zero forever, and whatever is in storage will eventually run
out. With nothing remaining in storage, and nothing more produced, C(t) must go to zero,
and therefore P (C(t)) must go above zero.
A-27

In lemma 5, the proofs that γ(t), γ̇(t), θ(t), a(t), R(t), and K(t) are continuous do not
change. It is furthermore immediately true that S(t) is continuous, since both C(t) and F (t)
are bounded. Here, we prove that C(t), and therefore P (t), are continuous. We then prove
that C(t) = 0 is never optimal when K(t) > 0, which immediately implies that µ(t) is always
equal to P (t) and is therefore also continuous. Finally, we prove that F (t) is continuous.
First, note that C(t) can never discontinuously “jump” down, since for equation (40) to
hold, µ(t) would have to jump up. However, such a jump is forbidden by equation (49). So
suppose by contradiction that C(t) jumps up at t. Per equation (40), µ must then jump
down at t. Such a jump is possible only if S(t) = 0. With S(t) = 0, the only way C(t)
can jump up is if F (t) jumps up as well, since we must have C(t) = F (t). Thus, F will be
strictly greater than zero at or immediately after time t, meaning that equation (41) must
hold with equality at this time. This is not possible, however, since µ jumps down at t, θ(t)
is continuous, and φ cannot be decreasing at t (since φ = 0 before the jump up in F ). Thus,
C(t) cannot discontinuously jump either up or down, and must therefore be continuous.
The continuity of C(t) and of P (C) immediately imply that P (t) is continuous.
Suppose by contradiction that C(t) = 0 while K(t) > 0. If we assume P (0) = ∞, then
equation (40) is violated, leading to an immediate contradiction. So assume P (0) is finite
instead. First suppose that C continues to equal zero forever after time t. Note that we
cannot have F = 0 forever, due to the transversality condition (50) for capacity, so it must
be that S > 0 forever. But then this violates the transversality condition for S, as µ must
be rising at the rate r + m, per equation (49).
So suppose that C increases away from zero at some time τ ≥ t. When this happens, P
must decrease, and µ must also decrease (since it must be equal to P when C > 0). Note µ
cannot be decreasing whenever S > 0, so it must be the case that there is no storage at time
τ , and therefore that C and F are equal at and immediately after τ . Note C(t) is continuous,
and K(t) > 0, so it must be that, with C and F equal, production is unconstrained at and
immediately after τ , with φ = 0. In this case, equation (41) cannot hold with equality, since
µ = P is falling and θ is rising at rate r. Thus, we have a contradiction, proving that we
cannot ever have C(t) = 0 when K(t) > 0, and therefore whenever t > 0.
Since C(t) > 0 for all t > 0 (and at t = 0 if K0 > 0), it immediately follows from equation
(40) and the continuity of P (t) that µ(t) is continuous.
To complete the parallel to lemma 5, we finally consider the continuity of F (t). Suppose
by contradiction that F jumps down at t. Because K(t) is continuous and strictly greater
than zero, we must have that production is unconstrained immediately after t, causing φ to
equal zero. Given the continuity of µ(t) and θ(t), for equation (41) to hold it must be that
production was also unconstrained (with φ = 0) before the jump. Moreover, because C(t) is
continuous and strictly greater than zero, we must have that F > C before t and/or F < C
after t. Either case requires S > 0 immediately after t. But then µ(t) will be increasing at
the rate r + m while θ(t) is increasing at only rate r, leading to a violation of condition (41).
What if F jumps up at t? Again, for (41) to hold, production must be unconstrained both
before and after the jump (the inequality cannot be strict, with φ > 0, after the jump since
we will have F > 0). The jump again implies that S(t) > 0, so that µ(t) will be increasing
at the rate r + m while θ(t) is increasing at only rate r, leading again to a violation of
condition (41). Thus, a jump in F (t) in either direction leads to a contradiction, implying
the continuity of F (t).
A-28

Lemma 6 holds, but with a modified proof. Suppose by contradiction that F (t) = 0
while K(t) > 0. Note that we cannot have F = 0 forever, since this would violate the
transversality condition (50) for capacity. So F must ultimately increase away from zero.
Let τ denote the time that F increases. With C(t) > 0, and both C(t) and F (t) continuous,
it must be the case that for a measurable period after τ , production is unconstrained while
S > 0. As was the case with the proof of the previous lemma, these circumstances will violate
condition (41), and we have a contradiction. In general, production cannot be unconstrained
while storage is strictly positive.
Lemma 7 goes through, with the addition that Ṡ(t) is continuous (since F (t), C(t), and
S(t) are all continuous).
Lemmas 8 and 9 are as stated and proven without any changes.
Lemmas 10 and 11 no longer hold. Instead, we show the following: It is possible to
have ȧ(t) ≥ 0 and K̇(t) ≥ 0 over some time interval [t1 , t2 ]. However, this is admissible
only if there exists an interval [ta , tb ] during which S(t) > 0 for all t ∈ [ta , tb ] with storage
beginning at time ta < t2 (i.e., the interval of storage starts strictly before the end of the
interval during which drilling and capacity are both weakly increasing) and if storage ends,
it ends at some time tb > t2 at which ȧ(tb ) < 0 and K̇(tb ) < 0. If on the other hand S(t) > 0
for all t > ta (i.e., tb = ∞), then there must be some time t3 such that ȧ(t) < 0 and K̇(t) < 0
for all t > t3 . In addition, whether or not storage ends in finite time, production must be
constrained over the entire interval [min(ta , t1 ), tb ].
First, we argue that production must be constrained throughout the entire interval [t1 , t2 ]
during which ȧ(t) ≥ 0 and K̇(t) ≥ 0. Suppose by contradiction that F (t̂) < K(t̂) for
some t̂ ∈ [t1 , t2 ]. Since production is unconstrained, we must have S(t̂) = 0, which implies F (t̂) = C(t̂). With unconstrained production, price rises at the interest rate, so that
Ċ(t̂) = Ḟ (t̂) < 0. Meanwhile, with a(t̂) > 0, marginal drilling costs d(a(t̂)) must also be
rising at the interest rate. Thus, everything in square brackets in equation (28) rises at the
interest rate, such that a(t) and K(t) continue to increase, while C(t) = F (t) continues to
decrease, and production remains unconstrained. Note there is no way escape this situation
without inducing a discontinuity in either a(t) or F (t): returning production to the capacity
constraint induces a discontinuity in F (t), while continuing on as is with production below
the constraint and a(t) rising induces a discontinuity in a(t) the moment the last well is
drilled. Since we have already shown that a(t) and F (t) must be continuous, we conclude
that production must be constrained throughout the interval.
We next argue that the interval with ȧ(t) ≥ 0 and K̇(t) ≥ 0 can only be escaped during
an interval of continuous storage (i.e., t2 ∈ [ta , tb )). Suppose first that no storage occurs at all
on the interval [t1 , t2 ]. Then the arguments in the original lemmas imply that the situation
with with ȧ(t) ≥ 0 and K̇(t) ≥ 0 cannot be escaped without generating a discontinuity in
either a(t) or F (t). So storage must occur on the interval. Now suppose that a period of
storage occurs on the interval, but that this period of storage begins and ends before the
interval concludes: ta < tb ≤ t2 . Since F (t) = K(t) during the period of storage, since F (t)
and K(t) are both continuous, and since S(tb ) = 0, we must have that C(tb ) = F (tb ) = K(tb ).
Moreover, note from above that production must be constrained during the entire interval
that ȧ(t) ≥ 0 and K̇(t) ≥ 0. Thus, we must have C(t) = F (t) = K(t) for all t ∈ [tb , t2 ],
during which ȧ(t) ≥ 0 and K̇(t) ≥ 0. But then the arguments in the original lemmas again
imply that this situation cannot be escaped without generating a discontinuity in either a(t)
A-29

or F (t), and we again generate a contradiction. Thus, to escape an interval on which ȧ(t) ≥ 0
and K̇(t) ≥ 0, we must have t2 ∈ [ta , tb ).
Assuming that an interval of rising drilling and capacity can in fact be escaped during
a period of storage (as we argue immediately below), it therefore immediately follows that
production must be constrained over the entire interval [min(ta , t1 ), tb ].
To complete the revised lemma, it remains to show that: (1) it is in fact possible to
escape the interval of ȧ(t) ≥ 0 and K̇(t) ≥ 0 in the presence of storage, (2) if storage ends,
it must end at some time tb > t2 at which ȧ(tb ) < 0 and K̇(tb ) < 0; and (3) if S(t) > 0 for
all t > ta , then there must be some time t3 such that ȧ(t) < 0 and K̇(t) < 0 for all t > t3 .
We proceed in order.
To see part (1), note that the time path cannot exit the condition in which ȧ ≥ 0 and
K̇ ≥ 0 by passing through a point at which ȧ(t) > 0 and K̇(t) = 0. At such a time, we have
K̈(t) = ȧ(t)X − λK̇(t) = ȧ(t)X > 0, which would immediately lead back to a situation with
ȧ ≥ 0 and K̇ ≥ 0. Escape must therefore involve a time t̃ at which ȧ(t̃) = 0 while K̇(t̃) ≥ 0.
This is not possible while S(t) = 0, for we have already shown that the production constraint
must bind, and with C(t) = F (t) = K(t), the rate of drilling and capacity would continue
to grow. But an escape is feasible while S(t) > 0. At t̃, we have ä(t) < 0 per equation
(28), such that ȧ < 0 immediately after t̃, and moreover we will have ȧ(t) < 0 for as long
as storage continues.65 Thus, ȧ(t) may transition from strictly positive to strictly negative
while K̇(t) ≥ 0.
To prove part (2), that the drilling rate and capacity must be strictly decreasing when
storage ends, recall that C(t) must be strictly decreasing during storage and that, to avoid a
discontinuity in C(t) or F (t), we must have that K(t) approaches C(tb ) < C(ta ) as storage
ends. Thus, it must be that K(t) is eventually strictly decreasing before storage ends.
Finally, since once ȧ(t) < 0, we must continue to have ȧ(t) < 0 so long as S(t) > 0, we will
also have that once K̇(t) < 0, we will continue to have K̇(t) < 0 so long as S(t) > 0.
To prove part (3), note that we cannot have ȧ(t) ≥ 0 forever, since when reserves are
exhausted such a path would cause a discontinuity in a(t). Thus, we must eventually have
ȧ(t) < 0, and we will then have ȧ(t) < 0 forever per the above arguments. Lemma 9 implies
that we must eventually have K̇(t) < 0 while ȧ(t) < 0, and once this situation occurs we
must have K̇(t) < 0 forever, completing the proof of the modified lemmas.
Lemmas 12 and 13 likewise no longer hold. Instead, the two modified lemmas from
above apply, but with capacity K(t) replaced by production F (t). To see this, first note that
Ḟ (t) ≥ 0 implies that production is constrained, for if production were unconstrained, then
there would be no storage, and C(t) = F (t) would be falling over time. With constrained
production, we are in the situation of the previous lemma, with ȧ(t) ≥ 0 and K̇(t) ≥ 0. As
shown above, production will be constrained throughout the entire interval [min(ta , t1 ), tb ].
Thus, the above results all carry over from K(t) to F (t).
Time differentiating equation (28) and assuming that S(t) > 0 yields: ä(t) = −[X ȧ(t)/d0 (a(t))2 ][(r +
λ)d(a(t))/X − P (F (t)) + λγ(t)/X] + [X/d0 (a(t))][(r + λ)d0 (a(t))ȧ(t)/X − (r + m)P (F (t)) + rλγ(t)/X]. Evaluating at ȧ(t̃) = 0 at time t̃ then yields: ä(t̃) = [X/d0 (a(t̃))][−(r + m)P (F (t̃)) + rλγ(t̃)/X]. This value
must be strictly negative because, to have ȧ(t̃) = 0 while a(t̃) > 0, equation (28) implies that we must have
P (F (t̃)) > λγ(t̃)/X. Moreover, as long as storage continues, we still have ȧ(t) < 0 for t > t̃, since the
(r + λ)d(a(t))/X term in equation (28) is positive and falling over time, while the negative P (F (t̃)) term
(growing at rate r + m) will continue to outweigh the positive γ(t̃) term (growing at rate r).
65

A-30

The statements of lemmas 14 and 15 are modified to allow for the possibility that
these variables may increase after strictly decreasing. However, at the moment t̂ in which
either K̇(t̂) = 0 or Ḟ (t̂) = 0, it must be that ȧ(t̂) ≥ 0, for if ȧ(t̂) < 0, then the logic of the
original lemma 14 (starting at “Third, we cannot have ...”) implies a contradiction (note if
ȧ(t̂) < 0 that production must be constrained). Then, per the preceding modified lemmas, a
period of storage would eventually ensue, with production constrained starting no later than
the moment t̂ at which capacity or production reverse course and persisting at least through
the end of the storage period. Should storage end, it would end with K̇(t) < 0 and ȧ(t) < 0.
Alternatively, should storage last indefinitely, then eventually ȧ(t) < 0 and K̇(t) < 0 for all
time, per the modified lemmas.
Lemma 16 goes through with a minor modification: the value of θ(t) must be, at minimum, the discounted revenue stream that would be generated by producing and consuming
from the capacity at the constraint forever.
Lemma 17 is as stated and proven without any changes.
Lemma 18 is as stated and proven without any changes.
The statements of Lemmas 19 and 20 are modified to allow for the possibility that
drilling may initially be increasing, but that in this case production must be constrained
immediately and throughout an interval that eventually must include a period of storage
and that subsequently must conclude with drilling and capacity strictly decreasing, per the
arguments in the modified lemmas above. In addition, we require the slight modification
that the choice variables and co-state variables are continuous with respect to S in addition
to K and R. Finally, it is important to note that, with storage, these lemmas rely on the
assumption that S0 = 0.
Lemma 21 goes through, with two minor modifications. First, note in the first sentence
of the proof that if K̇(t∗ ) ≥ 0, it is now possible to have ȧ(t∗ ) ≥ 0. However, production must
then be constrained at t∗ , per the arguments in the modified lemmas above. Second, for the
remainder of the proof, note that there cannot be any storage in the proposed contradiction.
Lemma 22 also requires minor modification. The same three cases must be considered:
(1) K̇(t̂) < 0 and λη(F ) < r for all F < K(t̂), (2) K̇(t̂) < 0 and λη(F ) ≥ r for some
F < K(t̂), and (3) K̇(t̂) ≥ 0.
Case (1) is considered in the first paragraph of the proof. Note that if K were to subsequently increase, then we must have, per the modified lemmas above, that production is
constrained at all times t for which K̇(t) ≥ 0. Moreover, this constrained production would
persist through an interval of storage, during which we must eventually have ȧ(t) < 0 and
K̇(t) < 0. If the period of storage were to continue indefinitely, then we must have binding
production forever. If the period of storage were to end with capacity below the critical
threshold of lemma 21, then we would return to the conditions that define case (1). If the
period of storage were to end with capacity above the critical threshold of lemma 21, then
we move to case (2) below.
Case (2) is considered in paragraphs two (that begins “Proceed by contradiction”) through
seven (that begins “The above facts generate a contradiction”). Note that there cannot be
any storage in the proposed contradiction. Thus, production below the constraint is never
optimal in this case.
Case (3) is considered in paragraph eight (that begins “We now consider the case in which
K̇ ≥ 0”). With storage, it is possible that ȧ(t) becomes positive while K̇(t) ≥ 0. However,
A-31

per the modified lemmas above, this eventually leads to a scenario in which K̇(t) < 0, with
production constrained throughout. Thus, in the end we are back to either case (1) or case
(2), which together imply binding production forever.
The proof of lemma 23 requires minor modification. With K0 sufficiently small, drilling
must begin instantly but no longer need be initially strictly decreasing over time. However, the revised lemmas 19 and 20 imply that production must nonetheless be constrained
immediately. Rule (7) then implies that all subsequent production must be constrained as
well.
This completes the extension of rules (1)-(2), (4)-(5), and (7)-(8) to the case of costly
storage.

A-32

G

Details for the computational model

Section 4.2 introduces computationally solved drilling, extraction, and price paths for a specific case of the model in equilibrium. This appendix discusses the details of the computation
procedure.
We obtain an approximate computational solution to the model by optimizing the social
planner’s welfare function using value function iteration. The model has two state variables,
R and K. Because the demand and drilling cost functions we specify satisfy the sufficient
conditions of theorems 1 and 2, we have that F = K so that there is only one choice variable,
a.
A fairly dense state space is required to yield smooth-looking simulations of drilling,
extraction, and prices. The state space for R consists of 600 steps, while that for F consists
of 300 steps (where the maximum value for F is given by X ∗ Rmax /4). The action space
for a consists of 600 steps (where the maximum value for a is given by Rmax /40). Because
numerical precision is particularly important when a, R, and F are small, we compress the
discrete actions and states at the lower end of their support by making the step lengths equal
in the square root of each state variable. For both solving and simulating the model, we use
a time step of three months.
In the value iteration loop, for each iteration we calculate for each discrete state s the
optimal discrete action a. Because each possible action is very unlikely to cause a discrete
state to be hit exactly in the next period, we obtain the value for next period’s state via
linear interpolation. For value function convergence, we use a tolerance of 10−7 (with the
value function measured in units of $million).
The solution to the model yields a policy function for the rate of drilling at all possible discrete states. To conduct the forward simulation, we linearly interpolate this policy
function whenever the simulation requires the optimal drilling rate for a state that does not
exactly match one of the discrete states.

A-33

