                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    DECRIMINALIZING INDOOR PROSTITUTION:
             IMPLICATIONS FOR SEXUAL VIOLENCE AND PUBLIC HEALTH

                                           Scott Cunningham
                                             Manisha Shah

                                         Working Paper 20281
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w20281


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2014




We would like to thank Alberto Abadie, Lynn Arditi, Sandra Black, Jen Hainmueller, Mark Hoekstra,
Mireille Jacobsen, Rob Jensen, Michael Kiselica, Trevon Logan, Paco Martorell, Roland Merchant,
Justin McCrary, Charles North, Gerald Oettinger, Emily Owens, and Van Pham for helpful comments.
Seminar participants at the NBER Summer Institute, IZA Economics of Risky Behaviors conference,
University of Chicago Crime Lab Conference, Texas STATA Microeconomics conference, SoCCAM,
and RAND also provided valuable feedback. For questions or comments please contact Scott Cunningham
at Scott_ Cunningham@baylor.edu and Manisha Shah at ManishaShah@ucla.edu. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Scott Cunningham and Manisha Shah. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Decriminalizing Indoor Prostitution: Implications for Sexual Violence and Public Health
Scott Cunningham and Manisha Shah
NBER Working Paper No. 20281
July 2014
JEL No. I18,J16,K42

                                            ABSTRACT

Most governments in the world including the United States prohibit prostitution. Given these types
of laws rarely change and are fairly uniform across regions, our knowledge about the impact of
decriminalizing sex work is largely conjectural. We exploit the fact that a Rhode Island District Court
judge unexpectedly decriminalized indoor prostitution in 2003 to provide the first causal estimates
of the impact of decriminalization on the composition of the sex market, rape offenses, and sexually
transmitted infection outcomes. Not surprisingly, we find that decriminalization increased the size
of the indoor market. However, we also find that decriminalization caused both forcible rape offenses
and gonorrhea incidence to decline for the overall population. Our synthetic control model finds 824
fewer reported rape offenses (31 percent decrease) and 1,035 fewer cases of female gonorrhea (39
percent decrease) from 2004 to 2009.


Scott Cunningham
Baylor University
Dept of Economics
One Bear Place #98003
Waco, Texas 76798-8003
(254) 710-4753
scott_cunningham@baylor.edu

Manisha Shah
Department of Public Policy
University of California, Los Angeles
Luskin School of Public Affairs
3250 Public Affairs Building
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1656
and NBER
manishashah@ucla.edu
1   Introduction

In the last 15 years, the American prostitution market appears to have shifted from a
primarily outdoor (street-based) to indoor market (massage parlors, escort agencies, and
much of the online market) (Cunningham and Kendall, 2011). The indoor market consti-
tutes up to 85% of all sex work activity in the United States (US) (Urban Justice Center,
2005). Though prohibited, the world’s oldest profession thrives and grows indoors. The
prostitution trade is estimated to generate over $14 billion a year in the US (Havoscope,
2013). A 2004 poll reports that 30 percent of single men over the age of 30 have paid for
sex in the US (Langer, Arnedt and Sussman, 2004).
    Most governments in the world including the United States prohibit prostitution.
This is likely due to moral concerns though disease transmission and victimization risks
associated with sex markets are salient policy concerns (Posner and Silbaugh, 1996). For
example, the 1992 National Health and Social Life Survey (NHSLS) shows that 22.9% of
female prostitutes report they have ever had gonorrhea relative to 4.7% of non-prostitute
females. Given the average prostitute sees 200-300 clients per year, and men have a
20% risk of getting the infection from a single act of vaginal intercourse with an infected
woman while women have a 60-80% risk of getting the infection from a single act of
vaginal intercourse with an infected man (National Institutes of Health, 2001); the spread
of disease is a significant public health concern. Sex market related violence is also
common. One study finds that 68% of women engaged in street-level prostitution have
been raped by clients and another reports that one third of all serial murder victims are
prostitutes (Farley and Barkan, 1998a; Brewer et al., 2006).
    The aim of this paper is to provide the first quasi-experimental estimates of the causal
effect of decriminalizing indoor prostitution on the composition of the sex market (size,
supply, and price), population sexually transmitted infection (STI) outcomes, and forcible
female rape offenses by using an unanticipated legal interpretation of a longstanding state
statute. We focus on rape and gonorrhea due to the high association each has with pros-
titution (Farley and Kelly, 2000; Ross et al., 2012). We estimate the causal impact of
decriminalization by exploiting the fact that a Rhode Island (RI) District Court judge


                                             2
effectively decriminalized indoor prostitution in 2003 (Arditi, 2009). This decision was
unexpected and caused a significant and sustained de facto decriminalization of indoor
prostitution. Neither the event nor its consequences have been widely understood or stud-
ied by researchers. Indoor prostitution was ultimately re-criminalized in 2009, but from
2003 to 2009, Rhode Island was the only state in the US with unbridled decriminalized
indoor prostitution and prohibited street prostitution with the decision being made in
such a significant and unanticipated way.
   We first show that this judicial decision which decriminalized the indoor sex market
had bite. Decriminalization decreased prostitute arrests, increased indoor prostitution
advertising, and expanded the size of the indoor prostitution market itself. We then es-
timate the causal effect of decriminalization on per capita rape offenses and gonorrhea
incidence using differences-in-differences (DD) and synthetic control models and find ro-
bust evidence across all models that decriminalization caused rape offenses and gonorrhea
incidence to decrease. Our synthetic control model finds 824 fewer reported rape offenses
and 1,035 fewer cases of female gonorrhea from 2004 to 2009 as a result of decriminaliza-
tion.
   Our knowledge of whether laws and regulation can reduce the potential costs asso-
ciated with prostitution is poorly understood. Some social scientists have proposed a
system which involves decriminalization of indoor sex work (as opposed to uniform crimi-
nalization), but few governments have been willing to experiment with the policy (Weitzer,
2011). It has been argued that indoor prostitution typically involves less exploitation, less
risk of violence, more control over working conditions, more job satisfaction, and higher
self-esteem (Weitzer, 2005). Street prostitution has higher rates of gonorrhea (Willcox,
1962; Wren, 1967; Dunlop, Lamb and King, 1971; Potterat, Rothenberg and Bross, 1979),
rape and sexual assault (Farley and Barkan, 1998b; Church et al., 2001a). However, none
of these studies provide causal estimates, and most are plagued by statistical problems
due to reliance on small, non-representative samples based on convenience sampling. In
addition, despite the greater prevalence of indoor sex work, the majority of research has
focused on street work (Lever et al. 2005). Given these types of laws rarely change and are
fairly uniform across regions, our knowledge about the impact of decriminalizing indoor

                                             3
sex work is largely conjectural.
        Our contribution to this literature is twofold. First, as far as we know, we are the
first social scientists to evaluate the decriminalization of prostitution using a natural
experiment. This allows us to provide the first causal estimates on the impacts of decrim-
inalization. It is important to note that the outcomes of interest are not only prostitution
related—we are using population STI outcomes and rape offenses. This allows us to say
something about the impacts of decriminalization as they relate to the population at
large, not just sex workers. Secondly, police agencies, lawmakers, and prosecutors all
over the US have responded to the growth on the indoor sex market by reallocating large
amounts of resources toward arresting indoor sex workers. This reallocation has been
considerably costly for local police since the indoor market is more diffuse and hidden.1
This research can influence change in policies related to police effort of enforcement of
laws against prostitution, particularly related to indoor sex work. Decriminalization of in-
door prostitution has experienced the most political traction as an alternative to uniform
criminalization. Some regions where decriminalization policies have been debated and/or
implemented besides the US include various Northern European countries, various Latin
American countries, as well as Australia, Canada, New Zealand, Thailand, and South
Africa (Platt, 2001; Kohm and Selwood, 2004; Jordan, 2005).


2       Conceptual Framework

In this section we provide some of the theoretical arguments for the expected impact of
decriminalizing indoor prosecution. Decriminalization should expand the size of the indoor
sex market by reducing the costs of entry both for sex workers and firms (i.e massage
parlors, brothels, etc.). Once the activity is decriminalized, sex workers are less likely to be
arrested, harassed by police, etc. and firms can choose to invest since they now have secure
property rights. As the indoor sex market increases, we also expect the stigma-related
    1
    In a 2009 suit, Illinois Cook County Sheriff, Tom Dart, sued Craigslist for its role in “facilitating
prostitution” and requested $100,000 in compensation for police man-hours the county had incurred to
pay police to investigate prostitution advertisements on the website. His suit claimed that “between
January and November 2008 his department devoted 3,120 man-hours and approximately $105,081 to
make 156 arrests” (Rigg, 2010).



                                                   4
costs of entry to decrease (Guista, Tommaso and Strom, 2009). Therefore, we predict an
unambiguous increase in the size of the indoor sex market post-decriminalization, and if
indoor and outdoor sex workers are imperfect substitutes,2 a net increase in the number
of women employed overall in the sex market.


2.1      Sexual Violence

Decriminalization will increase violence if violence is an increasing function of the number
of women employed in the sex market, since we expect decriminalization to increase
the size of the market. Some argue that prostitution comes with extremely high rates
of physical and sexual violence, and increasing the size of the market, even the indoor
market, will cause violence against women to increase (Farley, 2005).
       However, most of the evidence lends itself to hypotheses suggesting decreases in vio-
lence. For example, decriminalization increases the return on capital by providing well-
defined property rights to owners. Firms can use additional revenue to invest in locks,
security cameras and security personnel to reduce the opportunity of premeditated client
violence (Brents and Hausbeck, 2005). Decriminalization may also reduce violence by
increasing sex worker’s willingness to cooperate with police and reducing opportunities
for police corruption. Prostitutes commonly report a reluctance to contact the police
when they are the victims of theft or violence. Church et al. (2001a) find that only 34%
of prostitutes who were victims of violence by clients report it to the police. Levitt and
Venkatesh (2007) find that a high prevalence of police officers demand sex from prosti-
tutes as part of an implicit exchange to avoid arrest. If decriminalization increases the
likelihood of victims reporting crimes to the police, then it lowers the expected return to
a potentially violent client in addition to the aforementioned deterrent effects of security
   2
     Unfortunately we do not have data on the street sex market so we cannot test whether decriminal-
ization of indoor sex market affects the street market. However, empirical evidence suggests the street
market has declined substantially since the early 1990s both in Rhode Island and the US while the in-
ternet/indoor market has grown (Cunningham and Kendall, 2011). There is also evidence suggesting
that the labor market for street and indoor workers is quite separate. Therefore, it is unlikely that street
workers are transitioning into the indoor market since street and indoor workers are not substitutes. In
terms of client demand, there is some evidence that street and indoor prostitution may be substitutes for
clients on lower segments of the demand curve (i.e. men who do not wish to pay too much) (Holt and
Blevins, 2009).



                                                     5
(Ehrlich, 1973).3 It also implies that police can extract less rents from these women.
       So far we have only considered hypotheses where sex workers might benefit from
decriminalization. However, the next few hypotheses suggest potential benefits for the
population at large. For example, decriminalization of indoor prostitution could allow
police resources to be reallocated away from indoor arrests toward other crimes. The
freeing up of police personnel and equipment to other areas could ultimately cause other
crime rates to decrease (Draca, Machin and Witt, 2011). A final mechanism by which
decriminalization could reduce male violence is if prostitution is a substitute for violence
against women (Posner, 1992). This theoretical possibility dates as far back as Catholic
theologian and moral philosopher, Thomas Aquinas (Dever, 1996). The proposed hypoth-
esis is that men on the margin of raping vs. seeing a prostitute may substitute from rape
to prostitution since it becomes cheaper and more easily available post-decriminalization.


2.2      Public Health

In terms of public health outcomes, theory also predicts that decriminalization has an
ambiguous effect on sexually transmitted infections. Assuming a net increase in the
number of indoor sex transactions, decriminalization could increase the scale and growth
rate of a gonorrhea epidemic. However if decriminalization shifts transactions indoors to
lower STI risk sex workers and/or draws in lower risk sex workers, then decriminalization
may reduce an epidemic.
       Kremer and Morcom (1998) provide conditions whereby increasing the number of sex-
ually active individuals in a sexual network would paradoxically cause HIV prevalence to
decline. Negative effects on STI epidemics could occur if new entrants into the sex work
network are lower risk thus diluting the propagation mechanisms fueling the epidemic.
It may also cause street transactions to decrease by causing some clients of street pros-
   3
      Philip Markoff, the so-called “Craigslist Killer”, was charged with the armed robbery and murder
of an alleged prostitute named Julissa Brisman whom he met via an advertisement in the adult services
section of the Boston Craigslist website. Markoff’s next victim, Corinne Stout, managed to avoid the
same fate by screaming for help and alerting the man she used for security located in the next room of the
attack in time. Markoff fled, and Stout contacted the police who caught Markoff within days. This attack
occurred at a Holiday Inn Express in Warwick, Rhode Island in April 2009 when indoor prostitution was
still decriminalized. While anecdotal, it supports the point that legalized sex work removes some of sex
worker’s unwillingness to cooperate with police.


                                                    6
titutes to shift indoors, thereby decreasing the size of the outdoor market which tends
to be riskier. Gertler and Shah (2011) find that law enforcement efforts in Ecuador that
shift prostitution transactions indoors and away from streets lower STI rates. Similarly,
Jeal and Salisbury (2007) find that massage parlor sex workers in the UK use condoms
more consistently, receive STI screens more recently, and report fewer weekly episodes of
intercourse with fewer men than their street-based counterparts. Seib et al. (2009) and
Seib, Fischer and Najman (2009) find higher gonorrhea incidence and more requests for
sex without condoms among the illegal street workers than the licensed indoor sex workers
in Queensland, Australia.
        Given decriminalization of indoor prostitution has the potential to exacerbate or ame-
liorate sexual violence and public health outcomes, we will investigate these issues empir-
ically.


3       Rhode Island’s Decriminalization History

The great irony of Rhode Island’s decriminalization of indoor prostitution is that it was
unintentional. A 2003 District Court judge’s decision caused the de facto decriminaliza-
tion of indoor sex work after the court’s discovery that a May 1980 amendment to §11-34
of the General Laws of Rhode Island had created an inadvertent legal loophole decrim-
inalizing indoor sex work (COYOTE et al. v. Dennis J. Roberts, II et al., 1980, 1981;
State v. Robert J. DeMagistris, 1998).4
        De facto legalization in 2003 dates back to two important events. The first event is
COYOTE’s lawsuit against Rhode Island in 1976 (Arditi, 2009; COYOTE et al. v. Den-
nis J. Roberts, II et al., 1980, 1981). COYOTE (or Call Off Your Old Tired Ethics) is
a national organization seeking the legal reform of prostitution laws and other forms of
sexual behavior. A local chapter of COYOTE sued the Attorney General of Rhode Island
and the Chief of Police of the City of Providence in their official capacities arguing that
Rhode Island General Laws §11-34-5 – the statute which prohibited prostitution and the
    4
    Much of the following history comes from personal interviews with the Providence police department,
executives of the Providence Phoenix, journalists, and the defense attorney who represented the defendants
in the 2003 case, Michael Kiselica.



                                                    7
commission of other “lewd and indecent acts” (COYOTE et al. v. Dennis J. Roberts,
II et al., 1980) – was unconstitutional. In Judge Pettine’s words, “[COYOTE] charged
that the over broad sweep of the statute impermissibly infringed on constitutionally pro-
tected rights of privacy and association. . . . They prayed for a declaration that Rhode
Island General Laws §11-34-5 was unconstitutional . . . on its face.” After an extended
period of discovery and preparation, the case went to the Rhode Island Supreme Court
on September 25, 1979.
   The second event was a series of public outcry against streetwalking in the West End of
the city of Providence in the late 1970s. The Speaker of the House at the time, Matthew
Smith, worked closely with judges, police and citizens to create a legislative solution
to the problem of the highly visible streetwalking in the community. Smith and others
believed that in order to get prostitutes off the streets, Rhode Island would need to reduce
streetwalking from a felony to a misdemeanor offense so as to speed arrestees through the
courts more rapidly (COYOTE et al. v. Dennis J. Roberts, II et al., 1981; Arditi, 2009).
The amendments to Section §11-34 of the General Laws included an amendment to §11-34-
5 (“Transportation for indecent purposes–Harboring prostitution”) as well as the creation
of a newly enacted law in §11-34-8. The May 1980 amendments to Chapter §11-34 of the
Rhode Island General Laws were “both substantive and procedural” (COYOTE et al. v.
Dennis J. Roberts, II et al., 1980).
   The COYOTE case appears to have influenced the May 1980 amendments, because
in addition to downgrading street prostitution to a misdemeanor, the legislature decided
to amend the challenged statute by removing the troubling language. As the May 1980
amendments occurred before the Supreme Court had rendered a decision on the merits
of the COYOTE case, all legal parties involved in the case agreed the language was no
longer constitutionally challenging. On September 22, 1980, the case was dismissed as
moot (COYOTE et al. v. Dennis J. Roberts, II et al., 1980) while still reserving the
question of attorney’s fees. On December 17, 1980, Pettine issued his opinion on the issue
of attorney’s fees.
   Pettine’s opinion helps elucidate the meaning and ramifications of these amendments.
Pettine notes that the changes made to §11-34-5 are quite substantive, because by deleting

                                             8
the prohibition against committing the act of prostitution or any other indecent act,
the amendments appeared to him “to have decriminalized the sexual act itself, even
when undertaken for remuneration.” The main prohibitions that remained in §11-34-5, in
Pettine’s words, were the outlawing of “certain preliminary or preparatory activities” such
as transporting or receiving a person into a house for the purpose of prostitution. The
end result of all this is that legislators attempting to strengthen the state’s enforcement
of street prostitution passed a May 1980 amendment reducing street solicitation from a
felony to a misdemeanor but also deleted a reference to prostitution as a crime. However,
recall that in the 1980s indoor prostitution was not the problem as massage parlor and
internet prostitution are a relatively new phenomena.
   Surviving members of the 1980 General Assembly deny that the legislature was trying
to legalize any part of prostitution. Senator John F. McBurney III from the 1980 General
Assembly claims that legislators “didn’t know what they were voting for.” John Revens,
Jr., echoed this sentiment and states in 2009 that “[the 1980 General Assembly] would
never sponsor a bill decriminalizing prostitution if they knew what it was. No way. Not
in a million years.” (Arditi, 2009). In addition, the author of the bill, then Speaker of the
House Matthew Smith, strongly denies that he or anyone else was attempting to legalize
the prostitution sex act.
   The ramifications of the 1980 amendments are fascinating in part because there is no
evidence anyone except Judge Pettine understood the ramifications. Between §11-34-5
outlawing pimping, trafficking and other preparatory activities that support prostitution
and §11-34-8 prohibiting streetwalking, there were no additional problems with non-street
prostitution to bring this issue to light. This begins to change years later with State v.
Robert J. DeMagistriss in June 1998 (State v. Robert J. DeMagistris, 1998). Robert
DeMagistris was an amateur pornographer charged with violating §11-34-5 and §11-34-8.
The state had argued that DeMagristris’s amateur pornography constituted prostitution,
but since it was neither street prostitution nor an instance of recruiting someone into
prostitution, the Supreme Court sided with DeMagristris and concluded that because the
content of his amateur pornography videos occurred indoors, it was not a crime under



                                             9
either statute.5
    Demographic and economic changes during the late 1990s led to Providence experi-
encing steady growth in sex tourism (Malinowski, 2002) as well as an increase in Korean
immigrants (Arditi, 2009). Throughout the 1990s and early 2000s, police regularly ar-
rested the employees of several new Asian-themed massage parlors. The employees of the
massage parlors were charged usually with §11-34-8 or “loitering for indecent purposes”
In the early 2000s, a local criminal defense attorney named Michael Kiselica became a
popular attorney for defendants in the Korean community. Kiselica recognized early on
that State v. DeMagristris, 1998 clearly favored the defendants since indoor massage
parlor prostitution violated neither §11-34-5 nor §11-34-8 given it was indoors. Pre-trial
meetings following a new arrest would take place between Kiselica and the prosecution,
and during these meetings, Kiselica witnessed the prosecution repeatedly dropping all
charges against his clients. But in the spring of 2003, that pattern changed as the District
Attorney’s office informed Kiselica that they would no longer be dropping charges against
his clients, which set the stage for the challenging of the state’s prostitution laws.
    In the spring of 2003, Providence police arrested a dozen massage parlor employees
under a city-wide sting operation called “Operation Rubdown.” Operation Rubdown
targeted several of the major Asian-themed massage parlors in the city, and unlike earlier
arrests, this time the case went to court. Elaine Bucci, then District Court judge, presided
over Rhode Island ex rel. City of Providence v. Choe, No. 61-2003-03314 (6th Div. Dist.
Ct. 2003) and ultimately ruled in favor of the defense. Knowledge about the legality of
indoor prostitution became immediately known to the police, the prosecution, and the
defendants. Breton (2005) describes from interviews that police were now powerless to
crack down on prostitutes or their customers inside massage parlors, and that the indoor
sex market grew rapidly after the 2003 decision. However, the spread of information to
the general public was still slow in 2003. In private interviews, Kiselica states that the
   5
     The Court writes, “because §11-34-8 is directed at the public solicitation of prostitution, its reach
simply does not extend to the prohibition of obscene telephone calls or to the securing of world-be actors
for pornographic movies when such solicitation occurs either over the telephone or within the confines of
private residences. If [DeMagristris] had directed his recruitment efforts at public passersby or motorists,
we would have a different case before us. . . . Accordingly we reverse the defendant’s convictions under
this statute” (State v. Robert J. DeMagistris, 1998).



                                                    10
courtroom was relatively empty the day that Judge Bucci read her decision. No articles
appeared that summer in local newspapers. For example, Lexis Nexus searches show that
the first time “decriminalization prostitution Rhode Island” occurs is 2005 (in Breton
(2005)), two years after the 2003 judicial decision and twenty-five years after the May
1980 amendment itself.


4   Data

Our study uses six separate datasets: weekly classified advertisements from the “adult
services” section and restaurant advertisements from The Providence Phoenix ; data on
prostitutes and their transactions from a popular website called The Erotic Review; pros-
titution arrests and criminal offenses (including rape) from the Uniform Crime Reports;
gonorrhea cases from the Centers for Disease Control’s Gonorrhea Surveillance Program,
sexual behavior outcomes from the 1992 National Health and Social Life Survey (NHSLS),
and state level covariates from the Current Population Survey (CPS).
    The Providence Phoenix is a local weekly arts and adult entertainment publication.
We collected information on every advertisement by week from the first week of January
2000 until the last week of December 2008. The “adult entertainment” section was used
by the massage parlor establishments in Providence and surrounding areas for advertis-
ing. Shapiro (2009) notes that the The Providence Phoenix was the main newspaper
coordinating buyers and sellers in RI’s indoor sex markets. As a comparison group, we
also collect weekly data on Providence-based restaurant advertisements. Summary statis-
tics for these data are reported in Table 1. The mean number of weekly massage parlor
advertisements increased from 6.18 to 12.5 after the 2003 decision. The control group,
restaurant advertisements only saw an increase from 17.3 to 18.7 after the 2003 decision.
    Though Phoenix advertisements measure advertising by prostitutes who use it, ad-
vertisements do not contain information on the number and types of indoor transactions.
In addition, it omits the entire online sex market. To supplement, we harvest data from
an online review site called The Erotic Review. The Erotic Review, a reputation website
similar to Yelp.com, is one of the largest sex websites in the country and only covers



                                           11
indoor prostitutes. Customers use it primarily to provide feedback on transactions with
prostitutes in a particular area. We collect approximately 90,000 records from the The
Erotic Review database from 1998 to 2008 from which we identified Rhode Island based
prostitutes by using phone number area codes. We primarily use the data to focus on the
number of indoor sex workers by state as well as the price and type of sex acts purchased.
Summary statistics for the individuals used from these raw data are listed in Table 1.
The mean number of Rhode Island indoor sex worker reviews increases twelve-fold post-
decriminalization from 3.6 to 44.8, and the mean number of unique sex workers reviewed
in Rhode Island increases from 2.6 to 37.4 post-decriminalization.
       Prostitution arrest data is obtained from the Summary Uniform Crime Reports (UCR)
Part II offenses database. This data measures the total number of prostitution arrests
and allows us to determine whether the 2003 decision did in fact constrain police efforts.
In addition, we collected information on reported female forcible rape offenses, as well as
other Schedule I crimes from the Part I Summary UCR database for every state from 1960
to 2010. For the purposes of their data collection, the UCR defines a forcible rape offense
as an offense satisfying the following definition: “carnal knowledge of a female forcibly
and against her will.” Attempts or assaults to commit rape by force or threat of force
are also included.6 We do not use any of the newer National Incident Based Reporting
System (NIBRS) crime data as Providence (the largest city in RI) did not adopt NIBRS
until 2007 (http://www.risp.ri.gov/docs/UCR/2012.pdf, page 8).
       Our measure of gonorrhea is from the Centers for Disease Control (CDC) Gonor-
rhea Surveillance program. State-level data is available from 1985 to 2010 and summary
statistics based on these data are presented in Table 1. Gonorrhea is chosen as opposed
to syphilis or chlamydia because the demographics of gonorrhea make it more suitable for
a study of this kind given that its movements suggest a heterosexual vector, compared to
syphilis which is almost exclusively concentrated among men-having-sex-with-men com-
munity (CDC, 2010). In fact, Wren (1967) concludes that “there is no doubt that [pros-
   6
    This definition goes all the way back to 1928. Interestingly, in December 2011, the definition was
revised to “penetration, no matter how slight, of the vagina or anus with any body part or object, or oral
penetration by a sex organ of another person, without the consent of the victim.” This was motivated
by the belief that the previous definition was outdated (Rivera, 2012). However, this does not affect our
analysis.


                                                   12
titutes], as a group, must be the largest source of continual [gonorrhea] infection and
reinfection in any community.” In Table A5 in the Appendix, we show that prostitution
is significantly correlated with gonorrhea and not chlamydia for both men and women
using NHSLS data.
   Epidemiological differences between gonorrhea and chlamydia may explain why gonor-
rhea is statistically more common among high risk individuals in the heterosexual sexual
network. Gonorrhea is relatively symptomatic compared to other STIs such as chlamydia
and HIV, which are almost entirely asymptomatic. Given how observable the gonor-
rhea symptoms are, most people except for highly active individuals (e.g. sex workers
and their clients) stop having sex once infected. This is not necessarily the case for less
symptomatic STIs like chlamydia where individuals continue to be sexually active while
infectious. Over time, small differences in the STI’s symptoms can cause an infection to
become predominantly contained within particular sexual networks. In addition, unlike
other STIs, gonorrhea has a short incubation period making it a better approximation of
contemporaneous sexual behavior. For instance, HIV symptoms appear only in advanced
stage HIV, which may be years from the date of infection, whereas gonorrhea symptoms
materialize within days of infection (National Institutes of Health, 2001).
   The 1992 National Health and Social Life Survey is one of the most comprehensive
representative survey to date on sexual behavior in the United States general population.
These data contain over 1,600 variables from a national probability sample of 3,432 Amer-
ican males and females between ages 18 and 59. As far as we know, it is the only data
set in the United States that collects information on sexual coercion (rape), participation
in prostitution markets, and STIs at the individual male and female level.
   Finally, we present state-level covariates from the Current Population Survey on de-
mographics and economic factors in Table 1 as well. We use these variables as control
variables in the regression analysis.




                                            13
5     Empirical Framework and Results

5.1     Did Decriminalization Increase the Indoor Sex Market?

Before we can infer that the 2003 judicial decision altered the trajectory of population
sexual health outcomes, we must first find evidence that it changed indoor sex markets.
The conceptual framework suggests that the indoor sex market should increase after
decriminalization if the costs to entry decrease. We use prostitution arrests as a measure
of costs to entry. We then investigate whether quantity and price changed post–2003.
      In Figure 1, we present a plot of the 1996 to 2009 Rhode Island prostitution arrests
series from the Summary UCR database. The figure shows that there is a steep decrease
in arrests when decriminalization occurs in 2003 from 381 arrests per year to 275, and
arrests continue to decline from then onward.
      We also examine the effect of the 2003 decriminalization decision on arrests more
formally using a differences-in-differences (DD) strategy. The model we estimate is:


                     Ast = β1 RIs + β2 Dt + β3 RIs · Dt + Xst ξ + st ,                (1)


where A is the natural log of prostitution arrests in state s and year t; RIs equals 1 if
state s is Rhode Island, 0 otherwise; Dt equals 1 for every post-2003 year; Xst is a vector
of covariates that also includes state and time trends;  is an error term; and β3 is the
DD parameter estimate of interest.
      Table 2 reports the results from this regression. All models include state and year
fixed effects as well as state time trends. In column 2 and 3 we also include various time
variant controls, and in column 3 we include state quadratic trends. Standard errors are
clustered at the state level. The results indicate that there is a 45 percent (column 3)
decrease in arrests from 2004–2009 which corresponds to the raw data in the figure. The
results suggest that the 2003 decision reduced the number of prostitution arrests, thus
reducing the costs to entry.
      We now empirically investigate the supply side response using both the newspaper
and online data. In Figure 2, we present an index showing weekly advertisements in the


                                              14
“adult services” (top panel) section and local restaurants (bottom panel) of the Providence
Phoenix newspaper. For each type advertisement, we present the number of advertise-
ments (solid line) and the total amount of newspaper space advertisers purchased (dashed
line) that week. The value of the index equals a given week’s total counts divided by the
starting value in week 1. An index value of 2 is equivalent to a doubling in that week
relative to the first week. The 2003 decision corresponds immediately to an increase in
the size of newspaper space advertisers purchased. This is illustrated in Figure 3 where
the Spa Midori advertisement becomes substantially larger right after decriminalization.
It changes from covering 1/16 of the page (top panel) to a full page (bottom panel) two
months after decriminalization. In fact, one week following the 2003 decision, incumbents
purchasing of advertising space increases from 0.5 to almost 1.9. As the number of unique
advertisers lagged the 2003 decision by several months, this suggests the immediate re-
sponse to the 2003 decision was an increase in advertising space by incumbents in the
indoor sex market. Within several months, the number of unique advertisements also
increases suggesting new entrants into the market. By July 2004, the number of unique
advertisers doubled, where each remained until 2007 before rising again. The majority of
this growth occurred in Providence and neighboring cities such as Warwick.
   In the bottom panel of Figure 2, we also report comparable indices for local restaurant
advertising as a placebo. There is no noticeable effect visible from the series, but restau-
rant advertising appears more volatile. In Table 3, we present regression results from a
simple DD linear panel model containing both the treatment group (adult services) and
control group (restaurant ads) from the Phoenix. Our specification is:


                       Yat = β1 Aa + β2 Dt + β3 Aa · Dt + δ + at ,                     (2)


where Y is the natural log of the number of unique advertisements (or the ad size) in
each section (a) and week (t), Aa equals 1 for the adult services section and 0 for the
restaurant section, Dt equals 1 for every post–2003 year and β3 is the DD parameter
estimate of interest. We also control for calendar week fixed effects, δ.
   Our DD regression results in Table 3 conform to the simple visualized time series.


                                             15
The size of adult services advertisements increases immediately by over 100 percent. The
number of unique weekly advertisers also increases by over 100 percent during this period
from 2004–2008.
   The newspaper market is only one snapshot of the market for sex. Therefore we also
investigate data from one of the largest online sex websites in the country, the Total Erotic
Review. We examine the effect of the 2003 decision on the number of indoor sex worker
reviews, massages, and prices that indoor sex worker charge. We expect the number of
reviews to increase as well as massages provided since anecdotal evidence suggests the
Providence massage parlor sex industry increased post-decriminalization. In fact, the
evidence presented above from the Providence Phoenix data suggests this to be the case
since the number of massage firms more than doubled post-decriminalization. We use the
following DD specification:


                   Pirt = β1 RIr + β2 Dt + β3 RIr · Dt + γ3 Xirt + irt ,                (3)


where P is the dependent variables in Tables 4 (ln number of indoor reviews, massage
provided, etc.) and 5 (ln price), for a provider i in region r and year t; RIr is a dummy
equal to 1 if region r is Rhode Island; Dt equals 1 for every post–2003 year; Xprt includes
individual-level and transaction-specific covariates as well as region, month, and year fixed
effects; and prt is a provider-specific error term.
   The first two columns of Table 4 present coefficient estimates from two separate DD
models: ln number of new indoor reviews and whether a massage was provided. We
find that the decriminalization was followed by a large increase in reviews and massage
provision. This is not surprising given that early awareness of the implication of the ruling
was concentrated among the defendants, all of whom were massage parlor employees.
   In Table 5, we present evidence that prices did decrease after decriminalization. The
dependent variable in each model is the log of inflation adjusted gross price paid by the
client for a completed session. Additional controls in all models include session length and
employment status, and in column 2 we also include services provided. Standard errors
are heteroskedastic robust and clustered at the city level. The results are consistent across


                                              16
both models and indicate that real prices fall approximately 15 percent from 2004–2008.
These results are consistent with the large increase in supply (and a relatively smaller
increase in demand, if any).
      These results on arrests, quantity, and prices suggest that decriminalization did impact
the size of the indoor sex market, and that the 2003 decision was not simply some judicial
artifact that never had real world implications. We now turn to the main outcomes of
interest: sexual violence and gonorrhea incidence.


5.2     Impact of Decriminalization on Sexual Violence and Public Health

As shown above, decriminalization increased the size of the indoor sex market in Rhode
Island. However, the conceptual framework indicates that an increase in the sex market
could either improve or exacerbate sexual violence and public health outcomes.
      In the top panel of Figure 4, we plot female forcible per capita rape offenses from
the Uniform Crime Report for Rhode Island overlaid against the United States. There
is a large decrease in rapes following decriminalization in 2003. In the bottom panel of
Figure 4 and Figure 5 we plot other crimes (robbery, murder, assault, burglary, assault,
and motor vehicle theft) in Rhode Island and the US. None of these other crimes exhibit
similar declines post–2003.
      In the top panel of Figure 6 we plot per capita female gonorrhea incidence. Similar
to the rape time series, there is a large reduction in gonorrhea incidence post–2003 for
women and men.
      There is an increase in gonorrhea incidence and rape offenses pre–2003 which is not the
case in the rest of the United States. The changes in Rhode Island rapes and gonorrhea
from 2000 to 2003 suggest possible idiosyncratic dynamics that might be unique to Rhode
Island. We will address these issues through a variety of strategies, such as synthetic
control models, which we explain below. But first we present simple DD models.
      We first estimate the impact of decriminalizing indoor prostitution on per capita rape
offenses and gonorrhea incidence using the following DD model:


                      Gst = β1 RIs + β2 Dt + β3 RIs · Dt + ξXst + st                     (4)


                                               17
where Gst is per capita rape offenses (or ln per capita gonorrhea incidence) by state s and
year t, RIs is a dummy variable for RI, and Dt is a treatment dummy variable equal to
one following the 2003 decriminalization. The DD coefficient, β3t , estimates the relative
change in per capita rape offenses (or per capita ln gonorrhea incidence) in Rhode Island
following decriminalization compared with a composite aggregate of all other states in
the sample. We also include several covariates in the STI regression, Xst , such as state
population, demographics and economic conditions. In addition, Xst , includes controls
for state fixed effects, year fixed effects, and state-specific trends. All regressions are
clustered at the state level. Estimation results are presented in Panel A of Tables 6 and
7.
     Inference from this DD approach relies on asymptomatic approximations associated
with the assumption that the number of individuals within a state and/or the number of
states grows large. However, this assumption does not apply in our setting since treatment
occurred in only one state. We implement the method described in Buchmueller, DiNardo
and Valletta (2011) which they write is basically a variant of Fisher’s permutation or
randomization test (Fisher, 1935). To implement the procedure, we estimate equation 4
using OLS. Then we compare our estimate to 50 placebo estimates obtained by running
50 additional regressions in each case replacing RI with an indicator for one of the other
49 states or the District of Columbia. With 50 placebo estimates, achieving 10 percent
significance requires that Rhode Island be ranked second from the top or bottom of the
placebo distribution, while 5 percent significance requires that Rhode Island be ranked at
the top or bottom (Buchmueller, DiNardo and Valletta, 2011). This is a very demanding
statistical test which is also why we emphasize the 10 percent significance level.
     Column 1 of Tables 6 and 7 includes state linear trends and no controls, column 2
includes both state linear trends and controls, and column 3 adds state quadratic trends.
The top panels report results from standard DD estimation with standard errors clustered
at the state level. The bottom panels report the results from placebo based inference. We
list the 5th and 95th percentiles of the distribution of the placebo estimates.
     Regardless of the specification, all of the DD coefficients in Table 6 are negative and
precise in Panel A. Decriminalization results in a statistically significant decrease in rape

                                             18
offenses by approximately 17 rapes per capita or 39 percent. While the results in Panel
A are statistically significant at the 1 percent level, the same coefficients in columns 1-3
of Panel B range in statistical significance from 5 to 10 percent. These tests are based on
much more conservative and appropriate confidence intervals than those produced using
the standard clustering alternative (Buchmueller, DiNardo and Valletta, 2011).
       One might be concerned that policing increased in 2003 resulting in the decrease in
rape offenses we observe. If that were the case then we would observe other crime offenses
decreasing as well. To address this concern, we also estimate triple difference models using
each of the six non-sex crimes as a within-state placebo to net out any unobserved factors
that determine crime other than the judicial decision. Our triple difference estimates show
that rapes fell between 41 percent (with murder as a control) to 54 percent (with vehicle
theft as the control) by 2009, which is comparable to the DD results described in Table
6. (These results are available from the authors upon request.) In fact, one can see from
Figures 4 and 5 that rape is the only crime the experiences a sharp decrease post-2003.
       Table 7 presents DD coefficients for gonorrhea incidence. For females, decriminaliza-
tion reduced gonorrhea incidence from 39 (column 1-2) to 45 (column 3) percent. All
specifications are statistically significant at the 1 percent level in Panel A, but for the
more conservative placebo based results, statistical significance declines to the 5 and 10
percent levels.7


5.3      City Level Analysis

So far all of the analysis has been at the state level. However, evidence from both the
Providence Phoenix and the Total Erotic Review data suggest that the majority of the
change occurred in Providence since that is where the RI sex industry is concentrated.
Since rape offense data is also available at the jurisdiction level, we can re-estimate the
DD regressions at the city level. In Table A2 we report results from city-level analysis
   7
    In Figures 12 and 13 in the Appendix, we provide graphical illustrations (histograms) from the
placebo based inference results in column 3. The vertical dashed bars present the 5th and 95th percent
confidence intervals (excluding Rhode Island) and the solid line represents the DD estimate for Rhode
Island. In the figures, estimates that achieve 5 percent significance are identified by their position outside
the span of the placebo histogram (rape). The impact on female gonorrhea is statistically significant at
the 10 percent level.


                                                     19
using Providence as the treatment group. The control group is US jurisdictions with at
least 100,000 population, and the outcome is rapes per capita. In Table A3 we restrict
the sample to Northeast jurisdictions only in cities with at least 10,000.8 We estimate
this regression in case there is concern that the Northeast is distinct from the rest of
the United States and we should only be using Northeastern states as the control group.
The results are consistent across all specifications. In Panel B of Table A3, Rhode Island
does rank number two in columns 2 and 3 in the placebo analysis. However, because the
sample size is now 14 cities, even a ranking of one would not be statistically significant.
      The results in Table A2 suggest that decriminalization reduced rape offenses by ap-
proximately 27 percent in Providence. When we use the 14 Northeastern States as the
control group, the results suggest that decriminalization reduced rape offenses by 33 per-
cent in Providence. Therefore, as expected, it does seem that the majority of the reduction
in rapes is coming from Providence.


5.4     Synthetic Control Model

The DD research design is only as valid as the selection of the control group units with
comparable parallel trends. It is possible that our estimates may be biased due to the
use of state units which do not resemble pre-treatment Rhode Island. Therefore, we also
implement the synthetic control approach which is a generalization of the DD framework
(Abadie, Diamond and Hainmueller, 2010). However, unlike DD models, the synthetic
control model uses a subset of units for controls for comparison (as opposed to all states).
This method selects control states that exhibit the same pre-treatment dynamics as RI.
If there is some concern that the DD results presented above are biased as control states
may have different pre-treatment trends, then the synthetic control method addresses this
issue. The synthetic control model will select states which had similar upticks in rape and
gonorrhea prior to decriminalization. Therefore, the synthetic control estimation allows
us to test whether the post–2003 decline in rape and gonorrhea is simply due to spurious
regression to the mean. Finally, the synthetic control model allows us to identify dynamic
  8
   This leaves us with 14 jurisdictions that are the Amherst, Boston, Bridgeport, Buffalo, Hartford,
New York City, Providence (treatment group), Rochester, Springfield, Stamford, Syracuse, Washington
Metropolitan, Waterbury, and Yonkers Police Department.


                                                20
treatment effects.
   Let Yst be the outcome of interest (per capita rape or gonorrhea) for unit s of S+1 state
units at time t, and treatment group be s = 1. The synthetic control estimator models the
effect of decriminalization at time T0 on the treatment group using a linear combination
of optimally chosen states as a synthetic control. For the post–decriminalization period,
the synthetic control estimator measures the causal effect as Y1t − S+1    ∗            ∗
                                                                   P
                                                                      s=2 ws Yst where ws

is a vector of optimally chosen weights. Matching variables, X1 and X0 , are chosen as
predictors of post intervention outcomes and must be unaffected by decriminalization.
We describe the covariates used in both models in Table 8.
   We follow Abadie, Diamond and Hainmueller (2010) and use an inferential technique
based on several placebo exercises. We apply the treatment year to every state in our
sample of 51 state units (50 states plus District of Columbia), placing Rhode Island back
into the set of states in the donor pool. We select a set of optimal weights that minimizes
the root mean squared prediction error (RMSPE) pre-treatment, and then apply those
weights to the outcomes for our synthetic control ex post. We then calculate the RMSPE
for the post–treatment period. We generate a ratio of the post/pre-treatment RMSPE for
each state. This ratio should be high for Rhode Island, suggesting that the model fit the
pre-treatment trends well (represented by a small RMSPE) but has failed to replicate the
post–treatment series (represented by a large RMSPE). We rank the ratio of post/pre-
treatment RMSPE for all 51 units in our sample from highest to lowest. The probability
that chance could have produced our Rhode Island results will be the rank order of Rhode
Island in that distribution divided by the number of units (e.g., 51). This exercise allows
us to examine whether the effect of decriminalization is large relative to the distribution
of the effects that we estimate for states not exposed to decriminalization.


5.4.1   Rape Synthetic Control Results

Our analysis of rape uses the same data from the DD models from the Uniform Crime
Reports but we go back to 1960, since Abadie et al. (2010) show that if the number of
pre-intervention periods in the data is large, then matching on the pre-treatment mea-
sures helps control for the unobserved factors that affect the outcome of interest as well

                                            21
as control for any heterogeneity of unobserved and observed factors on the outcome of
interest. To minimize the volatility in the series we smooth the rape series using the mov-
ing average of the current and previous year’s level of rapes. We present the actual and
synthetic characteristics from our model in Table 8. The states which make up synthetic
Rhode Island are reported in Table 9. Our synthetic control is a weighted average of Iowa
(0.156), Idaho (0.245), and South Dakota (0.599). In Figure 17 in the appendix, we plot
the trends in per capita rape for the states which make up synthetic RI. Interestingly,
they all exhibit similar increases leading up to 2003, but only Rhode Island exhibits the
large decrease post–2003.
       The top panel in Figure 7 shows the synthetic Rhode Island trajectory before and after
decriminalization compared to the actual outcome. The bottom panel of Figure 7 shows
where our model fits the data well and at which points it does not. The gap between
the dashed line and the solid line in the top panel is the gap between the synthetic
                                                                               ∗
control (dash) and Rhode Island (solid), which is the gap between Y1t and Yst wst for all
s = 2, ..., S + 1. Evidence of a causal effect is reflected in an increase in the relative size
of the gap post–decriminalization relative to pre decriminalization. The post/pre RMSP
ratio for the Rhode Island rape model is 2.86.
       Next we apply the synthetic control model to all 42 additional state-units for the
placebo analysis.9 Applying the placebo inference to each of the 42 other state units
allows us to construct an empirical distribution of all state units’ ratios of post/pre-
RMSPE. We report the results from this analysis in Figure 9. We use this distribution to
compute the empirical distribution of all possible state-level changes in the fit of our data
post–decriminalization to calculate the probability that the Rhode Island ratio is due to
chance.10
       The state with the largest such ratio is Arkansas (7.4) and Rhode Island is second
   9
      There are not 51 state units because we generate a balanced panel of jurisdictions from 1960-2010.
However, the results are almost identical if we use an unbalanced panel.
   10
      We present visualizations of the placebo inference in Figures 14-16. Figure 14 displays the estimated
effect for Rhode Island against all the other 41 placebo gaps. Figure 15 limits the placebo gaps to those
state units with a pre-treatment RMSPE that is no more than twice that of RI’s, and Figure 16 limits
it to the units with a pre-treatment RMSPE no more than 1.5 times higher than RI. In each of these
figures, it is clear that RI’s estimated effect is both considerably larger than the placebo estimates as well
as having one of the largest negative estimated effects in the placebo distribution.


                                                     22
largest (2.86). This result implies that if one were to assign decriminalization at random
in the data, the probability of obtaining a post/pre 2003 RMSPE ratio as large as Rhode
                    2
Island’s is 0.048 ( 42 = 0.048).11 The synthetic control model estimates 824 fewer rape
offenses caused by decriminalization between 2004-2009.


5.4.2      Gonorrhea Synthetic Control Results

Our analysis of gonorrhea uses the same data from the DD models from the Center for
Disease Control’s Gonorrhea Surveillance Program for 1985 to 2009. We present results
from our synthetic control model in Figure 8 and map the gap in prediction error in the
bottom panel. We use log gonorrhea incidence to reduce the variability in the series and
because gonorrhea is distributed log normal. The optimal state weights are presented in
the bottom panel of Table 9.
       We conduct the same placebo inference described above. Figure 10 reports the results
from this exercise. For female gonorrhea, Rhode Island has the highest ratio of post–
RMSPE to pre-RMSPE relative to any other state unit, implying that the probability
chance could have produced these results is 0.0196. We estimate that decriminalization
resulted in 1,035 fewer cases of female gonorrhea relative to the estimated counterfactual
from 2004 to 2009.12
       We also estimate DD and synthetic control models for male gonorrhea incidence. We
find that decriminalization decreased male gonorrhea 35 percent (DD model presented
in Table A1 in appendix) or by 982 cases (synthetic control model). However, the male
model is more difficult to fit and the results are at most statistically significant at the
10 percent level once we run the placebo inference. Male impacts might be smaller and
  11
      We plot the prediction gap in rape predictions for Arkansas (AR) and synthetic AR as a final check
(see Figure 18 in appendix). Interestingly, AR shows a positive effect (unlike RI which is negative). AR
fits the pre-treatment data much better as its series is less volatile compared to Rhode Island. The pre-
2003 RMSPE is 2.3 compared to RI’s which is 4.48. RI’s worse fit is primarily caused by South Dakota,
the state which has the largest weight for synthetic RI, because it experienced a large spike relative to its
trend in the early 1990s (see Figure 17 in appendix). That penalty makes RI’s pre-RMSPE larger. The
post–RMSPE for RI is 12.85 and AR is 17.36.
   12
      In Figures 19-21, we present graphs of Rhode Island’s gap overlaid against all of the placebo gaps.
As we did with rape, we drop state units with pre-treatment RMSPEs more than two times higher than
RI (Figure 20) as well as 1.5 times higher (Figure 21). Again, we see that the estimated causal effects is
strikingly large and negative when compared to the placebo distribution.



                                                     23
harder to detect due to biology. Male to female disease transmission rates in the absence
of condoms are higher than female to male transmission rates for most sexually transmit-
ted infections (Garnett and Bowden, 2000). For example, on an annual basis, without
the use of antivirals or condoms, the transmission risk of HSV-2 from infected male to
female is approximately 8-10% while transmission risk from infected female to male is
approximately 4-5% (Kulhanjian, Soroush and Au, 1992). The same is true for chlamydia
and gonorrhea: men are more effective transmitters of disease. Similarly, male to female
transmission of HIV/AIDS is 1.9 times more effective than female to male transmission
(European Study Group on Heterosexual Transmission of HIV, 1992).


5.5    Comparing the DD and Synthetic Control Results

We use the cases averted for rape and gonorrhea from the synthetic control models to
estimate percent decreases. The synthetic control model estimates a 31 percent decrease
in per capita rape offenses and a 39 percent decrease in per capita female gonorrhea.
The DD models estimate a 39 percent decrease in rapes and a 39-45 percent decrease in
female gonorrhea due to decriminalization. The results are quite consistent across the
two models, though the synthetic control model estimates are slightly more conservative.


6     Exploring the Pathways

While we would like to say something conclusive about the mechanisms post–decriminalization
which lead to the observed decreases in rape offenses and gonorrhea incidence, we are care-
ful to note that this discussion on pathways is merely suggestive. We are not claiming
to have identified the causal channels which link the change in decriminalization to the
behavioral outcomes of interest. Below we present several hypotheses which could ex-
plain the results and offer suggestions as to why some are more plausible than others as
potential mechanisms.




                                            24
6.1      Sexual Violence Pathways

We first consider several potential hypotheses that relate decriminalization to the falling
rape offenses.
       First, it is possible that the ruling caused rapes to fall through an indirect effect
involving inframarginal reallocation of police resources. If police stop arresting indoor sex
workers (which we find), then these same police resources could be reallocated elsewhere
in the agency including the policing of rape and other sex crimes. This reallocation could
reduce rapes through either deterrence or the incapacitation of serial rapists. While we
believe a police resource explanation is plausible, conversations with law enforcement
officials suggest that it was unlikely in this particular case. In Rhode Island, the Office of
Narcotics and Organized Crime has been the principal agency responsible for arrests of
massage parlor employees, and this is not the same office of police officers who work rape
and other sexual crimes.
       We also check police employment data in general to test whether there are any changes
in overall employment post–decriminalization. Our data comes from the FBI’s Uniform
Crime Report Law Enforcement Officers Killed or Assaulted (LEOKA) dataset. We create
a balanced panel of jurisdictions (ORIs) which report police records and associated ORI
population annually from 1962 to 2005. Figure 11 plots this data for Rhode Island and
the rest of the US, and we do not find any changes in police employment post–2003.13
       Second, we investigate whether changes in data definitions or data collection over this
period could explain the findings, and fail to find evidence for this. Our rape models are
estimated using a balanced panel of data from each jurisdiction in Rhode Island.14 We
re-estimate the models using the unbalanced panel and the results do not change. In ad-
dition, we re-estimate the rape models using the FBI’s online UCR Summary files (down-
loaded from http://www.ucrdatatool.gov/Search/Crime/State/StatebyState.cfm)
as opposed to the raw FBI data and the results do not change. Therefore, we do not find
any evidence that ORI attrition is responsible for the sizeable declines in reported rapes
  13
     We also estimate DD models of police employment and do not find any significant evidence that
decriminalization impacts police employment in RI.
  14
     The authors wish to thank Justin McCrary for providing us with ORI specific LEOKA and UCR
data.


                                               25
in Rhode Island following decriminalization in 2003 (results available upon request). We
also spoke directly with the Providence police to understand whether any personnel or
definitional changes were made that could explain the drop in rapes. We were assured
by the Providence Police Department, the Rhode Island State Police and the FBI that
the Uniform Crime Reports counts are accurate and definitions did not change during
our study period. We also inquired about personnel changes around this time that would
have been relevant for the collection and distribution of the UCR records, but no such
personnel changes were reported to have taken place.
    Another possible “definition” related explanation for the decline in reported rapes
in the UCR data concerns the introduction of the National Incident Based Reporting
System (NIBRS) in 2004 since numerous Rhode Island jurisdictions adopted NIBRS. As
NIBRS defines rapes more broadly than UCR Summary definitions, the introduction of a
second crime data collection program may have impacted the reporting of UCR Summary
data. However, examination of ORI-level rape levels in the UCR Summary files show that
Providence experienced the largest reduction of any ORI from 2003 to 2004, and since
Providence did not adopt NIBRS until 2007, the NIBRS theory cannot explain the decline
that occurred in Providence.15
    Thirdly, decriminalization could reduce rapes among prostitutes by improving the
bargaining position of female sex workers relative to clients. Recent work in economics
has shown that changes in female bargaining threat points has the potential to reduce
violence against women (Aizer, 2010; Stevenson and Wolfers, 2006). Several studies note
that indoor sex workers report considerably lower risks of victimization relative to outdoor
street walkers, who themselves report extremely high rates of victimization (Church et al.,
2001b; Farley and Barkan, 1998a). While improvements in the safety of sex workers may be
occurring, it is unlikely to explain the entirety of the rape results. Sex workers constitute
a low share of total reported rape offenses given the illegal nature of their work. Hence,
   15
      One possible threat to our research design is unobserved shocks that may have altered the reporting
of all criminal statistics, including secular changes in crime itself, in Rhode Island after 2003. To examine
this we estimate difference-in-difference-in-differences (DDD) models in which non-rape crimes are used
to model within-state unobservable changes in crime. Insofar as decriminalization of indoor sex work
affected rape only, the DDD model allows us to isolate the effect net of secular changes in crime and the
reporting of crime in Rhode Island after 2003. The DDD results are consistent with the DD results.



                                                     26
even if decriminalization did reduce actual rapes among sex workers, it would not have
reduced reported rapes by too much since pre-treatment reporting was likely to be lower
than post–treatment reporting which would bias us against finding the decrease.
   The last hypothesis is related to the idea that some violent males think of rape and
prostitution as substitutes (Posner, 1992; Dever, 1996). When the judicial decision caused
supply to increase and prices to fall, violent males at lower segments of demand could
have shifted towards purchasing sex indoors and away from violence toward women. While
speculative, there is anecdotal evidence for this. In the 2010 documentary Happy Endings
which is about the efforts of Rhode Island to re-criminalize indoor sex work, there is a
scene where a sex worker claims that she believes the men she services would have raped
other women had they not come to see her.
   We examine the association between prostitution and rape for males and females more
formally using the 1992 NHSLS data. Female respondents were asked if they have ever
been the victim of sexual assault and whether they have ever exchanged sex for money.
Males were asked if they have ever forced a female to have sex and whether they have
ever purchased sex with money. We estimate the same linear probability model separately
for males and females by regressing prostitution on rape controlling for age, age-squared,
maternal education, own-education, marital status, household structure in adolescence,
race, age of sexual debut, family size, birth order, and Census divisional fixed effects both
at the survey and at age 14.
   The results are presented in Table 10. We find a weakly positive (p<.10) correlation
between rape victimization and prostitution experience for females. Female victims of
rapes are 2.5 percentage points more likely to report prostitution experience (17 percent
increase). Interestingly, we find a large and statistically significant positive correlation
for men who admit forcing a female to have sex and being a customer of transactional
sex. Men admitting to rape are 18 percentage points more likely to have ever visited a
prostitute. This is about a 6 percent increase over the mean and the result is statistically
significant at the .05 level.
   While we cannot provide definitive evidence on the exact mechanism of the decrease
in rapes, it appears likely that some of the decrease is due to men substituting away from

                                             27
rape toward prostitution. In addition, there might be a decrease in prostitutes being
raped, but this is likely to be a small effect.


6.2      Public Health Pathways

In this section we provide suggestive evidence about why decriminalization decreased
gonorrhea incidence. Decriminalization likely caused gonorrhea to decrease by diluting
the “core group” through the selection of lower risk sex workers into the network (Hethcote
and Yorke, 1984; Kremer and Morcom, 1998) and by reducing risky sex among indoor sex
workers. Post–decriminalization we observe significant entry of White and Asian workers,
and these races have the lowest gonorrhea prevalence.16 Therefore, post–decriminalization
men are more likely to match with a safe (i.e. gonorrhea free) sex worker which could
result in overall reductions in gonorrhea incidence.
       First, columns 1-2 of Table 4 suggests the supply of indoor sex workers increases post–
decriminalization. This is likely changing the composition of the prostitution market, and
might be diluting the core group by selecting lower risk sex workers into the network.
Empirical evidence suggests that indoor sex workers have lower rates of disease than
street sex workers. For example, Loff, Gaze and Fairley (2000) estimate an 80-fold higher
prevalence of bacterial STI among illegal street workers compared to legal sex workers. In
Table A4 in the appendix we show the increase in indoor sex workers by racial category.
The large increases are coming from White and Asian women (see columns 1-2). In fact,
Asian providers increase the most and Asians also have the lowest rates of gonorrhea
incidence. More White and Asian women entering the market should result in an overall
lower risk pool, ceteris paribus.
       In addition, Table 4 (columns 3-6) shows the estimates from DD models using the
Total Erotic Review data on four sex act outcomes associated with risk behaviors: fellatio
with and without a condom, vaginal sex and anal sex.17 We find that higher risk sex
acts, such as oral sex without a condom and anal sex, decreased substantially following
  16
     The mean gonorrhea rate per 100,000 from 1985-2009 by race is 44.6 for whites, 29.5 for Asians,
155.92 for Hispanics, and 691.31 for Blacks (CDC Gonorrhea Surveillance data).
  17
     The Erotic Review does not provide the option to report whether vaginal or anal intercourse occurred
with or without a condom.



                                                   28
decriminalization and that oral sex with a condom increased. Therefore, risky sex amongst
indoor transactions declined following the decriminalization. This is consistent with other
empirical evidence showing that prostitutes who work indoors practice safer sex and are
less likely to contract and transmit STIs (Seib et al., 2009; Seib, Fischer and Najman,
2009; Gertler and Shah, 2011). In addition, evidence from Nevada suggests that employees
report that they feel safe, are free to come and go, and are bound only by their contract
in legal brothels. Of the workers, 84 percent said that their job felt safe. Workers report
that they felt safe largely because the police, employers and co-workers were there to
protect them (Brents, Jackson and Hausbeck, 2009). Conditions like these also promote
safe sex as workers feel more empowered to reject risky sexual propositions.
    If low risk individuals increase their activity by a larger proportion than high risk
individuals, the composition of the pool of available partners will improve (Kremer and
Morcom, 1998). This implies that male clients are now more likely to match with safer
prostitutes. The prediction is that we should observe an overall decrease in gonorrhea–
which we do. In the appendix (Table A1) we also show that male gonorrhea decreases
as a result of decriminalization, though the standard errors increase for the placebo in-
ference exercises. Interestingly, Gertler and Shah (2011) find that increasing enforcement
by one standard deviation per month in the street prostitution market in Ecuador is sig-
nificantly associated with a 27 percent lower rate of sex workers being currently infected
with syphilis, chlamydia, and/or gonorrhea. The mechanism at play here is similar: en-
forcement changes the composition of workers in the street market (i.e. decreases the
supply) and increases transaction prices (which decreases transactions in the more risky
street market).


7   Discussion and Conclusion

This study provides the first causal estimate of the impact of decriminalization on the sex
market as well as outcomes related to sexual violence and public health. The results sug-
gest that decriminalization could have potentially large social benefits for the population




                                            29
at large—not just sex market participants.18 In addition, the results from both empirical
models (DD and synthetic control) are quite consistent speaking to the strength of the
results.
       Decriminalization reduces sexual violence by 824 fewer reported rapes or 31 percent.
We provide suggestive evidence that the decline in rapes may be due to men substituting
away from violent sexual behavior toward prostitution since decriminalization increases
the supply of sex workers and decreases prices.
       Decriminalization also improves public health outcomes by decreasing female and male
gonorrhea incidence by approximately 2000 cases. As the presence of comorbid STIs such
as gonorrhea, can increase the likelihood of HIV transmission, finding a reduction in gon-
orrhea is likely understating the gains to public health. The decline in gonorrhea is consis-
tent with several hypotheses. First, we provide evidence that suggests the sexual network
within which prostitution transactions occurred became less risky post–decriminalization.
However, we should note that we are unable to disentangle whether the decline was caused
by increased condom use and decreased risky sex acts in the massage parlors or by some
more nuanced change in the sex network brought upon by decriminalization that in turn
made STI transmission less efficient overall.
       Rhode Island ultimately re-criminalized indoor sex work in November 2009 with the
passage of bill HB5044A. However, the push to re-criminalize first started in 2005. There-
fore, the passage of this bill was neither unanticipated nor surprising unlike the initial
2003 judicial decision. Future research may evaluate the impacts of re-criminalizing in-
door prostitution on rape offenses and gonorrhea incidence once longer time series of data
become available. However, it is important to note that since re-criminalization was antic-
ipated, empirical results may be biased due to anticipatory effects. We scrape additional
Total Erotic Review data and interestingly, we do observe a decrease in the number of re-
views in Rhode Island immediately following re-criminalization (see Figure 23). However,
by 2012, the trend bounces back to the growth trend of the rest of the United States.
  18
    We should note that prostitution is morally repugnant for some individuals so legalizing the indoor
market may impose moral costs that are difficult to quantify. In addition, others have argued that
decriminalization may increase human trafficking (Cho, Dreher and Neumayer, 2011). However, good
data on numbers trafficked is extremely difficult to uncover given the clandestine nature of this market.



                                                   30
References
Abadie, Alberto, Alexis Diamond and Jens Hainmueller. 2010. “Synthetic Control Methods for Compar-
  ative Case Studies: Estimating the Effect of California’s Tobacco Control Program.” Journal of the
  American Statistical Association 105(490):493–505.

Aizer, Anna. 2010. “The Gender Wage Gap and Domestic Violence.” American Economic Review
  100(4):1847–59.

Arditi, Lynn. 2009. “Behind Closed Doors: How R.I. Decriminalized Prostitution.” The Providence
  Journal .

Brents, Barbara, Crystal Jackson and Kathryn Hausbeck. 2009. The State of Sex: Tourism, Sex and Sin
  in the New American Heartland. Routledge.

Brents, Barbara and Kathryn Hausbeck. 2005. “Violence and legalized brothel prostitution in nevada:
  examining safety, risk, and prostitution policy.” Journal of Interpersonal Violence 20:270–295.

Breton, Tracy. 2005. “State Law Foils Efforts to Thwart Prostitution.” Providence Journal-Bulletin .

Brewer, Devon D., Jonathan A. Dudek, John J. Potterat, Stephen Q. Muth, John M. Roberts and
  Donald E. Woodhouse. 2006. “Extent, Trends and Perpetrators of Prostitution-Related Homicide in
  the United States.” Journal of Forensic Science 51(5):1101–1108.

Buchmueller, Thomas C., John DiNardo and Robert G. Valletta. 2011. “The Effect of an Employer
  Health Insurance Mandate on Health Insurance Coverage and the Demand for Labor: Evidence from
  Hawaii.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 3(4):25–51.

CDC. 2010. Syphilis and MSM - CDC fact sheet. Atlanta, GA: CDC.

Cho, Seo-Young, Axel Dreher and Eric Neumayer. 2011. Does Legalized Prostitution Increase Human
  Trafficking? Courant Research Centre: Poverty, Equity and Growth - Discussion Papers 96 Courant
  Research Centre PEG.

Church, Stephanie, Marion Henderson, Marina Barnard and Graham Hart. 2001a. “Violence by clients
  towards female prostitutes in different work settings: questionnaire survey.” British Medical Journal
  322:524–525.

Church, Stephanie, Marion Henderson, Marina Barnard and Graham Hart. 2001b. “Violence by clients
  towards female prostitutes in different work settings: questionnaire survey.” BMJ 322(7285):524–525.

COYOTE et al. v. Dennis J. Roberts, II et al. 1980. In 502 F. Supp. 1342. United States District Court,
  District of Rhode Island.

COYOTE et al. v. Dennis J. Roberts, II et al. 1981. In 523 F. Suppl. 352. United States District Court,
  District of Rhode Island.

Cunningham, Scott and Todd D. Kendall. 2011. “Prostitution 2.0: The Changing Face of Sex Work.”
  Journal of Urban Economics 69:273–287.

Dever, Vincent M. 1996. “Aquinas on the Practice of Prostitution.” Essays in Medieval Studies 13:39–49.

Draca, Mirko, Stephen Machin and Robert Witt. 2011. “Panic on the Streets of London: Police, Crime,
  and the July 2005 Terror Attacks.” American Economic Review 101(5):2157–81.

Dunlop, E.M.C., Amy M. Lamb and Dorothy M. King. 1971. “Improved tracing of contacts of heterosexual
  men with gonorrhea: relationship of altered female to male ratios.” British Journal of Venereal Disease
  47:192–195.

                                                   31
Ehrlich, Isaac. 1973. “Participation in Illegitimate Activities: A Theoretical and Empirical Investigation.”
  Journal of Political Economy 81(3):521–565.

European Study Group on Heterosexual Transmission of HIV. 1992. “Comparison of female to male and
  male to female transmission of HIV in 563 stable couples.” British Medical Journal 304(6830):809–813.

Farley, Melissa. 2005. “Prostitution Harms Women Even if Indoors: A Reply to Weizer.” Violence Against
  Women 11(7):950–964.

Farley, Melissa and Howard Barkan. 1998a. “Prostitution, Violence Against Women, and Posttraumatic
  Stress Disorder.” Women and Health 27(3):37–49.

Farley, Melissa and Howard Barkan. 1998b. “Prostitution, Violence against women, and posttraumatic
  stress disorder.” Women and Health 27(3):37–49.

Farley, Melissa and Vanessa Kelly. 2000. “Prostitution: a critical review of the medical and social sciences
  literature.” Women and Criminal Justice 11(4):29–64.

Fisher, R. A. 1935. The Design of Experiments. Edinburgh: Oliver and Boyd.

Garnett, Geoffrey P. and Francis J. Bowden. 2000. “Epidemiology and Control of Curable Sexually
  Transmitted Diseases: The Opportunities and Problems.” Sexually Transmitted Diseases 27:58899.

Gertler, Paul and Manisha Shah. 2011. “Sex Work and Infection: What’s Law Enforcement Got to Do
  With It?” Journal of Law and Economics 54.

Guista, Marina Della, Maria Laura Di Tommaso and Steinar Strom. 2009. “Who’s Watching? The
  Market for Prostitution Services.” Journal of Population Economics 22(2):501–516.

Havoscope. 2013. http://www.havocscope.com/prostitution-revenue-by-country/. Technical report.

Hethcote, Herbert and James Yorke. 1984. “Gonorrhea Transmission Dynamics and Control.” Lecture
  Notes Biomath .

Holt, Thomas J. and Kristie R. Blevins. 2009. “Examining Diffusion and Arrest Avoidance Practices
  among Johns.” Crime and Delinquency Forthcoming.

Jeal, N. and C. Salisbury. 2007. “Health needs and service use of parlour-based prostitutes compared
  with street-based prostitutes: a cross-sectional survey.” An International Journal of Obstetrics and
  Gynaecology 114(7):875–881.

Jordan, Jan. 2005. The Sex Industry in New Zealand: A Literature Review. Technical report Ministry
  of Justice.

Kohm, Steven A. and John Selwood. 2004. “Sex Work and City Planning: Winnipeg’s Red Light District
  Committee and the Regulation of Prostitution.” Institute of Urban Studies Research and Working
  Paper 42.

Kremer, Michael and Charles Morcom. 1998. “The effect of changing sexual activity on HIV prevalence.”
  Mathematical Biosciences 151:99–122.

Kulhanjian, JA, V Soroush and DS Au. 1992. “Identification of women at unsuspected risk of primary
  infection with herpes simplex virus type 2 during pregnancy.” New England Journal of Medicine
  326(14):91620.

Langer, Gary, Cheryl Arnedt and Dalia Sussman. 2004. “Primetime Live Poll: American Sex Survey.”.



                                                    32
Levitt, Steven and Sudhir Alladi Venkatesh. 2007. “An Empirical Analysis of Street-Level Prostitution.”
  University of Chicago Working Paper.

Loff, B., B. Gaze and C. Fairley. 2000. “Prostitution, public health, and human rights law.” Lancet 356.

Malinowski, W. Zachary. 2002. “The Sex Business in Providence - ‘Why Here’.” Providence Journal-
  Bulletin .

National Institutes of Health. 2001. Workshop Summary: Scientific Evidence on Condom Effectiveness for
  Sexually Transmitted Disease (STD) Prevention. Technical report Department of Health and Human
  Services Hendon, Virginia: .

Platt, Leah. 2001. “Regulating the Global Brothel.” The American Prospect 12.

Posner, Richard A. 1992. Sex and Reason. 1st ed. Harvard University Press.

Posner, Richard A. and Katharine B. Silbaugh. 1996. A Guide to America’s Sex Laws. 1st ed. University
  of Chicago Press.

Potterat, John J., Richard B. Rothenberg and Donald C. Bross. 1979. “Gonorrhea in street prostitutes:
  epidemiologic and legal implications.” Sexually Transmitted Diseases 6(2):58–63.

Rigg, Robert. 2010. “The Not-so-Risky Business of High-End Escorts and the Internet in the 21st
  Century.” Richmond Journal of Law and Technology XVII(1).

Rivera, Natalie. 2012. Daily Sundial .

Ross, Michael, Beth Crisp, Sven-Axel Mansson and Sarah Hawkes. 2012. “Occupational health and safety
  among commercial sex workers.” Scandanavian Journal of Work, Environment and Health 38(2):105–
  119.

Seib, Charlotte, Jane Fischer and Jackob Najman. 2009. “The health of female sex workers from three
   industry sectors in Queensland, Australia.” Social Science and Medicine 68(3):473–478.

Seib, Charlotte, Joseph Debattista, Jane Fischer, Michael Dunne and Jackob Najman. 2009. “Sexually
   transmitted infections among sex workers and their clients: variation in prevalence between sectors of
   the industry.” Sexual Health 6(1):45–50.

Shapiro, Melanie. 2009. Sex Trafficking and Decriminalized Prostitution in Rhode Island. Master’s thesis
  University of Rhode Island. DigitalCommons@University of Rhode Island.

State v. Robert J. DeMagistris. 1998. In No. 96-286-C.A. Supreme Court of Rhode Island.

Stevenson, Betsey and Justin Wolfers. 2006. “Bargaining in the shadow of the law: Divorce laws and
   family distress.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 121(1):267–288.

Urban Justice Center. 2005. Behind Closed Doors: An Analysis of Indoor Sex Work in New York City.
  Technical report.

Weitzer, Ronald. 2005. “New Directions in Research on Prostitution.” Crime, Law & Social Change
  43:211–235.

Weitzer, Ronald. 2011. Legalizing Prostitution: From Illicit Vice to Lawful Business. NYU Press.

Willcox, R. R. 1962. “Prostitution and venereal disease: proportion of venereal disease acquired from
  prostitutes in Asia: a comparison with France, the United Kingdom, and the United States of America.”
  British Journal of Venereal Disease 38:37–42.

Wren, Barry G. 1967. “Gonorrhoea among prostitutes.” The Medical Journal of Australia 1(17):847–849.


                                                   33
                        Table 1 Summary Statistics

Dependent Variables                               Mean        Std. Deviation     N
Prostitution arrests per capita                     31.5           26.7         1,142
Number of weekly massage parlor advertisements       9.59           0.2          458
Number of weekly restaurant advertisements          18.71          0.31          469
Size of weekly massage parlor advertisements        1.16           0.03          458
Size of weekly restaurant advertisements            2.57           0.07          469
Number of new indoor sex workers by city           197.97         267.10         428
Massage provider                                    0.13          0.336        85,709
Fellatio (no condom)                               0.363          0.481        85,709
Fellatio (condom)                                  0.471          0.499        85,709
Vaginal sex                                        0.839          0.368        85,709
Anal sex                                            0.116          0.32        85,709
Real price                                        $275.19        $321.89       85,709
Hourly adjusted price                             $318.12        $445.75       85,709
Asian provider                                      0.156          0.363       85,709
White provider                                      0.506          0.50        85,709
Hispanic                                           0.153           0.36        85,709
Black provider                                      0.107          0.309       85,709
Reported rape offenses per capita                   32.8           11.6         1,179
Female gonorrhea incidence per capita                159            109         1,179
Male gonorrhea incidence per capita                  191            180         1,179
Other Control Variables                           Mean        Std. Deviation     N
Average length of session (minutes)                 59.94          0.119       85,709
Murders and non-negligent homicides per capita       6.72            3.8        1,179
Burglaries per capita                                898            385         1,179
Robberies per capita                                 180            109         1,179
Assaults per capita                                 1,212           449        1,179
Vehicle thefts per capita                            466            229         1,179
Larcenies per capita                                2,536           764        1,179
State unemployment rate                              6.07           1.76        1,179
Share of households below poverty line               13.5           3.31        1,179
Share employed by military                          0.004          0.003        1,179
Share of population white                            82.1           9.04       1,179
Share of population black                            12.6           8.67        1,179
White sex ratio 0-14                                 106            8.45        1,179
White sex ratio 15-24                                103            10.8        1,179
White sex ratio 25-39                                102            7.07        1,179
Share of population 15-24                            14.2           1.28       1,179
Male share of male population single                 46.9           2.92        1,179
Female share of female population single             40.1           2.86       1,179
Male share of male population married                42.7           2.96        1,179
Female share of female population married            40.8           2.72       1,179
State female population                           6,173,058      4,946,616     1,179
State male population                             5,977,432      4,915,284     1,179
Total state population                           12,150,490      9,859,788     1,179




                                          34
              Table 2 Did Decriminalization Decrease Prostitution Arrests?

                      Dependent variable:                      ln(Prostitution arrest per capita)
                                         Panel A: Clustered Standard Errors
                      RI effect post-decriminalization          -0.158      -0.276          -0.628***
                                                               (0.109)     (0.181)           (0.158)


                                   Panel B: Placebo-based Confidence Intervals
                      RI effect post-decriminalization         -0.158       -0.276            -0.628
                      5th percentile                           -1.071       -1.021            -1.324
                      95th percentile                           1.597        1.584             1.515
                      N                                         1150        1150               1150
                      Mean of dependent variable                3.16        3.16               3.16
                      State and year FE                         Yes         Yes                Yes
                      State linear trends                       Yes         Yes                Yes
                      Time variant controls                      No         Yes                Yes
                      State quadratic trends                     No          No                Yes
                        These are DD regressions using UCR data, 1985-2009 where the dependent variable
                        is ln prostitution arrests per 100,000. Regression controls include state population by
                        gender, unemployment rates, white sex ratios, share of white, black, young, married,
                        single, employed by military, and share of households below poverty line. State
                        population is used as analytical weights. Panel A presents standard errors clustered
                        at the state level and Panel B presents 5th and 95th percentile confidence intervals
                        from placebo-based inferential calculations. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01




   Table 3 Impact of Decriminalization on Number and Size of Advertisements

           Dependent variable:                                ln(Number of ads)            ln(Aggregate ad size)
           Adult classified × post-decriminalization                  0.765***                        1.162***
                                                                       (0.046)                         (0.065)


           Year x Week fixed effects                                     Yes                            Yes
           N                                                             926                            926
           Mean of dependent variable                                    2.52                           0.38
             These are OLS regressions using data from The Providence Phoenix classifieds, 2000-2008. Heteroskedastic
             robust standard errors are shown in parenthesis. All models include week x year fixed effects. * p<0.10, **
             p<0.05, *** p<0.01




             Table 4 Impact of Decriminalization on Supply Side of Market

Dependent variable:                    ln(# Indoor         Massage        Fellatio        Fellatio          Vaginal        Anal
                                          reviews                         condom         no condom            sex          sex
RI effect post-decriminalization          0.853***          0.085***      0.084***         -0.083***        0.027***     -0.161***
                                           (0.109)           (0.008)       (0.017)          (0.016)          (0.007)      (0.008)


N                                            428             85,905         85,905          85,905             85,905      85,905
Mean of dependent variable                   5.04             0.13           0.47            0.36               0.84        0.12
 These are OLS regressions using The Erotic Review data, 1999–2008. This data is record specific, meaning we have information on
 individual prostitute reviews. Columns 2-6 use the disaggregated data, and in Column 1 we aggregate reviews to the city/year level
 creating a variable of review counts. Columns 2-6 also include controls for session length, employment status, and size of reputation
 site. All outcome variables are binary dependent variables except for column 1, which is the log of total number of new sex workers
 reviewed. Standard errors are heteroskedastic robust and clustered at the city level. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01




                                                               35
Table 5 Did Decriminalization Affect Transaction Price?

          Dependent variable:                              ln(Price)
          RI effect post-decriminalization         -0.169***        -0.168***
                                                    (0.026)          (0.024)


          YearxMonth fixed effects                      Yes              Yes
          CityxMonth fixed effects                      Yes              Yes
          N                                            85,709           85,709
          Mean of dependent variable                    5.50             5.50
            These are OLS regressions using The Erotic Review data, 1999–
            2008. The dependent variable in each model is the log of inflation
            adjusted gross price paid by the client for a completed session.
            Additional controls in all models include session length and em-
            ployment status, and in column 2 we also include services pro-
            vided. Standard errors are heteroskedastic robust and clustered
            at the city level. *p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01




Table 6 Does Decriminalization Impact Rape Offenses?

   Dependent variable:                          Rape offenses per capita
                   Panel A: Clustered Standard Errors
   RI effect post-decriminalization        -16.30***       -17.10***        -19.42***
                                            (0.686)         (0.951)          (1.222)


             Panel B: Placebo-based Confidence Intervals
   RI effect post-decriminalization          -16.30*        -17.10*          -19.42**
   5th percentile                             -9.68          -9.50             -5.58
   95th percentile                            15.16          14.58              8.00
   N                                           1179             1179             1179
   Mean of dependent variable                  32.79            32.79            32.79
   State and year FE                            Yes              Yes              Yes
   State linear trends                          Yes              Yes              Yes
   Time variant controls                        No               Yes              Yes
   State quadratic trends                       No               No               Yes
     These are OLS regressions using UCR data, 1985-2009 where the dependent vari-
     able is rape offenses per 100,000. State population is used as analytical weights.
     Time-variant controls include state population by gender, unemployment rates,
     white sex ratios, share of white, black, young, married, single, employed by mili-
     tary, and share of households below the poverty line. Panel A presents clustered
     standard errors and Panel B presents 5th and 95th percentile confidence intervals
     from placebo-based inferential calculations. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01




                                          36
          Table 7 Does Decriminalization Impact Public Health Outcomes?

                      Dependent variable:                       ln(Female gonorrhea per capita)
                                           Panel A: Clustered Standard Errors
                      RI effect post-decriminalization          -0.434***      -0.494***        -0.616***
                                                                 (0.081)        (0.078)          (0.064)


                                    Panel B: Placebo-based Confidence Intervals
                      RI effect post-decriminalization           -0.434**        -0.494*         -0.616**
                      5th percentile                              -0.370          -0.352          -0.445
                      95th percentile                              1.078           1.001           0.361
                      N                                            1203           1203             1203
                      Mean of dependent variable                   4.86           4.86             4.86
                      State and year FE                            Yes            Yes              Yes
                      State linear trends                          Yes            Yes              Yes
                      Time variant controls                         No            Yes              Yes
                      State quadratic trends                        No             No              Yes
                          These are OLS regressions using CDC Gonorrhea Surveillance Program Data, 1985-
                          2009 where the dependent variable is ln gonorrhea incidence per capital for females..
                          State population is used as analytical weights. Time-variant controls include state
                          population by gender, unemployment rates, white sex ratios, share of white, black,
                          young, married, single, employed by military, and share of households below the
                          poverty line. Panel A presents clustered standard errors and Panel B presents 5th
                          and 95th percentile confidence intervals from placebo-based inferential calculations.
                          * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01




              Table 8 Actual Versus Synthetic Rhode Island Characteristics

                                                                                 Reported per capita rape model
Variable names                                                                Rhode Island Synthetic Rhode Island
Rape per capita    (1979)                                                          12.36                        13.45
Rape per capita    (1992)                                                          31.19                        35.69
Rape per capita    (1995)                                                          26.26                        31.86
Rape per capita    (2001)                                                          38.86                        34.53
Rape per capita    (2002)                                                          37.46                        37.45
Rape per capita    (2001 & 2002)                                                   38.16                        35.99
Rape per capita    (2002 & 2003)                                                   39.10                        38.82
Rape per capita    (2003)                                                          40.74                        40.20
Population                                                                       910,550.4                    1,072,008
                                                                                  ln(female gonorrhea) model
Variable names                                                                Rhode Island Synthetic Rhode Island
ln   Female   gonorrhea   per   capita   (1991 & 1992 & 1993 & 1994)                3.44                          3.45
ln   Female   gonorrhea   per   capita   (1995)                                     3.25                          3.47
ln   Female   gonorrhea   per   capita   (1996)                                     3.26                          3.29
ln   Female   gonorrhea   per   capita   (1997)                                     3.24                          3.31
ln   Female   gonorrhea   per   capita   (1998)                                     3.27                          3.51
ln   Female   gonorrhea   per   capita   (1999)                                     3.45                          3.54
ln   Female   gonorrhea   per   capita   (2000 & 2001)                              3.64                          3.65
ln   Female   gonorrhea   per   capita   (2001 & 2002)                              3.76                          3.75
ln   Female   gonorrhea   per   capita   (2002)                                     3.81                          3.79




                                                                37
Table 9 Rhode Island Synthetic Control Weights

            State name            Estimated weight
                 Reported rape rate model

            Idaho                          0.245
            Iowa                           0.156
            South Dakota                   0.599
            Log female gonorrhea rate model

            Louisiana                      0.588
            Montana                        0.254
            Vermont                        0.158




Table 10 Are Prostitution and Rape Correlated?

     Dep var: Prostitution                 Females        Males
     Female sexual assault victim           0.025*
                                            (0.015)
     Admitted rape                                        0.177**
                                                          (0.081)


     R-squared                               0.071         0.147
     N                                       1,504         1,085
     Mean of dependent variable              0.03           0.16
       These are OLS regressions using the NHSLS 1992 data where
       the dependent variable in each model equals 1 if the person
       has ever engaged in compensation for sex. Heteroskedastic
       robust standard errors in parenthesis. All models use house-
       hold size sampling weights as analytical weights and include
       controls for age, age-squared, maternal education, own ed-
       ucation, marital status, household structure in adolescence,
       race, age of sexual debut, family size, birth order, and Cen-
       sus divisional fixed effects both at the survey and at age 14.
       * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01




                                  38
                                     Rhode Island Prostitution arrests
          400
          350   300
Prostitution arrests
200     250




                                               Decision
          150
          100




                       1996   1998      2000    2002          2004   2006   2008   2010
                                                       Year



                          Figure 1 Rhode Island Prostitution Arrests




                                                   39
                                                Providence Phoenix Weekly Adult Services Ads
                                                      Number of advertisers and total size advertisements
                                      4
     Index value (relative to week 1)
           1        2  0      3




                                          01jul2000            01jul2002            01jul2004            01jul2006            01jul2008
                                                                                     Weeks

                                                                   Number of firms                      Total size of ads
                                          Five unique advertisers purchased a combined 0.67 inches at start of series.



                                               Providence Phoenix Weekly Restaurant Ads
                                                   Number of advertisers and total size of advertising




                                                                                                                                                                   25
                       8




                                                                                                                                     Total advertising space index
                                                                                                                                                             20
     Number of firms index
                        6




                                                                                                                                                      15
              4




                                                                                                                                              10
      2




                                                                                                                                        5
                       0




                                                                                                                                     0




                                          01jul2000         01jul2002           01jul2004          01jul2006             01jul2008
                                                                                 Weeks

                                                               Number of firms                      Total size of ads
                                          Seven unique advertisers purchased 0.823 inches of advertising space in week one.



Figure 2 “Adult services/spa” Section of the Providence Phoenix (Top panel),
      “Restaurants” Section of the Providence Phoenix (Bottom panel)




                                                                                    40
Figure 3 Providence Phoenix Advertising Before (Top panel) and After
                 Decriminalization (Bottom panel)




                                41
                                                                                                                  Forcible female rape offenses




     Rape offenses (per capita)
                                   20 25 30 35 40 45
                                                                   United States




                                                                    Rhode Island


                                                            1985                    1990                            1995                    2000   2005                    2010



                                                                                                                            Robberies
     Robberies (per capita)
                                   50 100 150 200 250




                                                                                                                                                          United States




                                                                                                                                                          Rhode Island

                                                            1985                    1990                            1995                    2000   2005                    2010



                                                                                                            Murder and non-negligent homicides
     Murders (per capita)
                                   10
                                   8




                                                                                                                                                               United States
                                   6
                                   4




                                                                                                                                                                Rhode Island
                                   2




                                                            1985                    1990                            1995                    2000   2005                    2010




Figure 4 Rape, Robbery, and Murder (per capita), Rhode Island and the US



                                                                                                                            Burglaries
     Burglaries (per capita)
                                   500 750 1000 1250 1500




                                                                                                                                                                 United States


                                                                                                                                                                  Rhode Island

                                                            1985                    1990                            1995                    2000   2005                    2010



                                                                                                                             Assaults
     Assaults (per capita)
                                   1400




                                                                                                                                                                  United States
                                   1200
                                   1000




                                                                                                                                                                  Rhode Island
                                   800




                                                            1985                    1990                            1995                    2000   2005                    2010



                                                                                                                           Vehicle thefts
     Vehicle thefts (per capita)
                                   200 400 600 800 1000




                                                                                                   Rhode Island


                                                                                   United States




                                                            1985                    1990                            1995                    2000   2005                    2010




                                                 Figure 5 Other Crimes (per capita), Rhode Island and the US



                                                                                                                             42
                                                    Female gonorrhea incidence (per capita)
                                300
       Female gonorrhea cases




                                                                     Decriminalization decision
                                200




                                                                                                          United States
                                100




                                                                                                                Rhode Island
                                0




                                      1985   1990             1995                 2000            2005              2010




                                                     Male gonorrhea incidence (per capita)
                                500
       Male gonorrhea cases
                                400




                                                                      Decriminalization decision
                                300
                                200




                                                                                                          United States
                                100




                                                                                                                 Rhode Island
                                0




                                      1985   1990             1995                 2000            2005              2010




Figure 6 Female and male per capita gonorrhea incidence, Rhode Island and the US




                                                                        43
                                            Reported rapes per capita
                                    Rhode Island vs. Synthetic Control Rhode Island
              50       40
 Reported rapes per capita
 10     20    030




                             1960    1970         1980         1990           2000        2010

                                         Rhode Island            synthetic Rhode Island
              20        10
 Reported rape rate gap
           0  -10
              -20




                             1960    1970         1980         1990           2000        2010


Figure 7 Top panel: Trends in per capita rape: RI and synthetic RI
     Bottom panel: Per capita rape gap between RI and synthetic RI



                                                         44
                                                   Log female gonorrhea per capita
                                                Rhode Island vs. Synthetic Control Rhode Island
                      5        4.5
       Log female gonorrhea rate
     2.5     3    3.5 2  4




                                         1985    1990         1995         2000           2005        2010

                                                     Rhode Island            synthetic Rhode Island
                      1
     Gap in log female gonorrhea rates
       -.5           0-1         .5




                                         1985    1990         1995         2000           2005        2010


Figure 8 Top panel: Trends in per capita female gonorrhea: RI and synthetic RI
      Bottom panel: Per capita gonorrhea gap between RI and synthetic RI



                                                                     45
                                   8
                                   6
                       Frequency
                          4        2
                                                                                  RI                                                AR




                                   0
                                              0           1           2           3        4      5                 6           7         8
                                                                                 Post/pre RMSPE ratio




Figure 9 Ratio of post–decriminalization and pre-decriminalization RMSPE for per
                capita rape: Rhode Island and 41 control states
                                   6
                                   4
                       Frequency
                                   2




                                                                                                                    RI
                                   0




                                              0                   1                2            3                         4               5
                                                                                 Post/pre RMSPE ratio




Figure 10 Ratio of post–decriminalization and pre-decriminalization RMSPE for per
              capita gonorrhea: Rhode Island and 51 control states



                                                                   Police employment per 100 000
                                                                                        1962-2005
                                   350
                       150 200 250 300
                         Police employment
                                   100




                                             1960              1970                1980                1990              2000            2010
                                                                                                Year

                                                                                         RI                   USA
                                              Vertical bar is 2003 decriminalization decision




      Figure 11 Police employment does not change post–decriminalization



                                                                                        46
A   Appendix Tables and Figures—For Online Publication


       Table A1 Does Decriminalization Impact Public Health Outcomes?

               Dependent variable:                   ln(Male gonorrhea per capita)
                              Panel A: Clustered Standard Errors
               RI effect post-decriminalization       -0.065      -0.128        -0.460***
                                                     (0.097)     (0.079)         (0.054)


                        Panel B: Placebo-based Confidence Intervals
               RI effect post-decriminalization       -0.065      -0.128          -0.460
               5th percentile                         -0.473      -0.459          -0.511
               95th percentile                         0.785       0.771           0.364
               N                                       1203        1203            1203
               Mean of dependent variable              4.96        4.96            4.96
               State and year FE                       Yes         Yes             Yes
               State linear trends                     Yes         Yes             Yes
               Time variant controls                    No         Yes             Yes
               State quadratic trends                   No          No             Yes
                These are OLS regressions using CDC Gonorrhea Surveillance Program Data,
                1985-2009 where the dependent variable is ln gonorrhea incidence per capita for
                males. State population is used as analytical weights. Time-variant controls in-
                clude state population by gender, unemployment rates, white sex ratios, share of
                white, black, young, married, single, employed by military, and share of house-
                holds below the poverty line. Panel A presents clustered standard errors and
                Panel B presents 5th and 95th percentile confidence intervals from placebo-based
                inferential calculations. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01




                                                    47
       Table A2 Does Decriminalization Impact Rape Offenses? (City Level)

              Dependent variable:                                   Rape offenses per capita
                                  Panel A: Clustered Standard Errors
              Providence effect post-decriminalization          -10.75***      -23.78***      -23.31***
                                                                 (2.402)        (1.131)        (1.158)


                             Panel B: Placebo-based Confidence Intervals
              Providence effect post-decriminalization            -10.75         -23.78         -23.31
              5th percentile                                      -27.64         -32.61         -24.43
              95th percentile                                      28.96          33.51         18.68
              N                                                   2975           2975           2975
              Mean of dependent variable                          51.11          51.11          51.11
              State and year FE                                    Yes            Yes            Yes
              State linear trends                                  No             Yes            Yes
              State quadratic trends                               No             No             Yes
                These are OLS regressions using UCR city level data, 1985-2009. City population is used
                as analytical weights. Time-variant controls include state population by gender, unem-
                ployment rates, white sex ratios, share of white, black, young, married, single, employed
                by military, and share of households below the poverty line. Panel A presents clustered
                standard errors and Panel B presents 5th and 95th percentile confidence intervals from
                placebo-based inferential calculations. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01




Table A3 Does Decriminalization Impact Rape Offenses? (City Level, 14 Northeastern
                                  states only)

               Dependent variable:                                  Rape offenses per capita
                                  Panel A: Clustered Standard Errors
               Providence effect post-decriminalization          -12.39*      -22.91***     -21.30***
                                                                 (4.198)       (1.444)       (1.370)
                             Panel B: Placebo-based Confidence Intervals
               Providence effect post-decriminalization           -12.39        -22.91         -21.30
               5th percentile                                     -20.78        -29.36         -23.66
               95th percentile                                     19.77         20.87          26.03
               N                                                   350           350            350
               Mean of dependent variable                         35.52         35.52          35.52
               State and year FE                                   Yes           Yes            Yes
               State linear trends                                 No            Yes            No
               City linear trends                                  No            No             Yes
                 These are OLS regressions using UCR city level data, 1985-2009. City population is used
                 as analytical weights. Time-variant controls include state population by gender, unem-
                 ployment rates, white sex ratios, share of white, black, young, married, single, employed
                 by military, and share of households below the poverty line. Panel A presents clustered
                 standard errors and Panel B presents 5th and 95th percentile confidence intervals from
                 placebo-based inferential calculations. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01




                                                         48
                 Table A4 Impact of Decriminalization on Sex Worker Race

Dependent variable:                   White Provider           Asian Provider           Hispanic Provider         Black Provider
RI effect post-decriminalization            0.070***                0.076***                 -0.039***                     -0.014
                                             (0.023)                 (0.022)                  (0.009)                     (0.008)


N                                            85,984                  85,984                    85,984                     85,984
Mean of dependent variable                    0.55                    0.16                      0.13                       0.11
 These are OLS regressions where the dependent variable in each model is a 0/1 for race of the worker, using Total Erotic Review Data,
 1999–2008. Standard errors are heteroskedastic robust and clustered at the city level. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01




         Table A5 Correlation between Participation in Sex Markets and STIs

         Depvar: STI Diagnosis Ever                            Females                              Males
                                                        Gonorrhea Chlamydia                 Gonorrhea Chlamydia
         Ever engaged in compensation for sex             0.113**              0.054          0.145***           0.011
                                                          (0.056)             (0.047)          (0.033)          (0.013)


         N                                                  1,654              1,649            1,229             1,223
         Mean of dependent variable                         0.03                0.04             0.08              0.02
           These are OLS regressions using the NHSLS 1992 data where dependent variable in each model is dichotomous
           variable equalling 1 if the respondent has ever had gonorrhea or chlamydia. Heteroskedastic robust standard errors
           in parenthesis. All models use household size sampling weights as analytical weights and included census division
           regional fixed effects both in 1992 (year of survey) and their residence at age 14. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01




                                                                49
                                   Placebo Rape Rate Sampling Distribution
                                                                Full model



               8
               6
          Frequency
             4 2
               0




                      -20                   -10                  0                       10                    20
                                                            Placebo estimates
           Solid vertical bar is RI DD estimate of -19.42 and vertical dashed bars are 5th and 95th percentile




     Figure 12 State Effects from Placebo Tests (Rape, Col 3 Table 6)




                 Placebo Log Female Gonorrhea Rate Sampling Distribution
                                                                Full model
              8
              6
          Frequency
             42
              0




                      -1                     -.5                    0                          .5                      1
                                                            Placebo estimates
                      Solid vertical bar is RI DD estimate of -0.62 and vertical dashed bars are 5th and 95th percentile




Figure 13 State Effects from Placebo Tests (Female Gonorrhea, Col 3 Table 7)




                                                                  50
                                                            60
                                                            40
                        Gap in rape rate prediction error
                                                            20
                                                            0
                                                            -20
                                                            -40   1960   1965   1970   1975   1980   1985   1990   1995   2000   2005   2010




Figure 14 Per capita rape gaps in Rhode Island and placebo gaps in all 41 control
                                    states
                                                            40
                                                            20
                        Gap in rape rate prediction error
                                                            0
                                                            -20
                                                            -40




                                                                  1960   1965   1970   1975   1980   1985   1990   1995   2000   2005   2010




Figure 15 Per capita rape gaps in Rhode Island and placebo gaps in all 41 control
states (discards states with pre-decriminalization RMSPE 2 times higher than RI’s)
                                                            30
                                                            20
                        Gap in rape rate prediction error
                                                            10
                                                            0
                                                            -10
                                                            -20




                                                                  1960   1965   1970   1975   1980   1985   1990   1995   2000   2005   2010




 Figure 16 Per capita rape gaps in Rhode Island and placebo gaps in all 41 control
states (discards states with pre-decriminalization RMSPE 1.5 times higher than RI’s)



                                                                                                 51
                                                           Reported rape offenses per capita
                                                     Rhode Island and Synthetic Control Rhode Island States



                                         60
              Rape offenses per capita
                                         40
                                         20
                                         0




                                              1960        1970         1980         1990           2000       2010

                                                                  Rhode Island             Idaho
                                                                  Iowa                     South Dakota



Figure 17 Per capita rape for Rhode Island and synthetic control Rhode Island states




                                                                 Reported rapes per capita
                                                            Arkansas vs. Synthetic Control Arkansas
                                         50
                                         40
              Rape offenses per capita
                                         30
                                         20
                                         10
                                         0




                                              1960        1970         1980         1990           2000       2010

                                                                  Arkansas           synthetic Arkansas



   Figure 18 Per capita rape offenses for Arkansas and synthetic control Arkansas




                                                                              52
                                          2
                         Gap in ln(Female gonorrhea cases)
                           -1            0-2         1       1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010




   Figure 19 Per capita gonorrhea gaps in Rhode Island and placebo gaps in all 51
                                  control states
                                          1
                         Gap in ln(Female gonorrhea cases)
                           -.5           0-1         .5




                                                             1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010




Figure 20 Per capita gonorrhea gaps in Rhode Island and placebo gaps in all 51 control
  states (discards states with pre-decriminalization RMSPE 2 times higher than RI’s)
                                          1
                         Gap in ln(Female gonorrhea cases)
                           -.5           0-1         .5




                                                             1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010




Figure 21 Per capita gonorrhea gaps in Rhode Island and placebo gaps in all 51 control
 states (discards states with pre-decriminalization RMSPE 1.5 times higher than RI’s)



                                                                                          53
                                                                 Log female gonorrhea incidence per capita
                                                               Rhode Island and Synthetic Control Rhode Island States



                                               6
             Log female gonorrhea per capita
                                               5
                                               4
                                               3
                                               2
                                               1




                                                     1985              1990            1995               2000           2005                  2010

                                                                                   Rhode Island                   Louisiana
                                                                                   Montana                        Vermont



Figure 22 Per capita gonorrhea for Rhode Island and synthetic control Rhode Island
                                     States




                                                                   Total Reviews for The Erotic Review
                                                                                       2006 to 2013
                                                                                                                                       40000 60000 80000 100000
                                               600
             Number of new reviews




                                                                                                                                       Number of new reviews
                200        400




                                                                                                                                       20000
                                               0




                                                     2006                 2008                2010               2012           2014
                                                                                              year

                                                                                  RI                 US (excluding RI)
                                                      The vertical bar is 2009.




           Figure 23 Total Erotic Review Data after Re-criminalization




                                                                                              54
