                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      THE PRISON BOOM AND THE LACK OF BLACK PROGRESS AFTER SMITH
                              AND WELCH

                                              Derek Neal
                                              Armin Rick

                                        Working Paper 20283
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20283


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2014




We thank Joseph Altonji, Elizabeth Carson, Steven Levitt, Jens Ludwig, Justin McCrary, Thomas
Miles, Bruce Western, Max Schanzenbach, workshop participants at the IRP Summer Research Workshop,
the NBER Summer Institute, Duke, and the Becker Friedman Institute Conference honoring Finis Welch
for helpful comments. We are especially grateful to Janet Currie, Steven Raphael, and an anonymous
referee for comments on a related project that led to this work. This work grew out of discussions during
the October 2008 meeting of the Chicago Workshop on Black-White Inequality, which was funded
by the Searle Freedom Trust. We thank the George J. Stigler Center for Study of the Economy and
the State for research support. We thank Andrew Jordan, Ian Fillmore, Ezra Karger, Sarah Komisarow,
and Joshua Shea for excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Derek Neal and Armin Rick. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
The Prison Boom and the Lack of Black Progress after Smith and Welch
Derek Neal and Armin Rick
NBER Working Paper No. 20283
July 2014
JEL No. J01,J31,K14

                                            ABSTRACT

More than two decades ago, Smith and Welch (1989) used the 1940 through 1980 census files to document
important relative black progress. However, recent data indicate that this progress did not continue,
at least among men. The growth of incarceration rates among black men in recent decades combined
with the sharp drop in black employment rates during the Great Recession have left most black men
in a position relative to white men that is really no better than the position they occupied only a few
years after the Civil Rights Act of 1965. A move toward more punitive treatment of arrested offenders
drove prison growth in recent decades, and this trend is evident among arrested offenders in every
major crime category. Changes in the severity of corrections policies have had a much larger impact
on black communities than white communities because arrest rates have historically been much greater
for blacks than whites.


Derek Neal
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and The Committee on Education
and also NBER
d-neal@uchicago.edu

Armin Rick
Johnson Graduate School of Management
Cornell University
114 East Ave
Sage Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853
ar964@cornell.edu




An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w20283
         THE PRISON BOOM & THE LACK OF BLACK PROGRESS AFTER SMITH & WELCH                                   1

                                             Introduction
   More than two decades ago, Smith and Welch (1989) published their seminal work on
the evolution of black-white inequality during the 20th century. They were among the first
researchers to gain access to electronic versions of census long form data, and using census
data from 1940 through 1980 as well as Current Population Survey (CPS) data from the
1980s, they traced the evolution of black-white differences in education, employment, and
earnings for cohorts born from the late 19th century into the latter half of the 20th century.
They titled their paper “Black Economic Progress After Myrdal,” and they argued that,
although the 1940 Census data supported Myrdal’s (1944) bleak assessment of economic life
among American blacks during the first four decades of the 20th century, subsequent census
data recorded noteworthy gains for blacks relative to whites in not only education levels and
measures of occupational prestige but also in levels of earnings and family income.
   For example, Smith and Welch (1989) report that the black-white gap in completed years
of schooling among males ages 26-35 fell from 3.9 years of schooling in 1940 to 1.4 years in
1980. This decline in the black-white schooling gap reflects an enormous increase in black
educational attainment. Over the 1940-1980 period, average schooling levels among black
men increased from just below 6 years of schooling to more than 12 years, while schooling
levels among white men increased from just under 10 years to 13.5 years. Given the strength
of the statistical relationship between earnings and education, it is not surprising that they
also documented enormous gains in the earnings of black men relative to white men.
   Most labor economists remember that Smith and Welch (1989) documented the dramatic
economic and social progress of blacks during much of the 20th century, but in the final
paragraphs of their paper, they offered this cautionary note, “..., there are also reasons for
concern about the future, especially for the still large black underclass.”1 Smith and Welch
(1989) argued that problems with the quality of schools that serve black children, especially
in Northern cities, were a barrier to further progress.
   Wilson (1987) also drew attention to the struggles of black youth in the inner-city, and
Neal (2006) used data from the National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP) to
show that reading and math scores for black students in urban areas did fall during the
1980s relative to scores for other youth.2 Further, although aggregate black-white gaps in
achievement and attainment continued to shrink for much of the 1980s, there is considerable
evidence that overall black-white skill convergence had already stopped by the time Smith
and Welch (1989) published their findings. Today, black-white gaps in math and reading
scores among youth and black-white gaps in overall educational attainment among young


1
 Smith and Welch (1989), pp. 561
2
 Flanagan and Grissmer (2002) show that by the mid 1990s, test scores for black children in Northern
cities were lower than test scores for black children in the rural Southeast. This pattern is striking because
migration to Northern cities was an important engine of black progress for much of the 20th century.
         THE PRISON BOOM & THE LACK OF BLACK PROGRESS AFTER SMITH & WELCH                                   2

adults are quite similar to the corresponding gaps observed around 1990.3 Further, our
results below suggest that, relative to whites, labor market outcomes among black men are
no better now and possibly worse than they were in 1970.
   Below, we explore several different methods for measuring recent trends in black-white
inequality in labor market outcomes. Given several different estimators and imputation
procedures, three facts shape these calculations. First, employment rates for men have
fallen in recent decades. Second, this decline in male employment rates has been coincident
with an unprecedented increase in incarceration rates. Third, since 1980, these declines in
employment and increases in incarceration have been much more dramatic among black men
than white men.
   Tables 1 through 4 present employment rates and institutionalization rates for adult men in
the United States. The data come from the Integrated Public Use Microdata Series (IPUMS)
and cover six census years, 1960-2010.4 Each diagonal row in these tables presents data from
one census year. Each column presents data for one age group over different census years.
Each horizontal row presents data from different census years for a five-year birth cohort.
Appendix Tables A1-A4 present parallel results for women.5 Given the numerous data sets we
employ in this paper and the numerous different coding schemes that we encounter regarding
Hispanic origin, we were not able to come up with a clean strategy for identifying Hispanic
populations consistently over time. Therefore, we typically divide our samples into whites,
blacks, and others.6
   Institutionalization involves more than incarceration. Recent census files also include res-
idents of mental hospitals and nursing homes in the institutionalized population. However,
few persons under age 50 are in nursing homes, and the populations housed in mental hos-
pitals have declined greatly over the past three decades. So, the institutionalization rates
presented in these tables likely understate the magnitude of recent trends in incarceration
rates, and the most recent institutionalization rates are reasonable proxies for the corre-
sponding incarceration rates.7
3
  The National Assessment of Education Progress: Long Term Trend Studies track math and reading perfor-
mance for students ages 9, 13, and 17 using exams that are designed to be comparable over time. Among
nine-year olds in 2012, the black-white gap in reading scores was smaller than the corresponding gap in 1990.
However, the other five 2012 measures of black-white gaps in reading and math for 2012 were comparable to or
greater in absolute value than the corresponding gaps in 1990. See http://nationsreportcard.gov/ltt_2012/.
While Murnane (2013) reports a recent increase in high school graduation rates among blacks both absolutely
and relative to whites, this change does not appear to have generated a significant reduction in the overall
black-white attainment gap. See Neal (2006) for an extensive treatment of trends in black-white achievement
gaps.
4
  The 1960-2000 data come from the Census Long Form. The 2010 data come from the American Community
Survey.
5
  See https://sites.google.com/site/dereknealresearch/ for all Appendix materials.
6
  Appendix A explains the complications that force us to use these categories.
7
  Before 1980, the Census Bureau produced more detailed codes that allow researchers to identify persons
living in correctional institutions, but starting in 1990, the codes used in the census and American Community
Survey (ACS) files simply identify persons as living in some type of institutional quarters. This broader
         THE PRISON BOOM & THE LACK OF BLACK PROGRESS AFTER SMITH & WELCH                                      3

   Tables 1 and 2 present employment rates and rates of institutionalization for black and
white men respectively. The employment rates presented in these tables are based on re-
spondent activities during the survey weeks in question. Note that, for both black and white
men, employment rates are lower now than in 1970 within each age group. While the de-
clines in the ages 20-24 group may, in part, reflect higher levels of college and graduate school
attendance, the declines among men at older ages strongly suggest weaker attachment to
market work. In contrast, the Appendix tables indicate that both black and white women
became more involved in market work over the same time period.
   While Tables 1 and 2 document employment declines among both black and white men,
the declines are much more pronounced for blacks, e.g. the decline in employment rates
among white men ages 25-29 was roughly 11 percentage points between 1970 and 2010 while
the comparable change among black males was over twice as large. By 2010, more than one
third of black males ages 25-49 were either unemployed or out of the labor force.
   The employment patterns in these tables have received less attention than they deserve
in the economics literature on race and inequality. Many analyses of trends in employment
and income rely on data from the CPS,8 but the CPS sampling frame does not include in-
stitutionalized persons, and the institutionalization rates in these tables show noteworthy
increases among both black and white men at all ages. Further, current levels of institution-
alization are particularly noteworthy among black men. On any given day in 2010, almost
one in ten black men ages 20-39 were institutionalized, and rates of institutionalization were
actually slightly higher among black men in 2000. Further, because turnover among prison
populations is quite high, these results suggest that far more than ten percent of prime age
black men will serve some time in prison or jail during a given calendar year.9
   Table 3 demonstrates that, while black men experience high rates of institutionalization
overall, rates among less-educated black men have reached levels that were unthinkable prior
to 1980. By 2010, the institutionalization rate among black, male high school dropouts ages
25-29 was almost one third and the employment rate for this group was less than one fourth.
Institutionalization rates among black dropouts ages 39 or less actually fell slightly between
definition of the institutionalized population includes those who reside in correctional institutions, facilities
for the mentally ill, or facilities for the elderly and handicapped. For the sake of consistency, we use the
post-1980 classification for all years. This means that the institutionalization rates in Tables 1 and 2 are
larger than the corresponding incarceration rates for every year and demographic cell. Nonetheless, among
prime age men, the fraction of institutionalized persons living in penal institutions has always been high
and has increased since 1980 because rates of institutionalization in mental health facilities have fallen. See
Figure 1 in Harcourt (2006). In 1980, roughly one fourth of the persons who were either in prison or mental
hospitals were mental patients. This figure was less than 10% by 2000.
8
  In a recent Handbook chapter, Acemoglu and Autor (2011) assess the literature on links between trends
in technology and trends in earnings inequality. They discuss the rates of growth of employment in jobs
classified by skill-type, but in keeping with much of the related literature, they devote scant attention to
the stunning growth in the numbers of low-skilled persons who have no formal sector job or how many of
these non-employed persons are in prison. Neal (2006), Western (2006), and Pettit (2012) discuss how the
growing prison population affects the sampling frames used to create official labor market statistics.
9
  See Bonczar and Beck (1997).
         THE PRISON BOOM & THE LACK OF BLACK PROGRESS AFTER SMITH & WELCH                           4

2000 and 2010, but rates among those over 39 continued to rise. Thus, among black men
in 2010, more than 1 in 6 high school dropouts in their forties were institutionalized on
any given day. These numbers do not simply reflect a significant number of men who are
serving extremely long sentences. Admission rates for new court commitments are now also
noteworthy for this age group.10
   Table 4 presents results for white men with less than a high school education. Employment
rates have fallen steadily among these men since 1970 across all age groups. Overall, rates
of institutionalization among these men remained roughly constant during the 1970s but
have risen steadily since 1980. As in Table 3, overall institutionalization rates increased only
slightly during the 2000-2010 period.
   In sum, among less educated men, rates of institutionalization have increased for both
blacks and whites at all ages. Further, among both black and white dropouts, we see employ-
ment levels among men over 40 that are strikingly low by historical standards. Nonetheless,
because the black samples contain proportionally more dropouts and even worse trends in
outcomes among dropouts, these trends contribute to growing inequality between black and
white men.
   Since 1980, incarceration rates among both black and white men in most age groups have
increased by factors of two to three, but these changes have had a much larger impact on black
communities. Because black male incarceration rates were much higher than corresponding
white rates before the prison boom ever began, the impact on blacks communities of a more
than two-fold increase in incarceration rates has been dramatic.
   It is logically possible that a common set of economic forces simultaneously drove recent
trends in incarceration, black-white inequality, and overall income inequality. However, the
existing literature contains noteworthy evidence consistent with the view that policy changes
created the prison boom. Thus, we seek more precise answers to two sets of questions

     (1) How important are changes in criminal justice policies as determinants of the dra-
         matic rise in U.S. incarceration rates during the past three decades and have these
         changes had differential impacts on black men as opposed to white men?
     (2) How does properly accounting for growth in incarcerated populations affect our as-
         sessment of recent trends in economic inequality among men in the US, both overall
         and between blacks and whites?

Below, we present new results derived from seven states that report reliable data to the
National Corrections Reporting Program (NCRP) over the period 1985-2005. These results
indicate that, in recent decades, a broad menu of changes in sentencing rules and parole poli-
cies created a much more punitive criminal justice system. In the 2000s, arrested offenders


10
 The NCRP files indicate that the prison admission rate for new court commitments among men ages 40-50
was roughly 3 in 1,000 in 2005. This rate is about three time higher than the comparable rate in 1985.
        THE PRISON BOOM & THE LACK OF BLACK PROGRESS AFTER SMITH & WELCH                        5

received much more severe punishment than their counterparts in the 1980s, and this is true
for both black and white offenders regardless of the offenses that led to their arrests.
   There is some evidence that the increased use of long sentences as punishment for violent
crimes may have been even more pronounced among blacks, and as others have noted, the
federal War on Drugs was not conducted in a color-blind manner. However, these factors
are minor parts of our story. The key point is that, since black arrest rates are now and have
always been much higher than white arrest rates, the move to much more punitive treatment
for all arrested offenders has had much larger effects on black communities than white ones.
   The existing literature does not provide definitive results concerning how punishing of-
fenders with prison terms rather than probation or other forms of supervision impacts the
future labor market outcomes of offenders. However, incarceration does prevent offenders
from participating in market work during their prison terms, and we demonstrate that re-
searchers must account for prisoners if they wish to accurately describe recent trends in labor
market inequality among groups of men defined by race or education groups.
   Because CPS data do not contain information about persons who live in prisons or other
institutions, the prison boom has affected the degree to which persons who have low earnings
prospects are counted in many official measures of employment and earnings, and this is
especially true among black men. In section 8, we explore several imputation strategies that
allow us to measure trends in income inequality between blacks and whites while accounting
for race-specific trends in non-employment and institutionalization. Although black-white
gaps in potential earnings appear to have shrunk during the 1990s, these gaps grew during
both the 1980s and the 2000s. The Great Recession period of 2008-2010 was quite bleak for
black men, and recent levels of labor market inequality between black and white prime-age
men are likely not materially different than those observed in 1970.
   In the following sections, we review the legal history of changes in criminal justice practice
over the past three decades or more, and we also review the empirical literature on links
between changes in criminal justice policies and prison growth. Then, we present original
work with data from the (NCRP) that clarifies the role of policy changes as engines of growth
in state prison populations and examines the extent to which certain changes may have
disproportionately affected blacks. After briefly reviewing the literature on how incarceration
affects future life outcomes, we analyze recent trends in black-white labor market inequality
while paying special attention to how changes in incarceration rates impact different measures
of trends in black-white inequality.

            1. Recent History of Trends in Criminal Justice Policy
  For most of the twentieth century, policies that governed justice and corrections in the
United States reflected a paradigm known as indeterminate sentencing. Judges enjoyed great
discretion when deciding whether to sentence convicted offenders to probation or prison, and
they enjoyed similar discretion when deciding the sentences for those who entered prison.
         THE PRISON BOOM & THE LACK OF BLACK PROGRESS AFTER SMITH & WELCH                                   6

Further, holding constant the sentences that judges imposed, parole boards enjoyed consid-
erable control over the time that specific inmates actually served.
   The indeterminate sentencing model offered judges and parole boards the freedom to
customize punishments to specific offenders rather than simply match specific punishments to
specific offenses. Judges and parole officials were free to consider prospects for rehabilitation,
the provision of incentives for good behavior and self-improvement, as well as expected
impacts on public safety when making decisions that determined the punishments received
by various offenders.
   However, during the 1970s, indeterminacy came under attack from activists of many dif-
ferent political persuasions. Some on the left charged that indeterminacy gave judges and
parole officials too much freedom to indulge their own racial prejudices when determining
sanctions. Others on the right charged that indeterminacy allowed lenient judges and parole
boards to undermine public safety by putting dangerous criminals back on the streets far
sooner than legislators intended.11
   Thus, in the late 1970s, legal changes began to move justice and corrections policies
toward a determinate sentencing model. Table 5 summarizes some of the changes that
different states made as they moved to more determinate sentencing practices.12 Before
1980, California, Colorado, Illinois, Indiana, Maine, and New Mexico eliminated or severely
curtailed discretionary releases by parole boards, and since that time, 16 other states have
either eliminated or curtailed the discretionary powers of parole boards. Further, a number
of these states eliminated discretionary parole as one component of a large set of reforms
that also involved establishing independent sentencing commissions. These commissions
developed sentencing guidelines that constrain the sentencing decisions of judges. Minnesota,
in 1980, was the first state to establish an independent sentencing commission. Since then,
24 other states have adopted commissions that vary greatly in terms of their missions and
their powers.
   In 1994, the federal government passed the Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement
Act. This law established the Truth-in-Sentencing (TIS) Incentive Grants Program which
provided grants for prison construction and expansion to states that adopted policies re-
quiring sentenced offenders to serve large portions of their sentences. The rules determining
whether or not specific states qualified for these grants were complex, but the nominal goal
of the program was to induce states to adopt policies that require most prisoners, especially
violent offenders, to serve 85% of their sentences. Delaware, Minnesota, Tennessee, Utah,
11
   See Raphael and Stoll (2013) as well as Stemen and Rengifo (2011) for discussions of this literature. See
Dansky (2008) for references specific to the debate in California.
12
   There are many factors that contribute to determinacy. Sentencing guidelines, narrow presumptive sen-
tencing ranges, mandatory minimum laws and other policies restrict the discretion that judges may exercise
at sentencing, while restrictions of discretionary parole release limit the ability of parole boards to affect
actual time-served. We do not attempt to code some states as determinate and others as indeterminate at
any point in time. Instead, we address a number of factors that influence both determinacy and punitiveness
in many states.
         THE PRISON BOOM & THE LACK OF BLACK PROGRESS AFTER SMITH & WELCH                                  7

and Washington adopted TIS laws prior to 1994, and by 1998, 22 additional states adopted
policies that secured their eligibility for TIS grant money. In addition, Table 5 shows that
the vast majority of states now have some TIS law on the books that limits discretionary
release by parole boards.13
   It is easy to see how each one of the policies described in Table 5 could be employed
not only to make criminal justice systems more determinate but also to make them more
punitive. Nonetheless, empirical work on the effects of these policies has not produced a
consistent set of results that link prison growth to the adoption of specific policies, and this
is not surprising given that different states often implement nominally similar laws in quite
different ways.
   Frase (2005) points out that some states use sentencing commissions as devices for match-
ing corrections populations and corrections budgets.14 In these states, restrictions on judicial
latitude in sentencing and parole board discretion over release appear to function as vehicles
for keeping prison populations within ranges that are in line with budgets allocated for cor-
rections. However, some other states have used similar determinate sentencing practices as
vehicles for making criminal justice policy more punitive. Nicholson-Crotty (2004) conclude,
based on a panel data model of state commitment and incarceration rates between 1975 and
1988, that mandatory sentencing guidelines are negatively associated with state-level growth
in commitment rates when such guidelines are linked to corrections budgets. However, the
opposite pattern holds in states that develop sentencing guidelines and correction budgets
separately.
   Moreover, many states that never established sentencing commissions have created more
determinate systems by simply legislating presumptive sentences. Stemen, Rengifo, and Wil-
son (2006) report that “between 1975 and 2002, every state adopted some form of mandatory
sentencing,”15 but the number of crimes covered by such statutes and the harshness of these
minimum sentences vary greatly among states and over time within states. California began
legislating presumptive sentences in 1976 when they abolished discretionary parole, and the
initial determinate sentencing law passed by the legislature would have likely had little impact
on prison growth. However, the state legislature approved 43 amendments to the legislation
during only the first year under determinate sentencing, and each of these 43 amendments
plus many amendments in subsequent years increased the severity of sanctions.16

13
   See Ditton and Wilson (1999) for a Bureau of Justice Statistics report on the implementation of Truth in
Sentencing laws during the 1990s.
14
   See Reitz (2006) for more evidence that the existence of sentencing commissions and restrictions on parole
are not necessarily drivers of prison growth. MI is the only state that we analyze using NCRP data that
Frase (2005) also identifies among the states that combine the work of sentencing commissions with the task
of forming budget projections for state prison systems. Further, according to Frase, the MI resource impact
assessments were not a permanent feature, and MI only employed a permanent sentencing commission during
the period 1995-2002.
15
   See p. 118.
16
   See BJA (1996), p. 16.
         THE PRISON BOOM & THE LACK OF BLACK PROGRESS AFTER SMITH & WELCH                                       8

   During the past two decades, the vast majority of states have also added laws that impose
enhanced sentences for habitual offenders, but once again, the details of these habitual
violator laws differ greatly among states. Although California was not the first state to pass
a law mandating enhanced penalties for repeat offenders, the California statute commonly
know as “Three Strikes and You’re Out” has received considerable attention from scholars
and journalists. The law was passed by both the legislature and voter initiative in 1994
following two well-publicized murders that were committed by offenders who had recently
been released from prison. Many states have followed California’s lead since 1994, but
few states have adopted laws that are as severe as the California “Three Strikes” policy.
Auerhahn (2002) claims that the California law stands out because it mandates a doubling
of the presumptive sentence following only the second conviction for a covered offense, i.e.
“strike,” and because the “strike zone” that defines covered offenses is more inclusive than
it is in other states.
   In sum, states have pursued determinacy using many different approaches over the past
three decades or more. However, the complexity of criminal justice systems at the state level
creates almost insurmountable problems for scholars who conduct empirical investigations
that seek to establish concrete links between prison growth and specific features of state-
level criminal justice systems that promote determinacy. The presence of a specific “type”
of law in a given state tells researchers little about the extent of legislative efforts to make
corrections policies more punitive in that state. Groups of states often adopt new corrections
laws that are nominally similar but still differ in important ways. Further, state legislators
who wish to adopt more punitive policies have many different policy levers at their disposal.
Thus, it is not obvious how one could construct a comprehensive index of punitiveness at the
state level for even a single point in time, much less a set of indices that track the evolution of
punitiveness within each state over time, and we have found no studies that even attempted
these quixotic measurement tasks.17
   Nonetheless, we argue below that researchers can build a strong case that changes in
criminal justice policy must be the key reason that prison populations are so large now
relative to those observed in the 1970s. During the late 1990s and the 2000s, crime rates and
arrest rates for most serious crimes remained flat or fell, but prison populations continued
to grow until at least 2008 and have fallen only slightly since. The reforms that began in the
1970s as attempts to enhance determinacy created corrections policies that were not only
more determinate but also much more punitive, and although some states have moved in
recent years to moderate their corrections policies, arrested offenders in all crime categories
likely face harsher expected punishments than their counterparts did in 1980.
17
  Note that in order to create such an index, researchers would have to understand how a specific set of
policies translated into a set of distributions of time-served that condition on conviction for specific offenses.
Then, researchers would need to conduct simulations that generated sample distributions of simulated time-
served for various populations of convicted offenders, and then collapse the information contained in these
simulated distributions into an index of punitiveness.
         THE PRISON BOOM & THE LACK OF BLACK PROGRESS AFTER SMITH & WELCH                                    9

1.1. Recent Leveling. Before moving on to the empirical literature on the links between
criminal justice policy and prison growth, it is important to note that overall prison popu-
lations have fallen slightly since 2009, and this development may also reflect recent policy
changes.
   In 2004 and 2005, two United States Supreme Court decisions made it more difficult
for states and the federal government to build enhancements into determinate sentencing
systems. In Blakely v. Washington (2004), the court held that any factors that judges rely
upon to determine the sentence for a specific defendant must be proven beyond a reasonable
doubt to a jury. Thus, if guidelines developed by a sentencing commission or provisions
contained in statutes passed by a legislature dictate enhancements to base level sentences
based on specific aggravating circumstances, e.g. “deliberate cruelty,” judges may not apply
these enhancements unless the aggravating circumstances have been submitted and proved
to a jury. In United States v. Booker (2005), the court held that the same principle applies
to federal judges, and the enhancements built into federal sentencing guidelines became
advisory provisions.
   These decisions may have weakened the importance of guidelines developed by sentencing
commissions or rules contained in statutes that attempt to spell out more punitive sentences
for various crimes when certain aggravating circumstances are present. Unless prosecutors
prove the existence of these circumstances while proving guilt of the crime in question,
such enhancements impose no constraints on judges. Judges can ignore the aggravating
circumstance when imposing sentences, and their decisions are not subject to review.
   Further, a more recent Supreme Court decision may have important implications for the
costs of incarcerating large state prison populations. In Brown v. Plata (2011), the United
States Supreme Court upheld the decision of a three-judge court that had been appointed by
the Chief Judge of the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit to deal with a
class action lawsuit that alleged California had violated the constitutional rights of prisoners
by operating prisons that were so overcrowded as to deny them adequate health care. This
three-judge court had ruled in favor of the plaintiffs and mandated that the California prison
population be no more than 137.5 percent of the design capacity for the system. This ruling
implied that California needed to reduce its total state prison population by more than
35,000 prisoners.18
   California has long been an outlier in terms of prison over-crowding, so the recent reduction
in California prison populations that followed this decision has been noteworthy. However, it
is not clear what the immediate impact of this decision will be on prison populations in other
18
  Yet, from the end of 2011 through April of 2013, the total stock of incarcerated persons in California only
fell by about 20,000. The state prison system has not fully complied with the 137.5 percent rule, and the state
also increased jail populations by around 8,000 inmates as part of its efforts to reduce prison populations.
See Lofstrum and Raphael (2013). The Brown v. Plata decision also settled an earlier class action suit,
Brown v. Coleman. Here, the plaintiffs argued that overcrowding compromised the capacity of the prison
system to provide adequate mental health care services.
         THE PRISON BOOM & THE LACK OF BLACK PROGRESS AFTER SMITH & WELCH                                      10

states since it is not clear how many states are currently beyond the 137.5 percent threshold
or whether these states have found some different but satisfactory way to address prisoner
health and safety in prisons with populations that exceed the 137.5 percent threshold. Still,
for many states, this Supreme Court decision clearly raises the expected costs of policies
that impose punitive sentences on offenders, and it is reasonable to expect these additional
costs to influence future policies.
   The final Brown v. Plata decision came after almost a decade of trials and hearings in
lower courts, so the outcome did not come as a complete shock to officials in California or
other states. Further, the budget problems that have plagued many states since 2008 have
raised public awareness of the costs associated with running large prison systems. Thus,
some states are exploring ways to punish non-violent offenders that do not involve prison.19
   Still, in 2009, not only incarceration rates but also admission rates into prison remained
more than twice as high as they were in the 1970s, even though both crime rates and arrest
rates had been constant or falling for well over a decade. Our goal in the next two sections
is to shed some light on why prison populations grew so rapidly from before 1980 well into
the 2000s. Data limitations force us to restrict our most detailed analyses to the period 1985
to 2005, so we are not able to carefully examine the entire prison boom. However, we have
much to say about both the mechanics of prison growth over this twenty year period and
why prison populations remained at such high levels after 2005.

              2. Empirical Literature on the Effects of Specific Laws
  The literature contains a number of papers that attempt to isolate the effects of specific
types of legal reforms on the growth of prison populations by applying panel regression
methods to data sets that track variation in outcomes and policies among states and over
time. Zhang, Maxwell, and Vaughn (2009) is a recent and prototypical contribution to
this literature. The authors attempt to explain variation in measures of admission rates,
incarceration rates, and expected time served among states and over time by regressing
these outcomes on six different measures of policy plus a set of additional control variables
that often include state and year fixed effects. They employ data from 1973 through 1998.
Their policy variables are a set of indicators for the presence of the following policies: (1)
voluntary sentencing guidelines (2) presumptive sentencing guidelines (3) habitual offender
laws (4) abolition of discretionary release by parole boards (5) requirements that sentencing
guidelines consider prison capacity (6) truth-in-sentencing laws.
  On the whole, the results imply few statistically significant effects for these policy variables
and even fewer that are of the expected sign. The authors conclude that sentencing policies
associated with determinacy did not contribute much to prison growth over the period 1973
19
  The Pew Center on the States recently released reports, Pew (2010) and Pew (2012), that, among other
things, describe steps that several states are taking to reduce the punitiveness of their criminal justice systems
and thereby reduce the size and cost of their state prison systems.
         THE PRISON BOOM & THE LACK OF BLACK PROGRESS AFTER SMITH & WELCH                                11

to 1998. Stemen, Rengifo, and Wilson (2006) and Stemen and Rengifo (2011) follow a similar
research strategy, but they focus only on incarceration rates as outcomes. Taken as a whole,
the results in these papers are similar to those in Zhang, Maxwell, and Vaughn (2009).
Indicator variables for adoption of these specific policies are not strong predictors of future
prison growth within states. Still, it is worth noting that all three of these studies found that
states that abolished discretionary parole release experienced slower than average growth in
prison populations.20
   This literature is limited in at least two important ways. To begin, these regressions do not
directly address a precise counterfactual that informs policy. In the language of the program
evaluation literature, these regressions are trying to identify treatment effects associated with
specific policies, but the indicator variables for treatment do not capture the implementation
of homogeneous policies, and therefore, the treatments are not precisely defined.
   For example, Zhang, Maxwell, and Vaughn (2009) note in their conclusion that the details
of habitual offender laws, which are often known as “three-strikes” laws, vary greatly among
states. While California, Georgia, and Florida handed down numerous enhanced sentences to
many offenders under these laws, a significant number of states defined their “strike zones” so
narrowly that the statutes are rarely used.21 Thus, if a particular study reports an average
treatment effect associated with the adoption of a state-level statute that legal analysts
classify as a habitual offender law, researchers cannot correctly interpret this result without
learning a great deal about how each habitual offender law was written and implemented in
each state.
   Further, because other policies with similar effects but different names are often imple-
mented in non-treated states, the implied control groups in these regressions are not valid
control groups. We have already noted that, since 1975, all states have adopted more manda-
tory minimum statutes, and it seems reasonable to conjecture that many also tightened
standards for parole revocation, applied more public scrutiny to parole board decisions, etc.
in ways that may not be reflected in coding schemes that seek to capture the adoption
of a specific type of statute. The results from these panel regression studies tell us little
about whether or not changes in the punitiveness of criminal justice policies are responsible
for the dramatic growth in prison populations that we have witnessed over the past three
decades or more. These results simply tell us that states associated with a specific set of
readily identifiable policies do not typically stand out as having above average rates of prison
growth.


20
   We noted above that both Frase (2005) and Nicholson-Crotty (2004) conclude that mandatory sentencing
guidelines reduce prison populations in states where the guidelines are used as a tool to manage corrections
expenditures. Marvell (1995) reached a similar conclusion using earlier data.
21
   Auerhahn (2002) uses a simulation model to demonstrate the large effect that these polices had on prison
growth in California in the late 1990s and also to predict the continued growth in the population during
much of the 2000s.
        THE PRISON BOOM & THE LACK OF BLACK PROGRESS AFTER SMITH & WELCH                        12

   Stemen, Rengifo, and Wilson (2006) performed additional analyses in which they tried
to construct variables that captured some of the variation over time and among states in
mandatory sentencing practices. Given the enormous variation in mandatory sentencing
rules among states at a point in time and within specific states over time, it is hard to
imagine how researchers could create an accurate index that captured both geographic and
temporal variation in mandatory minimum punitiveness, and the authors did not attempt
to create such an index. Rather, they created counts of the different types of mandatory
minimum statutes in several different categories: (i) weapons use (ii) serious harm to victims
(iii) crimes committed under supervision or in custody and (iv) hate crimes.
   With the exception of (ii), increases in the numbers of each of these statutes on the books
are significantly correlated with growth in prison populations, and on average, when states
add 10 new mandatory minimum statutes, the expected incarceration rate increases by 23
(out of 100,000). However, the authors write, “we do not believe that the mandatory sentenc-
ing laws considered here are necessarily directly contributing to increases in incarceration
rates; rather, they are used here as proxies for states’ general approaches to mandatory
sentencing laws and, in this sense, indicate the states’ general use of mandatory sentencing
policies.”
   The use of the term “proxies” in the quote above is important. The authors are conjectur-
ing that in times and places where legislatures are devoting considerable energy to passing
these types of statutes, state officials are engaged in other unmeasured activities that also
enhance the punitiveness of criminal justice policies.
   This is a reasonable conjecture, but it also highlights the limits of panel regression methods
as tools for discovering whether or not specific policy changes drove prison growth. When
scholars code different policies as the same policy or omit controls for relevant but unmea-
sured policies that are changing contemporaneously with measured policies, they should not
expect panel regressions to produce useful or even interpretable results.
   In addition, it is not obvious what we should expect from such models even if the measures
of sentencing policy were more precise. Imagine a homogeneous change in sentencing policy
adopted in a number of different states at varying times and assume that this new policy
took a simple form. Assume that it simply added three years to every sentence of at least
two years that would have been given under previous law. This change would have no
direct effect on admissions rates in any period because it would only apply to prisoners who
were going to serve at least two years anyway. However, it would have important effects on
steady-state incarceration rates and expected time-served among admitted prisoners.
   Yet, it is not clear that regression models like those in Zhang, Maxwell, and Vaughn (2009)
would accurately measure these effects on incarceration rates and time-served. Recall that
these regressions project admission rates, incarcerations rates, and proxies for time-served on
contemporaneous measures of policy, and such a policy change would not have any effect on
incarceration rates for at least two years. Further, it would take many years for the full effects
         THE PRISON BOOM & THE LACK OF BLACK PROGRESS AFTER SMITH & WELCH                               13

of such a change to unfold. Finally, because the authors are using ratios of prison populations
to admissions flows to estimate expected time-served, the measures of expected time-served
in states affected by such a law would be biased down for years following adoption, and this
bias would create a correlation between any indicator variable for the existence of such a
law in a given state in a given year and the residual associated with the observation for that
state-year combination.

                                  3. Decomposition Methods
  Given the limitations of these regression methods, many scholars have adopted an indirect
approach. A large literature employs statistical decompositions derived from the observation
that, in a steady-state, the fraction of the population incarcerated, i, can be expressed as:


                                       i = (c ≠ i) ú – ú “ ú ” ú s̄
  where
                   c = the fraction of criminals in the population
                   – = the probability of arrest given engagement in crime
                   “ = the probability of conviction given arrest
                   ” = the probability of admission given conviction
                   s̄ = the expected time served given admission
   This equation ignores parole and parole revocations. So, in this thought experiment, new
entrants to prison are always newly convicted offenders, and all prisoners serve their entire
sentence. This simple framework facilitates our exposition, but our key points remain in a
more cumbersome version that models transitions in and out of parole. See Raphael and
Stoll (2013) for a steady-state analysis that includes parole and parole revocations.
   One can derive this equation from many different models of criminal, police, and court
behaviors, but the most straightforward approach is to assume that a fixed fraction of an
infinitely-lived population exhibits complete persistence in crime, i.e. those who choose crime
as a career engage in crime whenever they are not incarcerated. This framework also rests on
the assumption that no innocent persons are ever arrested, convicted, or imprisoned. Further,
we are implicitly assuming that the composition of crimes does not vary over time, so that
it is meaningful to talk about single rates for crimes, arrests, convictions, and admissions.22
   The first two terms in the decomposition above remind us that even if prosecutors and
judges do not change their behavior, changes in the prevalence of criminality or the effec-
tiveness of policing may generate changes in prison populations, and it is worth considering
22Alternatively,  some researchers modify this formula to incorporate different rates and different average
sentences for different types of crime.
         THE PRISON BOOM & THE LACK OF BLACK PROGRESS AFTER SMITH & WELCH                                     14

these two forces before moving on to the role of criminal justice policy as a driver of prison
growth.
   A large literature argues that technical change and globalization have harmed the labor
market opportunities of unskilled men, and a smaller literature suggests that less skilled men
are more likely to choose crime as an occupation when their prospects for legal employment
are diminished.23 The fact that employment rates have fallen most rapidly over the past
30 years for the groups of men who have experienced the most rapid rise in incarceration
rates suggests that we should entertain the hypothesis that prison populations grew because
opportunities for legal employment among the less-skilled shrank.
   The first six columns of Table 6 describe trends in crimes and arrests nationally over
the period 1970-2011. The remaining columns describe trends in state and federal prison
admissions as well as population trends for jails, state prisons, and federal prisons. Consistent
data for the prison stocks and admissions numbers are not available for all years, but we
have pieced together available series where possible. The blank entries represent instances
where we were not able to calculate a reliable estimate of a given stock or flow for a given
year.
   We conjecture that property crimes and drug crimes should be the categories most af-
fected by trends in labor market opportunities because dealing in stolen goods and drugs are
alternatives to legal employment. We see increases in property crime during the 1970s and
the 1980s that cannot be accounted for by population growth. However, since 1991, reported
property crimes have fallen in almost every year. In contrast, state prison populations grew
steadily from 1973 to 2008 before leveling off and then declining slightly in 2010 and 2011.
In addition, prison admissions grow, almost every year, from the beginning of our admissions
series in 1978 to 2007.24
   Arrests for drug crimes do increase through 2006, and we cannot rule out the possibility
that, over time, declining (legal) labor market opportunities for less skilled men increased
the number of men who tried to make a living by producing, transporting, or selling illegal
drugs. On the other hand, these arrest trends alone can account for only a small portion of
the prison growth we observe over this period.25 In addition, trends in drug arrests are more
difficult to evaluate because there are no series of reported drug crimes. It is possible that
the increases in drug arrests we observe do not reflect changes in levels of criminal activity
but changes in police behavior. This possibility is noteworthy because available evidence
23See Grogger (1998) and Gould, Weinberg, and Mustard (2002).
24We  see no evidence that changes in police behavior generated important trends in the number of persons
arrested for property crime holding crime levels constant. Although there are year to year fluctuations in
the ratios of arrests to reported crimes, these ratios remain in roughly the interval [.17 ± .016] for the entire
four decades. Thus, arrests for property crime follow the same basic trends as reported property crime.
25
   The simulation model we build below suggests that less than three percent of the growth in state prison
populations between 1985 and 2005 can be attributed to trends in drug arrests. Growth in drug arrests
played a more important role as a driver of federal prison growth, but the federal system is a small part of
the overall prison system.
         THE PRISON BOOM & THE LACK OF BLACK PROGRESS AFTER SMITH & WELCH                                 15

on drug use suggests that rates of illegal drug use have likely remained constant or declined
during the past two decades even though drug-related arrest rates continued to rise.26 Taken
as a whole, data on the time-series patterns of arrests for different crimes suggest that prison
growth during the past twenty years cannot be the result of a simple shift by low-skilled
persons from legal to illegal work.
   Table 6 does document dramatic increases in arrests for violent crimes during the late
1970s and 1980s. However, prison admissions grew even faster over the same period. So,
unless there were important changes in the composition of violent crime arrests during the
late 1970s and 1980s, the growth in prison admissions during this period is suggestive of a
move toward more punitive corrections.
   We cannot provide more than suggestive evidence about the nature of changes in correc-
tions policies before 1985. However, the NCRP data do allow us to examine the period 1985
to 2005 in much greater detail, at least for a small sample of states that provide consistent
information about arrests, prison admissions, and prison releases. Our results from this sam-
ple suggest that the 190% growth of total state prison populations (462,000 to 1,338,000)
over this twenty-year period cannot be explained by changes in flows of arrested offenders or
changes in the compositions of these flows. In our sample, inmate populations grew much
faster than arrests within every major crime category. Thus, recent prison growth in the US
almost surely reflects changes in policies and procedures that determine the punishments
offenders receive after being arrested, and our simulation results suggest that these changes
in corrections policies account for the vast majority of prison growth from 1985 to 2005.
   Because data on the probability of conviction given arrest, “, are so scarce,27 scholars
often implicitly assume that “ does not vary over time and focus on admission rates given
conviction (”) and expected time served given admission (s̄) as empirical proxies for the
punitiveness of criminal justice systems. When movements in these two variables account
for most of the movements in i, scholars typically conclude that changes in the criminal
justice system rather than changes in criminal behavior are the key drivers of changes in
prison populations.
   Further, most scholars that employ this method distinguish between movements in ” and
movements in s̄ when discussing the potential importance of changes in broad features of
criminal justice systems. The following paragraph from Blumstein and Beck summarizes the
prevailing paradigm concerning the interpretation of the results from these decompositions:



26
  See               http://www.drugabuse.gov/publications/drugfacts/nationwide-trends                     and
http://www.drugabuse.gov/publications/drugfacts/high-school-youth-trends.
27Better data on convictions may be available in the future through the National Judicial Reporting Program,
but the Bureau of Justice Statistics does not provide any data that allow researchers to trace offenders from
the dates of their arrests to the dates of the dispositions of their cases, e.g. charges dropped, acquittal,
conviction, etc.
           THE PRISON BOOM & THE LACK OF BLACK PROGRESS AFTER SMITH & WELCH                        16

   “Growth in incarceration is typically a consequence of growth in one or more of the se-
quence of stages leading to an increased prison population. Those stages begin with com-
mission of crime, which can then be followed by arrest, conviction, commitment, and time
served in prison, including time served as a result of a parole violation. Changes in any
or all of these stages can contribute to growth in the prison population. By examining each
stage of the criminal justice process separately, the contribution of each to the total growth
in incarceration can be isolated. Such a partition can also provide insights into the degree to
which the growth is associated with greater criminality; greater police effectiveness in arrest-
ing offenders; some combination of increased effectiveness by prosecutors and punitiveness by
judges in convicting arrested offenders and sending them to prison; increases in time served
once sent to prison because of longer sentences (including mandatory minimum sentences),
because the parole boards or other release policies are slower in offering release or because of
more aggressive policies in recommitting parolees, either for a new offense or for a technical
violation." 28

   Note how Blumstein and Beck (1999) discuss the last two terms, ” and s̄. Given that
a person is convicted of a crime, the literature divides the punitiveness of criminal justice
systems into two components: (i) how likely are judges to sentence convicted offenders
to prison, and (ii) among those who receive a prison sentence, how long will they expect
to stay in prison. Further, Blumstein and Beck (1999) implicitly assert that, if there are
changes in sentencing or parole policies that lead to more long prison spells, e.g. mandatory
minimum sentence provisions, restrictions on release to parole, etc., then researchers can
detect the effects of these changes in policy by measuring changes in time-served among
those admitted to prison.29 This assertion is wrong, and it has created much confusion
in this literature. However, before addressing this issue in detail, we review the empirical
findings in the existing literature, and describe what appears to be an unresolved debate
concerning the role of mandatory minimums and other sentencing enhancements as drivers
of prison growth. We then show how a different framework for analyzing the data resolves
this debate while also confirming some key conclusions from the existing literature.

3.1. Existing Literature. Blumstein and Beck (1999) examine national data from 1980
through 1996 on offense rates, arrest rates per offense, prison admissions per arrest, expected
time served given admission, and incarceration rates. They examine linear trends in each
of these statistics for six different crime categories, and ask how much trends in the first
four statistics contribute to trends in incarceration rates by offense. They conclude that
28Blumstein  and Beck (1999), pp. 26.
29Zhang, Maxwell, and Vaughn (2009) adopt the same approach. When reporting that changes in admission
rates contribute more to prison growth than changes in expected time-served, they write, “Accordingly,
sentencing reforms that resulted in increased prison admissions increased prison populations more than
sentencing reforms that lengthened prison terms.” See p.197.
        THE PRISON BOOM & THE LACK OF BLACK PROGRESS AFTER SMITH & WELCH                           17

88 percent of the 1980-1996 growth in total incarceration rates for state prisons was due
to trends toward more punitive sanctions, and they break this contribution down in the
following way “the decision to incarcerate (51 percent) and ... (increases) in time served by
those incarcerated (37 percent).”30
   Raphael and Stoll (2013) develop a steady-state model of prison populations that is richer
than the simple steady-state equation above because it includes parole. The model has six
states: (1) not incarcerated or on parole (2) incarcerated for a violent felony (3) incarcerated
for a property felony (4) incarcerated for a drug felony (5) incarcerated for a parole violation
and (6) on parole. They employ data from the National Corrections Reporting Program in
a few years around 2004 and a few more years around 1984 as well as data from the 1986
Survey of Inmates in State Correctional Facilities. They also use data from the 2004 Survey
of Inmates in State and Federal Correctional Facilities and the FBI Uniform Crime Reports.
They calculate the transition probabilities between these six states and then solve for the
steady-state incarceration rates implied by these transition matrices under the assumption
that crime rates in different categories determine the population at risk for entering the
prison system.
   Raphael and Stoll (2013) perform these steady-state calculations for the 1984 and 2004
parameter values, and then calculate a counterfactual 2004 steady-state assuming 2004 crime
levels and 1984 policy parameters. They also repeat the counterfactual calculation making
adjustments for the fact that 2004 crimes rates would have been higher if incarceration
rates had been lower. However, even with these adjustments, Raphael and Stoll (2013)
conclude that more than 90% of the difference between the 1984 and 2004 steady-states
reflects differences in corrections policy. When discussing the relative contribution of different
components of policy to prison growth, they echo the conclusions of Blumstein and Beck,
“our enhanced tendency to sentence convicted felons to prison is particularly responsible for
incarceration growth, though longer sentences are also a contributing factor."31
   Both Raphael and Stoll (2013) and Blumstein and Beck (1999) conclude that expected
time served given admission to prison rose sharply for violent criminals over time, and they
identify this change as a noteworthy driver of prison growth. In contrast, a recent paper by
Pfaff (2011) concludes that changes in expected time served for admitted prisoners played
no role in prison growth over a similar time period. The analyses in Pfaff (2011) differ
from much of the related literature in three ways. First, Pfaff does not rely on steady-state
methods but follows cohorts in and out of prison over time. Second, while Blumstein and
Beck (1999) relied on national aggregates and Raphael and Stoll (2013) employed data from
all states that filed reports with the NCRP, Pfaff (2011) relied on NCRP reports from 11

30See page 43.
31See  page 80 and Figure 3.1. The authors also demonstrate that their 1984 and 2004 steady-state cal-
culations are reasonable approximations for the 1984 and 2004 prison populations and do a good job of
approximating the change in prison populations between the two years.
         THE PRISON BOOM & THE LACK OF BLACK PROGRESS AFTER SMITH & WELCH                               18

states that he identified as providers of reliable data. Third, Pfaff (2011) did not calculate
admission rates and time-served distributions that are specific to particular crime categories.
He dealt with aggregate flows.
   Pfaff (2011) concludes that distributions of time-served prior to release remained roughly
constant over the 1980s and 1990s. He examines different percentiles in state-specific time-
to-release distributions for prisoners admitted in particular years and finds rather mixed
results and no evidence of a clear trend toward longer prison spells conditional on admission.
He then concludes that “attention to sentencing matters is misplaced,” and he argues that
growth in mandatory minimum sentence provisions and other policies that enhance sentences
played little or no role in the growth of prisons.32
   Pfaff (2011) does acknowledge that, if states made sentencing more harsh by dictating
positive sentences for some offenders who previously received probation as well as longer
sentences for offenders convicted of more serious crimes, average time-served among admitted
prisoners could remain constant as prison populations grow. However, he then proceeds to
wrongly argue that, if various percentiles of the time-served distribution, e.g. 10th, 25th,
50th, 75th, and 90, do not change over time, then policies that increase the use of long
prison spells as punishments cannot be important drivers of prison growth. This argument
is logically wrong, as we illustrate below.
   Below, we perform our own analyses using data similar to the data Pfaff (2011) employs.
Like Pfaff (2011), we do not employ steady-state methods but track successive cohorts of
offenders as they move in and out of prisons over time. However, we do analyze all transitions
separately by offense category and admission type.
   Similar to the results reported by Raphael and Stoll (2013), our results show that distri-
butions of time-served prior to first release shifted modestly to the right for persons entering
prison following new convictions, and consistent with much of the previous literature, we
find that this shift was quite noteworthy for those convicted of violent crimes, e.g. murder,
rape, assault, and robbery. The length of prison spells that began due to parole revocations
shrank over this period as the number of such prison admissions grew both in levels and as a
fraction of all admissions. Overall, the expected length of prison spells appears to be slightly
shorter in recent years than in the 1980s.
   However, we also find that, given arrest, both the expected time-served and the probability
of serving at least five years in prison increased dramatically for offenders in all major crime
categories. Compared to their counterparts in 1985, arrested offenders in 2005 faced both
longer sentences on average and greater likelihoods of serving lengthy prison terms. These


32Infact, Pfaff (2011) concludes that the wide-spread view that the increased use of long prison spells has
been an important driver of prison growth is a “myth” and argues that changes in “admissions policies”
drove prison growth. He argues that prisons grew because offenders were more likely to enter prison not
because courts were more likely to hand down sentences that resulted in long prison spells.
         THE PRISON BOOM & THE LACK OF BLACK PROGRESS AFTER SMITH & WELCH                               19

results strongly suggest that changes in sentencing policies were an important driver of prison
growth over the 1985-2005 period.
   The contrast between our findings and those of Pfaff (2011) highlights the importance of
examining data on admissions and time-served separately by offense category and admission
type. Because Pfaff did not makes these distinctions, he did not realize that the relatively
stability of the distribution of time-served among admitted prisoners during the 1980s and
1990s resulted from off-setting increases in various types of admissions. The number of
persons serving short terms increased as the number of admissions associated with parole
revocations and convictions for minor crimes increased, but the number serving long terms
also increased as long prison spells became more common among arrested offenders in almost
all crime categories and as many more violent criminals received long prison terms.
   In addition, our approach demonstrates that changes in expected time served given admis-
sion are not, per se, germane to scholarly assessments of the impacts of changes in sentencing
and parole practices on rates of prison growth. Although the existing literature contains the
repeated contention that changes in s̄ provide direct evidence concerning whether or not
harsher sentencing and parole policies, e.g. elevated mandatory minimums, enhanced penal-
ties for habitual violator, Truth in Sentencing laws, etc, are important drivers of prison
growth, this is simply not true.33

3.2. The Wrong Denominator. If researchers want to know the extent to which policies
that result in longer time-served, given the severity of crimes committed, contribute to growth
in prison populations, they do not want to measure changes in the fraction of admitted
prisoners who serve long sentences. Instead, they want to measure changes in the fraction
of convicted offenders who serve long sentences. Further, because prosecutors have some
discretion over which charges to file and how to bargain terms of plea agreements, one can
argue that researchers should take another step back and focus on the fraction of arrested
alleged offenders who serve long sentences.34

3.3. A Different Decomposition. Instead of characterizing corrections policy as a choice
of an admissions probability and an expected sentence length, one could characterize policy as
a set of probability weights, ﬂs , where s = 0, 1, 2, ..., S are the potential times that a convicted
offender may serve, and ﬂs is the probability of serving a sentence of s given conviction. Here,
s = 0 denotes being fined, sentenced to probation, or some other punishment that does not
33Langan   (1991) makes a similar mistake when analyzing data from an earlier period. He argues that manda-
tory sentencing laws did not drive prison growth, and cites as evidence that “Prison sentence lengths have
not gotten longer since 1973, although mandatory sentencing laws commonly authorized or required longer
sentences.” Changes in the average lengths of sentences among admitted prisoners provide no information
about the impacts of changes in sentencing policy.
34Below, we discuss Rehavi and Starr (2013) who demonstrate that, among those arrested for the same
offenses, federal prosecutors have considerable discretion over how to charge offenders, and these charge
decisions constrain the discretion of judges in sentencing.
             THE PRISON BOOM & THE LACK OF BLACK PROGRESS AFTER SMITH & WELCH                        20

involve prison time. At the other extreme, s = S denotes serving the maximum possible
sentence.
   Again, we deal with the simplest case and ignore parole. Given our new notation, it is
straightforward to re-write our steady-state equation as
                                                                     S
                                                                     ÿ
                                             i = (c ≠ i) ú – ú “ ú         sﬂs
                                                                     s=1

   Now, consider a change in policy that involves uniformly harsher sentencing policies, i.e.
let ﬂÕ =[ﬂÕ0 , ﬂÕ1 , ..., ﬂÕS ] describe the new sentencing regime, and let ﬂÕs = kﬂs ’s > 0 with k > 1.
Further, let ﬂÕ0 = 1≠ Ss=1 ﬂÕs . If we assume that criminal behavior, arrest rates, and conviction
rates do not change in response to this change in sentencing policy, the new steady-state
prison population35 is monotonically increasing in k. However, s̄, the average time served
among convicted offenders who enter prison does not change since
                                                    qS       Õ     qS
                                                     s=1 sﬂs
                                                           sﬂs
                                             s̄ =   qS     Õ
                                                                 = qs=1
                                                                     S
                                                      s=1 ﬂs
                                                        s=1 ﬂs
Moreover, the entire distribution of time-served among admitted prisoners is the same under
ﬂÕ as it is under ﬂ.
   Changes in sentencing policy can create enormous growth in prison populations while hav-
ing little or no effect on the distribution of time-served among admitted prisoners. Further,
it is easy to construct scenarios in which a move to more punitive sentencing increases prison
populations while lowering the average time-served among admitted prisoners.
   The framework we describe can easily be extended to include crime-specific sentencing
weights. Let j = 1, 2, .., J denote an exhaustive and mutually exclusive list of crime cate-
gories. We can define ﬂsj as the baseline probability of serving a sentence of s years given
conviction for crime j, and then define ﬂÕsj = kﬂsj ’j. It is straightforward to show that,
’ k > 0, the distribution of time-served among admitted prisoners under the corrections
policy summarized by the S ◊ J matrices ﬂÕ and ﬂ are identical. Further, we can create
infinitely many new matrices of sentencing weights with elements, ﬂÕsj = ksj ﬂsj , such that
the implied changes in corrections policies imply higher admission rates and larger steady-
state prison populations but no changes in the distribution of time-served among admitted
prisoners.
   In the next section, we show that, compared to arrested offenders in 1985, those arrested in
recent years faced much higher likelihoods of serving short, medium, and long prison spells,
and this result holds for almost all offense categories. In terms of the notation above, the




35iÕ                           qS
       = (c ≠ iÕ ) ú – ú “ ú    s=1   skﬂs
         THE PRISON BOOM & THE LACK OF BLACK PROGRESS AFTER SMITH & WELCH                                21

best way to describe how policy has changed since 1985 is to state that ksj > 1 for almost
every combination (s, j).36
  We do not document dramatic changes over time in distributions of time-served among
admitted prisoners prior to first release. However, this fact should cause no one to conclude
that more punitive sentencing rules and less lenient parole policies are not the key drivers
of prison growth in recent decades. The relative stability of the time-served distribution
simply reflects that fact that, given arrest, prisons spells of all lengths became more likely
over time.37

                                         4. New Approach
   In this section, we present results from our own analyses of data on arrests, admissions, re-
leases, and prison populations. We use the National Corrections Reporting Program (NCRP)
to construct measures of admissions, releases, and time served for different states and time-
periods. We follow Pfaff’s (2011) approach of auditing the NCRP data in order to select a set
of states that provide reliable data over a long period of time. However, our audits are more
extensive than those performed by Pfaff (2011), and we take the additional step of using
micro-data on arrests to create offense-specific measures of arrests for each state-year-race
cell in our NCRP data.
   We also use agency level data from the Uniform Crime Reports to construct state level
data on arrests by offense for different years, and we demonstrate that our ability to track
co-movements in arrests and admissions over time by offense is key to developing a more
complete understanding of how prison populations grew over time. In particular, we show
how ratios of admissions to arrests evolved for various offense categories. These ratios do not
tell us everything we want to know about how the likelihood of imprisonment changed over
time for persons arrested for specific offenses because some offenders are convicted of crimes
that differ from the charges associated with their arrests and because there are lags between
arrest and conviction. However, we gain useful insights by tracking these ratios over time,
and in some analyses below, we treat these ratios as proxies for the likelihoods of entering
prison given arrest for various offenses.
   We also create offense-specific survivor functions for prisoners who enter prison in each year
from 1985 to 2005. For each major offense category, we trace not only how the likelihood of
imprisonment given arrest changes over time but also how the likelihoods of serving sentences
of various lengths change over time. Our key tables describe how likely the persons arrested
for a specific crime in a given year were to serve prison spells of various lengths. These

36The  one exception is that the likelihood of serving short prison terms fell among those arrested for some
violent crimes. However, the likelihoods that these same arrested offenders serve medium or long terms
increased by even more.
37Note that, in our framework above, the admissions rate for a given convicted offender is simply the sum
of the likelihood of receiving each of S possible positive sentences.
        THE PRISON BOOM & THE LACK OF BLACK PROGRESS AFTER SMITH & WELCH                     22

results establish that sentencing and parole policies became much more severe over the past
several decades.
   Finally, we attempt to quantify the importance of these changes using simulations that
describe how prison populations would have evolved under different assumptions about sen-
tencing and parole policies. Here, we are careful to distinguish between admissions that
result from new court commitments and admissions that result from parole revocations. Be-
cause the majority of prison spells that result from new court commitments are less than
two years in length, any policies that increase the number of prison admissions will soon
increase the number of persons on parole. Further, this rise in the stock of parolees increases
the number of parole revocations that generate new prison admissions, even if the standards
for parole revocation remain fixed.
   Our simulation results indicate that the vast majority of prison growth we observe from
1985 to 2005 resulted from changes in policies that govern the sentencing and time-served of
arrested offenders. Trends in arrests account for only a small portion of the prison growth
we observe, and changes in policies that govern standards for revoking parole appear to have
had small impacts on the overall growth of prison populations.

4.1. Reliable Data. Many social scientists are aware that available data on crimes, arrests,
admissions to prison, releases from prison and stocks of prisoners in the United States are
usually of lower quality than well known data series that track employment or education
levels. Data on crimes and outcomes in the criminal justice system are not usually gathered
through the types of field operations that government agencies often use to collect infor-
mation about labor market outcomes or education. Instead, these data sets are typically
compilations of self-reports made by government agencies within the criminal justice system
concerning their own activities. This data collection process generates many missing reports
as well as data that are often internally inconsistent or transparently wrong.
   Social scientists have typically responded to these data quality problems by either avoiding
certain data series altogether or by hoping that at least the estimates of national aggregates
derived from various series are somewhat reliable. We take a different approach. We analyze
NCRP data from each state separately and then restrict our attention to a set of states where
NCRP data pass a number of reliability tests. We then clean the Uniform Crime Reports
(UCR) data on arrests for these states to make sure that we have reliable information on
the evolution of arrests over time in these states.

4.1.1. Cleaning the NCRP Data. Appendix A provides details concerning our data cleaning
and construction procedures. Here, we provide an overview. We began by auditing the
NCRP data. Pfaff (2011) performed similar audits on the NCRP admission and release files,
but his sample ended in 2002, and our cleaning and checking procedures are more involved.
  The NCRP data provide detailed records of admissions and releases for many states in
many years from 1983 to 2009 as well as stocks of prisoners in custody for the years 2005
         THE PRISON BOOM & THE LACK OF BLACK PROGRESS AFTER SMITH & WELCH                             23

through 2009. We begin our audit process by restricting our attention to states that filed
NCRP reports on a fairly consistent basis, especially during the 1990s when prison popu-
lations were rising quite rapidly. This requirement eliminates 16 states and the District of
Columbia.
   For the 34 states that remain, we conduct several checks for internal and external consis-
tency. In our first check on NCRP data quality, we examined the dates in the release and
admission data in the NCRP to check for internal consistency in the following sense: for any
given year t, the total number of prisoners in the release files with recorded admission dates
in year t should not be greater than the number of prisoners recorded in the admissions files
for year t.
   In our second check on NCRP data, we used the admission and release flows from 1987
through the period 2005-2009 to determine whether or not the age-specific stocks in the post-
2005 NCRP files are consistent with the flow data on admissions and releases prior to 2005.
For example, if we assume that teenagers 15 and under are not entering regular prisons,
the difference between total admissions and total releases after 1987 among the cohorts who
were 15 or younger in 1987 will tell us what the stocks of prisoners under age 35 should be
in 2007.
   Our third and fourth checks involved comparisons between the NCRP data on admissions
and releases of prisoners and the National Prisoner Statistics (NPS) data on flows and
stocks. These NCRP and NPS data series should not match exactly because they do not
define the prisoner populations of interest in exactly the same way. However, large deviations
in reported flows or large deviations between the reported changes in NPS stocks and the
implied NCRP stock changes are cause for concern.38
   These four checks allow us to identify eight states that provide continuous reports that
appear to be of acceptable quality. They are CA, CO, MI, NJ, NY, SC, WA, and WI.39
However, we do not use NY because NY release records contain no information on the type
of admission or year of admission to prison in several years. Without these variables, we
cannot determine how distributions of time-served for different types of offenders evolved
over time.
   Figure 1 uses data from the NPS to display percentage growth in prison populations for
three samples: (i) state prisons in the seven states in our main sample, (ii) all state prisons
and (iii) all state and federal prisons. The overall growth pattern for our seven states is
similar to the pattern observed for all states. However, growth is more rapid early and levels
off earlier in our sample. The data for CA account for most of these discrepancies. CA is


38
   For years before 1999, the stock data for the NCRP and NPS are comparable. Both contain counts for all
prisoners in custody. However, later stock data and all flow data are not comparable. See Appendix A for
details.
39
   IL also provides reliable data but stops reporting in 2003.
         THE PRISON BOOM & THE LACK OF BLACK PROGRESS AFTER SMITH & WELCH                              24

a large state that experienced rapid prison growth early, and in part because of capacity
constraints, CA prison populations stopped growing while many others continued to grow.

4.1.2. Reliable Data on Crime and Arrests. The FBI Uniform Crime Reporting (UCR) sys-
tem collects data on crimes and arrests through reports from local law enforcement agencies.
However, these data are filled with missing reports as well as reports that appear transpar-
ently wrong. Further, while the FBI uses these data to produce national estimates of annual
crime and arrest rates by offense, we are not aware of any FBI efforts to produce comparable
estimates at the state level. Justin McCrary has produced edited versions of the UCR crime
files and made them publicly available. We employ these data in our analyses below. We
also employ our own edited versions of the UCR arrest files for the seven states in our NCRP
sub-sample.40
    As a first step, we examine the monthly reports to identify incidences of “backlog filing.”
Some agencies periodically place the crimes and arrests for a several month period in one
monthly report, and it is necessary to identify these reports before making any determination
about the monthly frequency of crimes or arrests in any given agency over any specific period.
Based on monthly averages of valid reports of arrests within agencies within specific calendar
years, we make imputations for missing monthly reports that do not result from “backlog
filing.” In cases where agencies do not report for entire years, we use interpolation procedures
described in Appendix B to fill in the missing data.

4.2. NCRP Results. Table 6 above demonstrates that national trends in prison admissions
and total prison populations do not track national trends in crimes or arrests after the early
1990s. Before turning to NCRP results on prison admissions and time-served in our seven-
state sample, we first document that, in broad terms, trends in crimes and arrests follow
the same patterns in our subsample of states that we see in the national totals. Here, we
do not display crime rates or arrest rates but simple counts of crimes and arrests. Counts
of this type are the key inputs in our simulation procedures. When we discuss the results
of our simulations and their interpretation, we then discuss alternative ways to account for
demographic changes over time.
   Figure 2a shows trends in UCR data on violent crimes for the nation and our seven-state
sample. Each dot is an index number with the 1985 level normalized to 100. The basic
patterns are the same in the two samples. Violent crime became more common during the
late 1980s and early 1990s, but violent crime has been roughly at or below the 1985 level
since 1999. Figure 2b shows the same basic trends in arrests for violent crime, but here
the increases during the late 1980s and early 1990s are even more dramatic. Further, the
curve for our NCRP states diverges slightly from the national curve because arrests rise to
40
  The crime files are here, http://emlab.berkeley.edu/~jmccrary/UCR/index.html. We describe the con-
struction of our arrest files in Appendix B. When we apply our cleaning procedures to the UCR Crime files,
we are able to create edited versions of the crime data that closely match McCrary’s files.
        THE PRISON BOOM & THE LACK OF BLACK PROGRESS AFTER SMITH & WELCH                     25

a higher peak in our NCRP states. Nonetheless, since 1995, arrests for violent crime have
been falling, almost steadily, both nationally in our NCRP sample.
   Figures 2c and 2d present parallel results for property crimes and arrests. The trends are
similar in the two samples. Property crimes and arrests rise initially and then fall. However,
property crimes and arrests fall below 1985 levels several years earlier in our NCRP states.
   Figure 2e shows that drug arrests follow qualitatively similar patterns in our NCRP sample
and the nation as a whole, although some noteworthy quantitative differences emerge after
1995. Drug arrests in our NCRP states remain more than 50 percent above 1985 levels
throughout the 2000s, but for the nation as a whole, drug arrests were at least double their
1985 levels for most of the 2000s. Most of this gap reflects the fact that drug arrests in
California remained roughly flat from 1994 to 2002, and California accounts for a significant
fraction of the arrests in our seven-state sample.
   Figures 2a-2e show that the patterns in crime and arrest data for our sample of NCRP
states follow the same broad trajectories that we observe for the nation as a whole, just
as Figure 1 demonstrated that prison growth in our NCRP states followed national trends.
We have already argued based on the results in Table 6 that the national growth in prison
populations since the 1980s cannot be readily explained by trends in arrest data. Below, we
show, in detail, that the growth in prison admissions and prison populations in our NCRP
states since 1985 is far greater than one would have expected based on sentencing and parole
policies in 1985 and observed trends in arrest data since 1985.
   The three panels of Table 7 present the key patterns in the NCRP and FBI-UCR data.
The first three columns of each section give arrests, admissions, and admissions per arrest for
a given crime. The remaining three columns give the number of prisoners (per 1000 admitted
prisoners) who remain in prison two, five, or ten years after admission. When discussing our
results on time-served among admitted prisoners, we often restrict attention to cohorts that
entered prison in 2000 or before. We do not have data on all of our seven states in each
year past 2005. Thus, we do not have complete information on release dates after 2005. The
survivor function entries in Table 7a-7c that describe release patterns in 2006 through 2009
are based on the assumption that cohort hazard rates for any subsample of our states match
the corresponding cohort hazard rates for these years in our full seven-state sample.
   The first thing to note about the patterns in Tables 7a-7c is that the admissions to arrests
ratios increase for every offense category. For all offenses, the likelihood of entering prison
given arrest increased between 1985 and 2000, and, in some cases, by factors of two or three.
   We see particularly dramatic increases in admissions to arrests ratios for two crimes that
have not historically been associated with high admissions to arrests ratios. The 2005 ad-
missions to arrests ratios for both non-aggravated assault and motor vehicle theft are more
than three times the corresponding ratios for 1985. The distributions of time-served among
prisoners admitted for these offenses exhibit mixed changes over time, but given such large
increases in the likelihood of admission given arrest, those arrested for these offenses in the
        THE PRISON BOOM & THE LACK OF BLACK PROGRESS AFTER SMITH & WELCH                     26

early 2000s faced higher probabilities of serving short, medium, and long prison sentences
than those arrested for the same offenses in 1985.
   The patterns for drug offenders in Table 7c are also striking. The ratio of admissions to
arrests for drug trafficking more than doubled between 1985 and the early 2000s, and over
the same period, the corresponding ratio for drug possession more than tripled. Among those
entering prison for drug-trafficking and drug possession, the probability of serving at least
two years in prison is higher now than in the 1980s. For those who enter prison following a
conviction for possession, the probability of serving five years is lower in the 2000s than in
the 1980s, but the opposite is true among those convicted for trafficking.
   When we multiply the admissions to arrests ratios by the entries for various survivor
function levels, it becomes clear that Table 7c implies a trend toward harsher treatment for
those arrested on drug charges. For example, in 1985, we see 74 admissions to prison for
every 1,000 arrests for drug trafficking, and 190 of every 1,000 prisoners who entered prison
for drug trafficking served at least two years prior to release. Thus, for every 1,000 persons
arrested for drug trafficking in 1985, roughly 14 served at least two years in prison, but the
comparable figure for 2005 is 51. If we repeat these calculations for the outcome of serving
at least five years in prison, the resulting numbers are 3.5 for 1985 and 13 for 2005.
   Although we do not see the same dramatic increases in admissions to arrests ratios among
those arrested for violent crimes, the results in Table 7a still imply a trend toward harsher
punishment of violent offenders. For every 1,000 persons arrested for homicide in 1985,
roughly 168 persons remained in prison ten years later. For those arrested for homicide in
2000, the comparable figure is 377. The exact numbers differ, but the same patterns hold
for Rape, Robbery, and Aggravated Assault. Compared to comparable alleged offenders in
1985, persons arrested for violent crime in the 2000s faced not only greater risks of entering
prison but much greater risks of serving long prison terms prior to first release.
   The panels of Table 7 demonstrate that arrested offenders in the early 2000s faced much
higher probabilities of serving significant prison time than their counterparts in 1985. Fur-
ther, this apparent change in the severity of policies that govern sentencing and time-served
is evident within all major crime categories. Taken as a whole, the results in Tables 7a-
7c show that, over time, courts and corrections officials found ways to impose more short,
medium, and long prison terms on those arrested for particular crimes.
   Table 8 presents these results in a more compact manner that closely matches the statistical
model of prison populations that we presented above. Recall that, for a person who is arrested
and convicted of crime j, we defined ﬂsj as the probability that the offender serves a prison
spell of length s given some baseline set of corrections policies. We then noted that one
can define a new set of corrections policies, ﬂÕsj , using a matrix of constants ksj that scale
these punishment probabilities up or down, i.e. ﬂÕsj = ksj ﬂsj . Further, one can collect these
probabilities in matrices ﬂ and ﬂÕ that fully characterize the two corrections policy regimes.
        THE PRISON BOOM & THE LACK OF BLACK PROGRESS AFTER SMITH & WELCH                          27

   Now, consider data on corrections outcomes for two cohorts of arrested offenders where
the first cohort faces ﬂ, and the second cohort faces ﬂÕ . Further, make three assumptions
about the charging and sentencing processes that govern both regimes. First, assume that
each convicted defendant in both cohorts is convicted of the offense listed in the UCR arrest
record that documents his arrest, i.e. the most serious charge against the defender at the
time of arrest. Next, assume that the probabilities of conviction given arrest for specific
crimes are identical for both cohorts. Finally, assume that prisoners enter prison in the same
year they are arrested.
   None of these assumptions are strictly valid. However, they allow us to link data on arrests
and admissions in a useful way. We consider combinations of offense categories j = 1, 2, .., J
and prison spell length s = 1, 2, ..S. Then, we calculate, within each cohort of arrested
persons, the ratios of the number of persons convicted of offense j who served s periods
in prison to the number of persons that were originally arrested for offense j. Given our
assumptions, the ratio associated with any pair (s, j) in our baseline cohort is a consistent
estimator of the quantity (“j ú ﬂsj ), where “j is the probability of conviction given arrest for
offense j. The corresponding ratio for the latter cohort is a consistent estimator for (“j ú ﬂÕsj ).
                            ﬂÕ
   Now, recall that ksj = ﬂsj
                            sj
                               defines the severity of corrections policies for the latter cohort
relative to the baseline cohort. Thus, for each pair (s, j), we can form a consistent estimator
of ksj by forming ratios of the ratios we describe above, i.e.
                                                    \
                                                   [“júﬂÕsj ]
                                          k̂sj =
                                                    \
                                                   [“júﬂsj ]

   Since ksj is the proportional change in the likelihood of receiving a prison term of length
s given arrest or conviction for crime j, we can describe how corrections policies changed
between the two cohorts using a (S ◊ J) matrix K    „ with elements k̂ .
                                                                        sj
   Table 8 presents these results for 84 (s, j) pairs that capture the intersections of J = 14
offense categories and S = 6 spell lengths. For example, consider the cell in Table 8 that
corresponds to the row “Drug-Trafficking” and the column “2-3 years.” The first entry tells
us that for every 1,000 persons arrested for drug trafficking in 1985, there were just over
seven persons who entered prison in 1985 and served between two and three years for drug
trafficking. The second entry implies that the corresponding figure for 2000 is almost 27
persons. The final entry, 3.68, is the ratio of these two ratios, k̂sj . Given our assumptions
above, this value indicates that the probability of serving between two and three years in
prison, conditional on being arrested for drug trafficking, increased by 268 percent between
1985 and 2000.
   Table 8 is a compact way to demonstrate that the data imply a shift to uniformly harsher
punishments for offenders in all crime categories. Note that, for all non-violent crimes, each
ksj entry is greater than one, and the majority are greater than two. In every category,
         THE PRISON BOOM & THE LACK OF BLACK PROGRESS AFTER SMITH & WELCH                               28

arrested offenders in 2000 faced a higher likelihood of serving prison terms of 0-1 years, 1-2
years, 2-3 years, 3-4 years, 4-5 years, or more than five years. Since only tiny fractions of
those arrested for non-violent offenses ever serve more than five years in prison, we lose little
information by aggregating all prison spells longer than five years into one category, and
these results clearly establish that those arrested for all non-violent offenses faced harsher
expected punishments in 2000 than in 1985.
   The results for violent crime may appear different at first glance, but they still imply a shift
to harsher punishments. Several of the k̂sj ratios that correspond to short prison spells for
violent crimes are actually less than one, but this does not indicate that corrections policies
became more moderate in some respects over time. Recall that Table 7a demonstrates that
total admissions to arrests ratios increased over the 1985 to 2000 period within every violent
crime category. Thus, within each category, any declines in the likelihood of short prison
spells simply imply that the shift toward more frequent use of long prison spells was even
greater than the increases in overall admissions rates given arrests. Note that the likelihood
of serving at least five years given arrest increased by at least a factor of two in each violent
offense category.
   We note above that, beginning in 2006, we have less than full coverage of releases in our
seven NCRP states. Thus, in order to get better information on changes in the likelihood of
long prison spells for violent criminals over time, we made similar comparison between the
1985 and 1995 cohorts.
   We compute k̂sj values that describe changes in criminal justice policies between 1985 and
1995 governing sentence lengths of 0-1 years, 1-2 years, 2-3 years, 3-4 years, 4-5 years, 5-6
years, 6-7 years, 7-8 years, 8-9 years, 9-10 years, and more than 10 years given arrest for
each violent crime. The results for spells less than five years resemble those in Table 8 and
those that describe spells longer than five years indicate a clear shift to longer prison spells
for violent offenders. All of these k̂sj values are greater than one, and more than half of the
values are greater than 2. Compared to those arrested in 1985, persons arrested for violent
crime in 1995 were much more likely to enter prison and serve long prison terms.41
   Table 8 not only demonstrates that the shift to harsher punishment for arrested offenders
applied to all crime categories, it also shows that the sizes of some shifts are stunning.
Conditional on being arrested for drug possession, the likelihood of serving between two and
five years in prison increased by more than a factor of five, and the shift toward harsher
punishment for drug traffickers is also dramatic. Finally, compared to their counterparts in
1985, persons arrested for simple assault in 2000 were five times more likely to serve at least
five years in prison.



41We  see qualitatively similar results for the 2000 cohort when we simply rely on the data that we have in
each year after 2005.
         THE PRISON BOOM & THE LACK OF BLACK PROGRESS AFTER SMITH & WELCH                                 29

4.3. Simulation Results. The results in Tables 7a-7c and Table 8 clearly show that arrest
offenders faced harsher expected punishments in the early 2000s than in 1985. However,
these results do not provide precise information about the total contribution of these implied
changes in sentencing and corrections policies to the growth of prison populations after 1985.
   Thus, we next describe a simulation model that directly maps both changes in arrest rates
and changes in policies that govern expected punishments for arrested offenders into changes
in prison populations. The logic of our model is quite similar to other simulation models in
the literature. The Raphael and Stoll (2013) steady-state approach ignores transition paths
but follows the same basic logic. In addition, McCrary (2010) develops a mathematically
similar model with a single offense and no parole, and McCrary and Sanga (2012) use a
parameterized version of this model to illustrate how deterrence elasticities shape the paths
of prison populations following exogenous shifts in the severity of sentencing. Appendix C
provides details concerning our methods. Here, we provide an overview.
   We assume, as before, that each convicted offender is convicted of the most serious charge
listed in his arrest file, i.e. the charge recorded in UCR arrest files, and that the offender
enters prison in the year of his arrest. Given these assumptions, we can use our arrest data,
data from the 1985-2009 NCRP files,42 and NPS data from 1982 through 1985 to estimate
the following probabilities:
    (1) the probability that an offender arrested in 1985 enters prison as a new court com-
        mitment
    (2) the probability that a person who was paroled from prison in year (1985 ≠ p) enters
        prison in 1985 as the result of a parole revocation
    (3) the probability that a person exits prison to parole in year (1985 + s) given that he
        entered prison in 1985 due to a new court commitment
    (4) the probability that a person exits prison to parole in year (1985 + s) given that he
        entered prison in 1985 due to a parole revocation
    (5) the probability that a person exits prison without parole supervision in year (1985+s)
        given that he entered prison in 1985 due to a new court commitment
    (6) the probability that a person exits prison without parole supervision in year (1985+s)
        given that he entered prison in 1985 due to a parole revocation
In the NCRP data, only trivial numbers of parolees face parole revocation more than three
years after their release to parole. Thus, we let p = 0, 1, 2, 3, and we treat all revocations
after three years as if they happened in p = 3. We do not need to keep track of releases

42We   do not employ the actual admissions data from the NCRP. Rather, we use the most recent NCRP
stock data for a given state and the NCRP release files from the previous years to construct admissions files
that are completely consistent with the stock and release data for 1985 and subsequent years. Given our
state selection rules, these constructed admissions series closely track the actual NCRP admission series. By
using these constructed admissions data we ensure that all of the probabilities that we calculate for use in
our simulation model are between zero and one.
        THE PRISON BOOM & THE LACK OF BLACK PROGRESS AFTER SMITH & WELCH                             30

directly from parole to freedom because these releases do not change the stock of prison
inmates.
   We let s = 0, 1, 2, ..., 20. Because we are examining the evolution of prison stocks between
1985 and 2005, we do not need to know anything about the release probabilities for s > 20.
   Above, item (1) is a single probability but items (2)-(6) are vectors of probabilities. We
calculate all the elements of (1)-(6) separately for cells defined by the interaction of three
race groups, 14 offense categories, and two geographies. The race groups are white, black,
and other. The offense categories are those used in Tables 7a-7c, and we divide geography
into California and our other six NCRP states. California is a large state that, not only in
recent years but also in 1985, followed corrections policies that are notably different than
those followed by our other NCRP states.
   In sum, for each of the (14x3x2) cells, we calculate a commitment probability, a vector of
parole revocation probabilities, and four vectors of prison release probabilities. Given any hy-
pothetical cohort of arrested offenders for any crime in any year within any (race*geography)
cell, we can simulate the transitions for these offenders that follow their arrests, i.e. transi-
tions to prison, transitions from prison to supervised parole release, transitions from parole
back to prison due to parole revocation, and transitions from prison to release without pa-
role supervision. We do not attempt to measure transitions from release without supervision
back to prison because these transitions begin as future arrests.
   Now, if we assume that the punishments arrested offenders receive in year t do not affect the
number of arrested offenders or the characteristics of arrested offenders in future years, then,
we can feed different sequences of hypothetical annual arrest levels through our simulation
and track the resulting evolution of prison populations in each of our (14x3x2) cells from
1985 through the end of 2005.
   This implies that, given our 1985-2005 data on arrests from the UCR files and the estimated
probabilities described above, we can address the following counterfactual:

   How would prison populations in our NCRP states have evolved over time if the probabili-
ties described above had been held fixed at their 1985 levels, assuming that crime rates and
resulting arrest rates evolve independently of sentencing or parole polices?

   To understand how we build the counterfactual answer to this question, note first that we
can use NCRP data to estimate the initial stocks of persons in prison and on parole at the
beginning of 1985,43 and we can also record all subsequent releases from these initial stocks
of inmates and parolees. In addition, because the probabilities above fully characterize the
dynamics of flows in and out of prison and parole, we can track the flows that we expect
into prison, out to parole, back to prison from parole, etc. from each sample of arrested
43The   aggregate prison stocks implied by these estimates match the stocks reported for 1985 by the NPS
fairly well.
        THE PRISON BOOM & THE LACK OF BLACK PROGRESS AFTER SMITH & WELCH                         31

offenders for 1985 and subsequent years. Further, we can also track the movements we
expect for persons on parole in 1985 who subsequently entered prison because they violated
their parole conditions. Thus, we can build a counterfactual time path for prison populations
under the assumption that the probabilities described above govern the movements into and
out of prison and parole for all cohorts of arrested offenders and parolees from 1985 forward.
   Figure 3 presents the results of this exercise and makes our main point clear. Prison
populations in our NCRP states grew from about 104,500 at the beginning of 1986 to roughly
325,500 at the beginning of 2006. However, taking the arrest series since 1985 as given, our
counterfactual simulation suggests that at the beginning of 2006, the stock of prisoners would
have been just less than 165,000 if the 1985 corrections regime had remained in effect. Put
differently, roughly 73% of the growth in prison populations in these states between the
beginning of 1986 and the beginning of 2006 resulted from changes in policy.
   Some may view this figure as an upper bound because we have assumed away the possibility
that arrest rates would have been higher in recent years if courts and parole boards had not
become more punitive. The most straightforward way to address this concern is to allow
for the possibility that, ceteris paribus, the number of arrests in each year is a decreasing
function of the stock of incarcerated persons at the beginning of the year. When creating
the counterfactual prison populations associated with holding corrections policies constant
at 1985 values, one can simply include additional arrests for years 1987 and beyond to reflect
the fact that arrests would have been higher in these years if the 1985 policies had been in
place and fewer potential criminals had been in prison.
   The existing literature does not speak with one voice concerning the optimal way to param-
eterize this adjustment. Therefore, we adopt parameters that we believe yield conservative
estimates of the contribution of changes in correction policies to prison growth. Among the
studies we have reviewed, Levitt (1996) reports by far the largest, in absolute value, esti-
mated elasticities between prison stocks and crime rates.44 He uses court orders concerning
prison overcrowding as instruments for changes in prison populations and concludes that,
at the state level, the elasticity of crimes rates in year t with respect to incarceration rates
in year t ≠ 1 is ≠.4 for violent crimes and ≠.3 for property crimes. These estimates are
more than double, in absolute value, most estimates in the related literature. Thus, if we
adjust the simulation results in Figure 3 for incapacitation and deterrence effects using these
elasticities, the resulting counterfactual prison populations for our NCRP states are likely
upper bounds on the prison populations that would have been realized post-1985 if the 1985
corrections policies regime had remained in place.
   Here, we assume that, within each crime category, there is a constant ratio of arrests to
reported crime over time. This allows us to treat Levitt’s estimated elasticities of crime with


44SeeJohnson and Raphael (2012), Lofstrom and Raphael (2013), Marvell and Moody (1996), McCrary and
Sanga (2012), and Owens (2009).
        THE PRISON BOOM & THE LACK OF BLACK PROGRESS AFTER SMITH & WELCH                    32

respect to lagged prison stocks as estimates of the corresponding elasticities of arrests with
respect to lagged prison stocks.
   Figure 4 presents the results. In each year from 1987 forward, we inflate arrest rates to
account for the fact that crime rates may have been higher under the 1985 corrections regime
since prison populations would have been lower. The results indicate that prison populations
in these states would have grown from 104,500 at the beginning of 1986 to just over 189,000
at the beginning of 2006 if 1985 corrections policies had remained in effect. Thus, even when
we use Levitt’s results to account for incapacitation and deterrence, our results indicate
that over 60 percent of the growth in prison populations between the beginning of 1986 and
the beginning of 2006 is the result of changes in the policies that govern sentencing and
time-served outcomes among arrested offenders.
   In addition, it is important to note that prison populations in these seven states would
have grown by more than 12,400, or just less than six percent, if the ratios of incarcerated
persons to population had simply remained constant within cells defined by age, race, and
gender. Thus, the implied contribution of more punitive corrections policies to changes
in incarceration rates is even larger than Figures 3 and 4 suggest. If we subtract 12,400
from both actual and simulated stocks, we find that roughly 65% to 77% of the growth in
prison populations that is not accounted for by changes in demography can be attributed to
increases in the punitiveness of sentencing and corrections policies.
   Criminologists typically adjust for demographic changes by expressing results in terms
of incarceration rates per 100,000 people. The population of our seven states in 1985 was
58,742,684, which yields an incarceration rate of 178 prisoners per 100,000 persons at the
end of 1985. The 2005 population is 75,236,560, which yields an incarceration rate of 433.
The incarceration rates implied by the counterfactual results in Figures 3 and 4 are 219 and
252. Thus, our simulation results suggest that changes in the severity of sentencing and
corrections policies generated between 71% and 84% of the growth in incarceration rates
between 1985 and 2005 in our seven states.
   We note above that Raphael and Stoll (2013) made similar calculations concerning changes
in steady-state incarceration rates implied by criminal justice policies and arrest rates that
prevailed in 1984 and 2004. In Figure 3.1 of their book, they report that 91% of the growth
in these implied steady-states is attributable to changes in policy.
   The key differences between our methods and those employed by Raphael and Stoll (2013)
are that (i) they decomposed growth in implied steady-states rather than actual populations
(ii) they did not restrict their analyses to states that report “clean” NCRP data and (iii)
they used smaller adjustment factors, in absolute value, to correct for incapacitation and
deterrence.
         THE PRISON BOOM & THE LACK OF BLACK PROGRESS AFTER SMITH & WELCH                                     33

   It is not clear how the first two differences should impact the Raphael and Stoll (2013)
results compared to ours.45 However, it is clear that they attribute a larger role to changes in
sentencing and corrections policies, at least in part, because they assume that the effects of
prison growth on arrest rates are significantly smaller than those reported by Levitt (1996).
The methods they employ to create their estimates are defensible and produce results that
are more in line with the rest of the literature. By using Levitt’s estimates, we are most likely
creating a conservative estimate of the impacts of more severe sentencing and corrections
policies on prison growth.46
   Yet, some may argue that Levitt’s elasticities are still too small in absolute value because he
exploits only year-to-year variation in prison populations induced by court orders. Because
the court orders that induced these population changes may be less salient for potential
criminals than sustained long-term shifts toward more punitive policies, Levitt’s research
design may not capture the full deterrence effects of recent prison growth on crime rates.
   However, Nagin (2013) presents a comprehensive review of the literature on deterrence
and concludes that the deterrence effects of shifts to longer prison terms are modest at best.
For our purposes, the most relevant studies that he reviews are Helland and Tabarrok (2007)
and Lee and McCrary (2009).47 The former finds that the large sentencing enhancements
associated with potential conviction for a third “strikeable” offense under California’s “Three
Strikes and You’re Out” regime did generate an almost twenty percent reduction in arrest
rates. This effect is noteworthy, but the enhanced sentences associated with a third strike
were quite severe. The latter study finds that the significant increases in expected punishment
associated with being tried as an adult in Florida likely generate, at most, small deterrence
effects. The Nagin (2013) review of these studies and others provides no reason to believe that
introducing additional, yet plausible, deterrence effects into our simulations could materially
change our conclusions about the primacy of sentencing and corrections policies as drivers
of prison growth. In addition, while a sustained commitment to punitive policies may deter
some potential offenders, it may also harden others. Several recent studies suggest that
putting more offenders in prison and keeping them there longer may have criminogenic
effects.48
45However,   there are reasons to believe that some of the data Raphael and Stoll (2013) employ are quite
noisy. For example, Table 2.2 reports that in 2004 their data contain almost forty percent more prison
admissions for murder than actual arrests for murder.
46Further, if one assumes heterogeneity in the propensity to persist in criminal activity, the tripling of
prison populations in these states between 1985 and 2005 should also have impacted the marginal gains from
incapacitation. In fact, Raphael and Lofstrom (2013) show that, when the Supreme Court recently forced
California to substantially reduce its prison population during 2011 and 2012, crimes rates barely moved,
and there is little evidence of a significant spatial relationship between the sizes of release flows and changes
in local crime rates.
47See Durlauf and Nagin (2010) for more on the methodological challenges facing those who seek to measure
incapacitation and deterrence effects separately.
48See Aizer and Doyle (2013), Bayer, Hjalmarsson, and Pozen (2009), Chen and Shapiro (2007), and Di Tella
and Schargrodsky (2013).
         THE PRISON BOOM & THE LACK OF BLACK PROGRESS AFTER SMITH & WELCH                              34

   In Figure 3, we are tracking total and simulated prison populations. We have repeated the
exercise while keeping separate track of the populations of prisoners who last entered prison
following conviction for crime and the populations who last entered prison following parole
revocations. The results show that, in most years, the number of prisoners associated with
new court commitments is at least three times the number of prisoners associated with parole
revocations. Further, at the beginning of 2006, both stocks of prisoners are roughly twice
the levels implied by the simulations that impose the 1985 corrections policies throughout
the sample period. Although there appear to have been some changes over time in how
California made decisions concerning parole revocations, the key driver of growth in the
number of persons serving prison terms that began as the result of parole revocations is
growth in the stock of persons on parole and therefore at risk for revocation, and this growth
in the stock of parolees was primarily driven by growth in the number of persons serving
time for new convictions.

4.3.1. Race-Specific Results. We began by noting the low employment rates and high incar-
ceration rates that now exist among black men, especially less-educated black men. We have
shown that changes in sentencing and parole policies drove overall prison growth during the
past several decades. Thus, we now ask whether these changes in sentencing and parole
policies were implemented in a way that disproportionately affected blacks.
  Figures 5 and 6 repeat the simulations in Figure 3 treating blacks and whites as separate
populations. Here, we see dramatic growth in prison populations for both races that cannot
be explained by trends in arrests. Further, at the beginning of 2006, the ratio of actual
prisoners to the simulated stock based on 1985 corrections policies is greater for whites than
blacks, 2.12 vs 1.75. Finally, Appendix Tables A6 and A7 present race-specific versions of
Table 8. These tables also do not support the idea that changes in sentencing and parole
policies after 1985 were more punitive in cases that involved black offenders. Most of the kˆsj
entries are, in fact, larger among whites.
  While there is no evidence that the prison boom was driven by changes in sentencing
and parole policies that were differentially punitive for blacks,49 policy changes that increase
expected punishment for arrested offenders have a larger effect on blacks as a group because
black arrest rates have been and remain much higher than white arrest rates. There is some
suggestive evidence that, even in our base year 1985, black offenders were already more likely
to receive significant prison time for some offenses, e.g. Robbery, Burglary, Motor Vehicle
Theft, and Larceny, but this baseline differential is a minor part of the story. The policy
change we describe above involved an across the board move to more punitive sentencing
and parole policies for all offenders, and this change had more significant impacts on black
49However,  because we cannot identify Hispanics in a consistent way over time and because the Hispanic
population is growing over time, we cannot rule out the possibility that punishments applied to both black
and Hispanic defendants became more severe over time relative to those applied to non-Hispanic white
defendants.
         THE PRISON BOOM & THE LACK OF BLACK PROGRESS AFTER SMITH & WELCH                                     35

communities than white communities because black arrest rates have been at least four times
greater than white rates from 1980 forward.50

                                          5. Federal Prisons
   To this point, we have focused on growth in state prisons. The NCRP contains spotty
data on federal prisons. So, we have pieced together information on growth in the stock of
federal prison inmates from other sources. Tables 9a, 9b, and 9c present prison populations,
admissions, and releases by offense category for the federal prison system from 1989 through
2010.
   In percentage terms, the federal prison population grew even more rapidly than state
prison populations during the 1990s and 2000s. Between 1989 and 2010, the stock of federal
prisoners increased by more than 250 percent.
   However, the reasons for this growth are different. The Federal prison population increased
by about 150,000 persons over this period, and increases for only three offense categories
account for almost 90 percent of this growth. The number of persons imprisoned for drug
offenses increased by almost 81,000, while the number imprisoned for weapons and immigra-
tion offenses increased by more than 29,000 and 21,000 respectively. The stock of prisoners
in the other crime category increased by roughly 18,000 as well, while the stock of prisoners
serving time for traditional violent and property crimes remained roughly constant.51
   We do not have federal arrest data that is comparable to the arrest data we employ in
analyzing the growth of state prisons. However, even if we had data on federal agency arrests,
we could not compare trends in arrests to trends in crime for the federal crime categories that
drove federal prison growth. UCR crime data do not include drugs, weapons, or immigration
as offense categories. When an offender breaks into a home and steals jewelry, the owner
of the jewelry may well file a police report. However, drug crimes, weapons crimes, and
immigrations offenses typically involve episodes where all parties involved are violating the
law. The persons who just bought illegal drugs or illegal weapons are not likely to report the
sales to police, and the persons who helped illegal immigrants enter the country or obtain
illegal employment have no interest in reporting the related immigration law violations to
police. In this light, it is interesting to note that Federal prison admissions for drug offenses
50We   are not claiming that racial disparities in charges filed against arrested offenders or sentences given to
convicted defendants do not exist. In a recent paper, Rehavi and Starr (2013) not only review the substantial
literature on racial disparities in sentencing but also provide clear evidence of discriminatory behavior by
federal prosecutors prior to the sentencing stage. When dealing with comparable arrested offenders, federal
prosecutors are more like to file formal charges that bring mandatory minimum sentence provisions into play
if the offenders are black, and we cannot rule out the possibility that state prosecutors engage in the same
biased behaviors. Still, our results provide no evidence that these types of discriminatory behaviors have
become worse over time.
51We see large percentage increases in the stocks of prisoners incarcerated for rape, but this is an increase of
only hundreds of people, and it appears to be driven by a change in the classification of what sexual crimes
count as rapes.
           THE PRISON BOOM & THE LACK OF BLACK PROGRESS AFTER SMITH & WELCH                                   36

continued to rise long after the crack epidemic ended in most urban areas, and admissions
for immigration violations are higher in the period 2008-2010 than in any previous period,
even though rates of illegal immigration allegedly fell during the Great Recession.52
   We also do not have time-served information for federal prisoners by offense because the
NCRP records for the federal prison system are spotty. Thus, we cannot calculate proxies
for the likelihood of serving various prison terms given arrest for specific federal offenses, and
we cannot clearly assess the extent to which changes in federal corrections policies mirrored
the changes we see at the state level.
   Still, we can establish at least two important contrasts between patterns of growth in the
federal prison system and the patterns we document for state prison growth. To begin, recent
growth in the stock of federal prisoners did not involve significant growth within all offense
categories. In fact, there was almost no growth in the numbers of prisoners serving time for
offenses other than drug, weapons, and immigration violations. In addition, in contrast to
our results for state prisons, federal prison growth was not the result of a color-blind shift
toward more punitive sentencing. The Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1986 was one of the major
federal actions in the War on Drugs, and it established mandatory minimum sentences for
drug possession that appeared to target blacks for particularly punitive punishment. For
example, the act put in place mandatory prison sentences for drug possession, but the rules
that mapped drugs amounts into sentences made huge distinctions between drugs that are
chemically similar but used by different racial groups. The act specifies a five year minimum
sentence for either possession of at least five grams of crack cocaine or possession at least 500
grams of powder cocaine. Because powder cocaine is the main ingredient in crack cocaine this
100 to 1 ratio has attracted much attention. Many legal scholars have noted that crack use
is much higher in black communities while the prevalence of powder cocaine use is relatively
higher in white communities, and they have alleged that the sentencing provisions of the
Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1986 targeted blacks for particularly punitive treatment.53
   In 2010, President Obama signed the Fair Sentencing Act that greatly reduced but did
not completely eliminate disparities in mandatory sentencing provisions among drugs that
are chemically similar. However, the rules in the Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1986 governed
sentencing in federal drugs cases for more than two decades.
   Also, Rehavi and Starr (2013) demonstrate that racial biases may exist in the Federal
system that are not codified in any statutes or guidelines. These authors find evidence
that black offenders receive almost 10% longer sentences than comparable white offenders
arrested for the same crimes, and half of this gap can be explained by decisions made before
defendants are convicted. Holding constant the characteristics of arrested offenders and the
charges in their initial arrest files, federal prosecutors are more than twice as likely to file
charges against black defendants that carry mandatory minimum prison sentences. Because
52See   Figure 17 in Wasem (2013).
53See   Alexander (2012) for an extensive discussion of this issue and related aspects of the War on Drugs.
        THE PRISON BOOM & THE LACK OF BLACK PROGRESS AFTER SMITH & WELCH                      37

the Rehavi and Starr (2013) data set begins in 2006, it is not possible to know whether or
not federal prosecutors became more biased over time, but the implications of the biases
they identify for steady-state ratios of blacks to whites in federal prisons are significant.
   In our analyses of state prison growth, we have no information about charges filed, plea
bargains, acquittals, or convictions. We only have data on arrests and prison spells. As
we note above, this limits our capacity to know which arrested offenders entered prison as
convicted offenders found guilty of specific crimes. However, the Rehavi and Starr (2013)
evidence points to an advantage of our approach. Their results demonstrate that judges and
parole boards are not the only actors who influence the punitiveness of corrections policies.
Prosecutorial decisions also matter, and in settings where many crimes are associated with
sentences that are both presumptive and harsh, prosecutors may find it easier to extract
guilty pleas to lesser charges. Thus, even if we had access to clean samples of convicted
offenders and their convictions offenses that allowed us to build a more detailed model of
the criminal justice system, we would still want to use samples of arrested offenders as the
baseline inputs for our simulations.


                                           6. Jails
   While federal prison population grew even faster than state prison populations over the
past three decades, jail populations grew at similar rates, at least over the long term. Table
6 shows that in 1985, there were 1.8 inmates in state prisons for every inmate in local jails.
In 1990, 1995, 2000, 2005, and 2011, this ratio equaled 1.74, 2.02, 1.99, 1.78, and 1.87
respectively. Thus, jail populations follow roughly the same long-term trends as state prison
populations.
   Without more detailed information on the movements of prisoners between jails and pris-
ons, it is not possible to know exactly why jail stocks track prison stocks so closely. Some
sentenced prisoners serve time in jail while awaiting transfer to state prisons, and other con-
victed prisoners with short sentences actually serve their entire sentences in jail without ever
entering state prison. Thus, it seems reasonable to expect that the move to more punitive
sentencing that caused prison populations to grow also increased jail populations. Nonethe-
less, more work is required to pin down the different sources of growing jail populations over
the past several decades.


                     7. Incarceration and Economic Outcomes
  So far, we have established that changes in corrections policy drove the prison boom.
Further, at least at the state level, these changes appear to be implemented in a roughly
color-blind manner. These policy changes had a much greater impact on black communities
than white communities because blacks have long been arrested at much higher rates than
whites.
           THE PRISON BOOM & THE LACK OF BLACK PROGRESS AFTER SMITH & WELCH                   38

   Given these results, it is natural to ask how these changes in corrections policy have
impacted the trajectory of black-white economic inequality, especially among men. We would
like to know how the move toward more punitive corrections policies impacted long term
trends in employment and earnings for less-skilled men overall and for black men relative to
white men.
   To examine these questions directly, we would need to isolate inter-state variation in the
move toward more punitive corrections policies that is orthogonal to unmeasured variation
in state labor market conditions. This data requirement is problematic for at least two
reasons. To begin, only a handful of states report NCRP data that are clean enough to
permit reliable measurement of how the punitiveness of corrections policies changed over
time. Further, recent research suggests that correction policies are influenced by the health
of state economies. States are less likely to build new prisons or incur other costs associated
with prison expansion during times when the state economy is trending down.54
   Nonetheless, there is a literature that explores many potential links between the severity of
criminal justice policies and labor market outcomes, and we review this literature here before
presenting analyses of recent trends in black-white labor market inequality that account for
changes in the stock of incarcerated men over time.
   In any discussion of the relationships between corrections policies and labor market out-
comes, there are two different ways to define the parameters of interest. One could take a
population of offenders as given and then explore how the punishments they receive impact
their trajectories of employment, earnings, recidivism, and incarceration in the future. In
addition however, one could also explore how corrections policies and beliefs about correc-
tions policies impact the decisions of young persons to become involved in crime at all. The
existing literature deals almost exclusively with the former exercise and devotes scant at-
tention to the latter. The importance of this omission hinges on the degree to which young
persons may be deterred from criminal activity by the prospects of future punishments.
   We review not only studies that examine the future employment and earnings outcomes
of offenders but also studies that explore recidivism. While our main focus is the link
between corrections policies and future economic outcomes for offenders, we review the
recidivism literature for two reasons. First, time spent in criminal activity is time not spent
in legal employment. So, mechanisms that imply causal impacts of corrections policies on
recidivism may simultaneously imply causal effects of corrections policies on future earnings
and employment. Second, the decision of non-employed individuals to allocate time to
criminal activity that could be allocated to market work or job search may be a signal that
these individuals face bleak future prospects in the formal labor market.
   It is logically possible that harsh criminal justice policies improve the labor market out-
comes of less-skilled men. To the extent that harsh expected punishment lowers the expected

54See   Pew Center on the States (2010).
           THE PRISON BOOM & THE LACK OF BLACK PROGRESS AFTER SMITH & WELCH                   39

return from illegal work relative to legal work, punitive sentencing and corrections policies
may induce young men to work more and build skills that make market work more rewarding
in the future. Further, many prisoners have drug problems or mental health challenges that
simultaneously make them less fit for market work and more prone to crime, and rehabili-
tation and counseling programs in prisons may help such prisoners. Finally, education and
job training programs offered in prisons may give prisoners the opportunity to build skills
that employers value.
   However, there are also many reasons to expect that a move to more punitive corrections
policies could harm the labor market outcomes of young men. To begin, decisions by prose-
cutors that increase the number of felony convictions holding constant the crimes committed
by arrested offenders increase the number of future job seekers who have criminal records,
and a number of studies demonstrate that many employers are reluctant to hire persons with
prior felony convictions. Further, the decision to assign more offenders to prison directly low-
ers employment rates by creating forced separations from existing jobs. In addition, prison
time prevents the accumulation of additional work experience and removes offenders from
networks of employed people who may provide useful contacts. Finally, prison time may
enhance the attachment of offenders to criminal careers. Young offenders who are given
prison time instead of probation are exposed to career criminals who may strengthen their
attachment to crime by teaching them how to be better criminals or by simply deepening
their exposure to organized networks of criminals.55

7.1. Labor Market Impacts of Corrections Policies. Holzer (2009) provides an ex-
tensive review of the literature that examines how the severity of punishment for offenders
affects their subsequent labor market opportunities, and we will not re-examine all of the
studies that Holzer discusses here. Instead, we review several themes in the literature and a
few studies that deserve particular attention.
   Holzer (2009) distinguishes between studies that examine how employers treat ex-offenders
and studies that directly measure employment and earnings outcomes for ex-offenders. He
correctly notes that the existing literature shows that many employers investigate whether
or not their applicants have criminal records, and these employers often state that they
are hesitant to interview and hire persons who have been convicted of serious crimes. This
literature does not speak to the effects of more frequent use of prison time as a sanction
for convicted felons, per se, because the focus is on the effects of having a criminal record.
However, sentencing laws may impact conviction rates through the plea bargaining process.
When prosecutors are able to threaten arrested offenders with more severe potential punish-
ments, they may be better able to extract guilty pleas that result in felony convictions, even
if the offenders receive probation or short prison terms in exchange for their pleas.

55See   Bayer, Hjalmarsson, and Pozen (2009).
         THE PRISON BOOM & THE LACK OF BLACK PROGRESS AFTER SMITH & WELCH                                        40

   Holzer (2009) divides studies that evaluate the impacts of prison time on future labor
outcomes into two categories: those that rely on panel data from surveys and those that rely
on administrative data. He correctly notes that most of these studies find that increases in
the severity of punishment offenders receive are associated with negative impacts on future
labor market outcomes.56
   However, one well-designed study did not fit this pattern. Kling (2006) finds that, given
admission to prison, the length of time-served does not have important negative impacts on
future labor market outcomes. The key concern about most studies in this literature is that
the variation in the punishments that observationally similar offenders receive is correlated
with unmeasured traits of the offenders that also impact labor market outcomes directly.
To address this issue, Kling employs controls for earnings histories prior to prison entry,
and he uses the identity of judges as a source of exogenous variation in sentence lengths.
Kling’s figures show a clear jump in employment and earnings in the year that sentences are
scheduled to end, and these figures also show that earnings and employment rates converge
to a common post-release level regardless of how long an offender stayed in prison before
release. Kling’s post-release panel is short, and his results do not rule out negative life-cycle
impacts of enhanced sentences, but his study remains a noteworthy exception to the general
pattern of results in this literature.57
   In sum, the existing literature provides considerable evidence that some employers are
hesitant to consider applications from convicted felons. Further, many studies provide sug-
gestive evidence that punitive sanctions harm the future labor market prospects of offenders,
and no studies provide evidence that serving time in prison as opposed to serving time on
probation or parole improves the future labor market prospects of offenders. Nonetheless,
the Kling (2006) study raises the possibility that, among those who enter prison, actual
time-served is not an important determinant of future labor market outcomes.58

7.2. Market Level Impacts. As we note above, it is almost impossible to identify the
causal impacts of a move to more punitive corrections policies on earnings and employment
outcomes at the market level. However, Holzer, Offner, and Sorenson (2005) do show that,

56See  Grogger (1995), Raphael (2007), and Western (2002) as examples.
57For  those serving longer prison spells, the initial jumps in earnings upon release are higher and the declines
from these peaks are faster and more dramatic. Because Kling has relatively few post-release observations
for those who served sentences of four years or more, it is possible that the earnings and employment levels
for these groups continued to decline beyond the end of the sample period even though the earnings and
employment levels for those serving short sentences appear to stabilize before the end of the sample period.
58It is even more difficult to know how the prison boom has affected the spouses of inmates as well as their
children, and how these effects will impact future generations. Wildeman and Western (2010) review the
literature on this topic, and while they highlight the challenges of isolating truly causal effects of incarceration
on families, they review many findings that point to the possibility that spouses and children may suffer
when changes in criminal justice policies increase incarceration rates. This is particularly true of policies
that increase incarceration rates for non-violent offenders. Johnson (2009) produces related findings using
data from the Panel Survey of Income Dynamics.
         THE PRISON BOOM & THE LACK OF BLACK PROGRESS AFTER SMITH & WELCH                               41

within states over time, changes in employment and labor force participations rate among
less-educated, black men under age 35 are negatively correlated with past growth in prison
populations. These correlations remain given many different controls for factors that may
influence state-specific employment trends. Although these results do not establish a causal
relationship between corrections policies and future employment rates for less-skilled men,
they do show that, on average, the within state correlation between prison growth and future
employment growth is what one would expect given the assumption that serving prison time
does harm the labor market prospects of offenders.
7.3. Punitiveness and Recidivism. The Kling (2006) study is unique because few studies
that address the links between punishments and future labor market outcomes actually have
access to data on a plausibly exogenous source of variation in the severity of punishments.
But, a number of recent recidivism studies also use judge assignment to isolate exogenous
variation in the severity of punishments given the severity of offenses. We review these studies
here because the choice of recidivists to engage in criminal activity may be correlated with
failure to secure legal employment. In Chapter 7 of their book, Raphael and Stoll (2013)
provide a more extensive review of the entire literature on causal links between incarceration
rates and crimes rates.
   Aizer and Doyle (2013) exploit random assignment of juvenile offenders to different judges
to isolate exogenous variation in assignment to incarceration among observationally similar
offenders. They find that the use of incarceration as a punishment for juveniles significantly
increases the likelihood of adult incarceration. In contrast, Green and Winik (2010) follow
over 1,000 drug defendants and conclude that variation in assignment to incarceration versus
probation induced by random assignment to different judges did not impact future arrest
rates. Di Tella and Schargrodsky (2013) employ a similar research design using data on
adult offenders from Argentina. They conclude that the use of electronic monitoring as a
substitute for incarceration significantly lowers rates of recidivism.59
   The literature does not speak with one voice, but on balance, these studies suggest that
when prosecutors and judges make decisions that result in prison time instead of probation for
marginal offenders, these marginal offenders become more likely to engage in future criminal
activity that leads to future arrests and incarceration. By definition, these periods of future
incarceration cannot be periods of future employment and are thus suggestive evidence that
the use of prison as punishment harms the labor market prospects of offenders.
   Our analyses of NCRP data demonstrate that the rise in prison populations primarily
reflects changes in public policies that shape the punishment of arrested offenders. The
results in Tables 1-4 demonstrate that employment rates among less educated men generally,
and less-educated black men in particular, have fallen dramatically as prison populations
59Chen  and Shapiro (2007) employ a regression discontinuity model to examine the effects of assignment to
federal prisons of different security levels. They find some evidence that harsher prison conditions do not
deter future offending and may actually increase recidivism.
         THE PRISON BOOM & THE LACK OF BLACK PROGRESS AFTER SMITH & WELCH                                  42

have exploded. We are not able to make precise statements about how much recent changes
in corrections policies contributed to changes in overall labor market inequality or black-
white inequality in particular. However, the balance of the existing literature suggests that
the policies that caused the prison boom may well have generated negative labor market
consequences for those arrested in recent decades, and black men experienced much higher
arrest rates than white men over this period.
  Finally, whatever one believes about the causal impacts of corrections policies on the
labor market outcomes of offenders, we demonstrate, in the next section, that researchers
who seek to document recent labor market trends among men must account for the prison
boom. Researchers can no longer construct accurate measures of overall inequality or black-
white inequality without properly accounting for the missing data problem created by mass
incarceration.

                   8. Measuring Black-White Inequality Over Time
   Most of the Smith and Welch (1989) results came from 1940-1980 long-form census files,
but they also provided results from the Current Population Surveys (CPS). Smith and Welch
(1989) used CPS data from the 1980s to demonstrate that black-white wage inequality
remained roughly constant during the period 1980-1986. They concluded that, although
black men had not made further progress during the 1980s, they had not given back the
gains made in previous decades. Thus, the almost half century period 1940-1986 contained
a record of significant absolute and relative economic progress for blacks.60
   The CPS program has long been the source of many government statistics on labor force
participation, unemployment, and earnings, and CPS data were the best source of informa-
tion about 1980 labor market trends available to Smith and Welch (1989). Yet, for more
than a decade, subsequent scholars have argued that the prison boom, which began around
1980, has created an environment such that CPS data provide a grossly incomplete picture
of labor market inequality among men. Because the CPS program draws samples from the
non-institutionalized population, researchers who rely on CPS data to measure employment
rates cannot count prisoners among the non-employed. Further, because prisoners tend to be
less educated and from minority populations, standard measures of labor market inequality
between racial and education groups may be significantly biased by the systematic omission
of prisoners.
   The literature on how race-specific trends in non-employment may contaminate measured
trends in black-white gaps in earnings or wages begins with Butler and Heckman (1977).
The literature is large, and we will not review it all here. Instead, we review a set of studies
60A  significant literature followed Smith and Welch (1989). The literature affirms the conclusion that black
Americans made important relative economic progress during much of the 20th century. However, the
literature contains serious debate over the relative importance of different forces as contributing factors to
black progress. See Card and Krueger (1992) and Donohue and Heckman (1991).
           THE PRISON BOOM & THE LACK OF BLACK PROGRESS AFTER SMITH & WELCH                    43

that came after the prison boom of the 1980s and devote specific attention to the growing
number of incarcerated persons missing from the CPS sampling frame.
   Chandra (2000) is among the first economists to raise the possibility that different trends in
institutionalization rates by race are an important source of selection biases that contaminate
standard measures of how black-white earnings differences have evolved over time. He uses
data from the 1940-1990 census files, and he employs three different imputation rules for
non-workers. The first follows the approach developed by Brown (1984). It assumes that all
non-workers have wage offers from the bottom half of their race-specific unconditional offer
distributions and that offers follow a log normal distribution. The results from this procedure
imply that between 1970 and 1990, the black-white ratio of mean wage offers actually fell
slightly between 1970 and 1990 even though the ratio of mean observed wages rose from .69
to .75. The other two methods involved within-cell imputations. Chandra (2000) defines
cells using the intersection of age and education groups. The imputations involve either the
mean or minimum of observed wages in each cell. These imputation rules do not produce
estimates of black-white ratios of mean wage offers that differ dramatically from black-white
ratios of observed wages. However, the results still imply that black-white wage ratios of
observed mean wages are larger than the corresponding ratios of mean wage offers and that
the gap between these two ratios grew between 1970 and 1990.
   Neal (2006) employs data from the 1960-2000 census files. He divides the data into cells
defined by the intersection of schooling levels and potential experience levels. He assumes
that the mean log of potential earnings for those employed in the previous calendar year is .4
greater than the corresponding mean for those who are either institutionalized or simply not
employed. The basic methodology is similar to the approach that Smith and Welch (1989)
used to address the possibility that falling black employment rates after 1970 bias measures
of trends in black wage growth after 1970. Neal settled on the .4 after examining the wages
of men in the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979 (NLSY79) who worked in some
years but also reported no earnings for a number of calendar years.
   For all but the groups with the most education and potential work experience, the Neal
(2006) imputation rules imply that the absolute values of black-white gaps in log potential
earnings are larger in 2000 than in 1970, and in most demographic cells, this pattern does not
hold for gaps in observed log earnings among the employed. Further, by 2000, the differences
between observed black-white earnings gaps and the implied gaps in potential earnings are
often quite large among workers with a high-school education or less, i.e. these differences
typically imply that the gap in potential earnings is from one fifth to one third larger.
   Becky Petitt and Bruce Western, along with several co-authors, have done the most ex-
tensive work on this topic.61 Here, we review the results from one of their more recent and
comprehensive efforts. Pettit, Sykes, and Wester (2009) depart from the approaches above

61For   summaries, see Pettit (2012) and Western (2006).
        THE PRISON BOOM & THE LACK OF BLACK PROGRESS AFTER SMITH & WELCH                       44

by employing different data. They do not use census files to capture the institutionalized
population. Instead, they estimate the population characteristics of prisoners using several
annual surveys of prisons and jails, and then assume that growth in the number of prisoners
in various demographic groups follows the same trajectories as the trajectory of total prison-
ers. Then, they add estimates of the annual stocks of prisoners in different demographic cells
to annual CPS samples and form adjusted wage measures by making different assumptions
about the potential wages and earnings of incarcerated persons. The three imputation rules
they employ are: (i) assign all non-workers the mean potential wages of workers who share
the same race, age, gender, and education, (ii) follow assignment rule (i) for non-workers
who are not institutionalized and assign mean potential wages for inmates based on sev-
eral surveys of inmates that gathered information about labor market outcomes prior to
imprisonment, and (iii) assign zero wages to all non-workers. They perform these analyses
separately for ages 22-64 and ages 22-30. They produce results for years 1980-2008.
   In all specifications, black-white gaps in mean log hourly wages are larger in absolute value
in 2008 than in 1980. As a whole, the results clearly indicate that blacks fared relatively
better during the 1990s than during the 1980s or the period 2000-2008. Still, it is hard to
draw precise conclusions from these results. The implied amount of increase in black-white
inequality is much larger given specification (iii) than specifications (i) or (ii). In fact, the
black-white wage gap for 2008 based on (iii) is roughly double the gap that results from
method (ii) even though the gap based on (iii) is only about 50% larger in 1980.
   The first two approaches are conservative adjustments for selection. Non-workers who are
not in prison always receive the average wages of similar workers as their wage offers, and
the information used to form imputed wages for prisoners comes from those prisoners who
were employed prior to entering prison. At the same time, the authors acknowledge that
assigning wages of zero to all non-workers is an extreme adjustment for selection.
   In sum, these methods all produce results that suggest standard measures of black-white
wage inequality overstate the relative economic success of blacks in recent decades by ignoring
the selection bias created by the prison boom. However, these results do not pin down how
large this bias likely is.

8.1. Imputation Methods. Here, we also pursue an imputation strategy, but we do not
focus on gaps in mean wages or mean log wages. Instead, we focus on the ratio of the
median potential wage for black males to the median potential wage for white males in
various demographic groups.
   We focus on medians because medians have important robustness properties with respect
to imputation rules that researchers use to deal with missing data problems. Suppose that
a researcher has data on a sample of size N , and for M observations in this sample, data on
the variable W is missing. If N ≠M
                                 N
                                     > .5, the researcher can recover the true median of W
for the entire sample if the researcher knows only the fraction of the missing observations,
        THE PRISON BOOM & THE LACK OF BLACK PROGRESS AFTER SMITH & WELCH                    45

–, that fall above the true median. Given this information, the researcher can create an
imputation sample by assigning the highest observed W to –M of the records with missing
values while assigning the lowest observed W to the remaining (1 ≠ –)M , and the median W
in this imputation sample will be the median of the true W values over all records in the full
sample. The researcher does not require any additional information about the distribution of
the missing values. As long as N ≠M
                                  N
                                      > .5, knowledge of – alone provides enough information
to recover the median of W over the full sample.
   In Tables 10 and 11, we exploit this result to produce numerous estimates of ratios of
black median potential weekly wages to white median potential weekly wages. Our goal here
is to describe economic inequality that reflects inequality in labor market opportunities for
men. Thus, we want to consider men who are in what should be their prime working years.
We want to focus on persons who are finished with schooling and persons who are not in
a period of transition to retirement. To this end, we group men by potential experience
categories, and we focus on men with between 6 and 25 years of potential work experience.
   We use data from the ACS and Census that describe earnings and weeks worked in the
previous year, and we calculate weekly earnings as our wage measure. We do not compute
hourly wages because data on hours worked from these sources is quite noisy and because
we want to accommodate the possibility that some workers are willing but not able to secure
full-time jobs.
   For years 1980 and beyond, we also employ data from the CPS-Merged Outgoing Rotation
Groups (MORG) files in combination with data from the Census or ACS. The Census and
ACS are advantageous because they include both military and institutionalized populations.
However, they are also pencil and paper surveys, while the MORG involves interaction with
an interviewer and more probing questions about rates and modes of pay. Therefore, we
drop all non-institutionalized civilians from the Census and ACS who are both employed
during the survey week and employed during the previous calendar year. We then replace
these observations with observations from the corresponding MORG files, and we multiply
the sampling weights for these MORG observations by the ratio of the total populations
represented by the two samples. Thus, the MORG observations that we insert represent
the same number of persons that we drop from the ACS. Results based on these composite
samples are presented in brackets to the right of our main results.
   The thought experiment here is to describe black-white differences in median potential
wages for samples of men defined by potential experience levels. For men who are not working
and not institutionalized, we focus on the likelihood that the weekly wage they would earn
if they took the best job available to them is above the median potential wage for men of
their same race and potential experience. For men who are institutionalized and report no
employment during the previous year, we take two different approaches. The first, presented
in Table 10, treats institutionalized workers like any other non-employed persons. Here, we
define “potential weekly wage” as the wage available to a given worker if the worker was
          THE PRISON BOOM & THE LACK OF BLACK PROGRESS AFTER SMITH & WELCH                               46

not institutionalized, and we further assume that the distribution of potential wages among
the institutionalized is the same as the distribution among other observationally similar men
who are not employed.
  Table 11 presents results from our second approach. Here, we define the “potential weekly
wage” values among institutionalized men as the wages available at jobs they can claim
within their institutions. Given the wages paid for jobs in prisons or homes for adults with
disabilities, we feel confident that these potential wages are all below the relevant median
potential wages for each race-experience cell.
  Tables 10 and 11 follow the same format. Each panel presents results for samples of
workers that share similar levels of potential work experience. Each row presents results for
a different year. The data for 1960-2000 come from census long form files. The data for
2007 and 2010 come from the American Community Survey. We include the 2007 results to
demonstrate the effects of the Great Recession on black-white inequality.
  The columns describe different mixing rules. The column (10/25) presents results based
on the assumption that 10 percent of black men in a given cell who do not work actually face
wage offers above the median wage offer for the cell while the corresponding figure among
white men who do not work is 25 percent. The column (25/10) reverses these imputation
rules by race. The column (15/15) uses a common imputation rule for white and black
men. The Raw column presents the ratio of median observed black earnings to median
observed white earnings. These results are equivalent to those one would obtain by using a
(50/50) imputation procedure. The final six columns give the fractions of men who report
employment, who are institutionalized and do not report employment in the previous year,
and who are not institutionalized and do not report employment in the previous year.62
  The (15/15) rule is our preferred specification based on exploratory analyses of the wage
histories of men in the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (1979). These men were ages
35-43 during their 2000 interviews, and for those who did not report employment in 2000, we
look to the 1996, 1998, 2002, and 2004 surveys for information about their potential wages
in 2000. The NLSY sample covers only seven birth cohorts, but the patterns in the 1996
to 2004 data suggest that the (15/15) rule is a reasonable benchmark. We offer the (10/25)
and (25/10) results to place what we contend are plausible bounds on black-white ratios of
median wage offers given the reported wages, patterns of non-employment, and patterns of
incarceration in the Census and ACS data.63
62Here,  the relevant census employment question inquires about employment in the calendar year prior to
the April administration of the census. In the ACS, the parallel question refers to employment in the twelve
months prior to the respondent’s interview date. Between 2000 and 2007, the decline in the fraction of
men who are institutionalized and not working reflects, in part, a non-trivial increase in those who are
institutionalized but yet report recent employment. We have no way to determine whether or not the
different conventions used in the ACS and census to inquire about employment in the last year contribute
to this pattern since the ACS did not include institutionalized persons until 2006.
63We use three rules to create a sample of wage offers for the NLSY79 men. First, we collect reported wages
for those who report jobs in 2000. Second, for those who were not working in 2000 but did report a wage
         THE PRISON BOOM & THE LACK OF BLACK PROGRESS AFTER SMITH & WELCH                                47

   Several patterns stand out in Tables 10 and 11.
   First, even in 1960, white male employment rates exceeded those of their black peers, and
black-white gaps in median observed wages slightly overstated the relative potential wages of
black men. However, black employment rates were around 90 percent for all four experience
groups in both 1960 and 1970, so our results are not terribly sensitive to the imputation
rules we employ.
   Second, when assessing the relative progress of black men during the 1960s, our selection
corrected results often imply even greater black relative progress during the 1960s than one
would infer from changes in medians of observed wage distributions. This is clearly true for
those with 11-25 years of potential experience. In these groups, institutionalization rates
fell during the 1960s for both black and white men, but the declines were greater among
black men. Further, among both white and black men, employment rates in these potential
experience groups were roughly the same in 1970 as in 1960.
   Third, after 1970, differences between the ratios of observed median wages and our selec-
tion corrected ratios grow over time. By 1990, we see noteworthy differences between the
raw ratios of observed median wages by race and all of our selection corrected ratios. Note
that the corrected ratios in the (25/10) column likely overstate the relative wage offers of
black men, but these ratios are less than the corresponding entries in the Raw column for
all experiences groups in each year from 1990 through 2010, and if we consider the (15/15)
results for 1990 in Tables 10 and 11, the differences between our selection corrected ratios
and the ratios of raw observed medians range from roughly .06 to .10 in absolute values.
   Fourth, among workers with less than 15 years of potential experience, it is hard to
escape the conclusion that black-white ratios of median potential wages in 2010 were, at
best, comparable to the corresponding ratios in 1970. Among workers in these first two
experience groups, the entries in each of the first three columns of Table 11 are smaller
in 2010 than in 1970, and the same pattern holds for four of six comparisons in Table 10.
These results are particularly noteworthy since the ratios of observed median wages among
employed men, i.e. the results in the Raw column, suggest that black men of all potential
experience levels made significant relative progress during the 1970-2010 period.
   Fifth, our selection corrected ratios suggest that, between 1970 and 2010, black men with
16-25 years of potential experience enjoyed trivial net growth in median potential wages
relative to their white counterparts. This result holds even though employed black men
made substantial wage gains relative to employed white men during this period. Within
five of the six columns of Table 11 that describe results for workers with 16-25 years of

in 1996, 1998, 2002, or 2004, we record the wage report most proximate to the 2000 interview. Finally, for
those who never report employment between 1996 and 2004, we impute wages of one dollar per hour. We
divide this sample of wage offers by race and find that 14 percent of white men and 15 percent of black men
who are not working in 2000 report a wage in the 1996, 1998, 2002, or 2004 samples that is above the median
wage offer in our race-specific samples. The corresponding results for the 75th percentile are 4 percent for
white men and 7 percent for black men.
        THE PRISON BOOM & THE LACK OF BLACK PROGRESS AFTER SMITH & WELCH                       48

experience, the absolute differences between our selection corrected ratios for 1970 and 2010
are less than .02.
   So far, we have discussed our results by examining different imputation rules while im-
plicitly assuming that patterns of selection did not change over time, i.e. we have discussed
patterns within the columns that describe our three imputations rules. However, it is pos-
sible that selection patterns did change over time and that, across years within a particular
potential experience group, our best estimates do not come from a single column. Thus,
we must ask whether or not it is possible to construct some scenarios involving changes in
patterns of selection over time that imply significant relative black progress between 1970
and 2010.
   The results in Table 11 suggest that it is difficult to pick any combinations of our results
that imply significant and lasting improvement in black-white potential wages after 1970.
Given observed black-white differences in employment and incarceration rates, the (10/25)
results yield the smallest corrected ratios and the (25/10) results yield the largest corrected
ratios for each cell defined by year and level of potential experience. Note that, among those
with 15 years of potential experience or less, the (10/25) results for 1970 are within .01 of
the (25/10) results for 2010. Among those with 21-25 years of potential experience, the
corresponding comparisons imply relative potential wage growth for black men of just over
.03. And, while the same exercise for those with 16-20 years of potential experience does
imply growth of almost .08, it is important to note that this figure falls to just over .01 if we
instead compare the 10/25 results for 1970 to the 15/15 results for 2010.
   In sum, when comparing 1970 and 2010, we can rule out any form of black relative progress
in potential median wages that involves significant gains for black men in all potential ex-
perience groups. Further, only a rather extreme scenario that involves dramatic changes in
patterns of selection over time allows us to entertain the possibility of significant gains for a
single potential experience group.
   Sixth, while our fourth and fifth points taken together point to the conclusion that black
men likely made little relative economic progress between 1970 and 2010, it is important to
note that there were ups and downs. Our results are squarely in line with the view that black
relative progress was anemic at best in the 1970s and 1980s. However, for black men with
6-20 years of experience, the 1990s were a decade of noteworthy relative progress, and this
result holds for all of our measures, even though black men with 21-25 years of experience
appear not to have gained ground on white men during this same period. Our results show
mixed and small changes in relative black potential wages during the period 2000-2007, but
the decline in the labor market prospects of black men relative to white men during the
Great Recession is quite dramatic.
   Seventh, the patterns present in the composite files that contain MORG wage observations
imply even bleaker trends for black men relative to their white counterparts. The MORG
files are not available for 1970 and 1960, so we must restrict our composite analyses to the
        THE PRISON BOOM & THE LACK OF BLACK PROGRESS AFTER SMITH & WELCH                     49

period 1980-2010. To begin, note that in every cell, the 1980 black-white ratio is higher
given the composite data. However, more than half of the black-white ratios for 2010 are
smaller given the composite data. Further, every set of selection corrected results based
on the composite data imply that the relative wages of black men either remained roughly
constant or fell notably between 1980 and 2010. Finally, given each of our three imputation
rules, the results based on composite data imply even worse relative trends for black men
with between 6 and 25 years of experience.
   The type of imputation methods we employ here are not the right vehicles for assessing
movements in the lower quantiles of potential wages distributions. In 2010, black non-
employment rates were more than 25 percent in all four experience groups, so it is not even
possible to recover black-white ratios at the 25th percentile of potential wage distribution
using imputation procedures like ours. However, Tables 3 and 4 provide clear indications
that less skilled black men have lost ground relative to their white counterparts since 1970.
Employment rates have fallen and institutionalization rates have risen for less skilled men
of all races, but these trends have been truly dramatic among less skilled black men. Recent
gaps in employment rates and institutionalization rates between black and white high school
dropouts are quite large and strongly suggest that less skilled black men are now worse off
relative to their white counterparts than they were in 1970.
   Taken as a whole, the representative working-age black man (in terms of medians) appears
to have made no potential wage gains relative to his white counterpart during the 1970-2010
period, while less-skilled black men saw their employment rates fall and their incarceration
rates rise relative to their white counterparts. Unless black men at the top of the skill
distribution enjoyed large gains, it seems quite likely that black men lost ground relative to
white men between 1970 and 2010.
   In Table 12, we present results for the ratio of black wages to white wages at the 75th
and 90th quantiles of the respective potential wage distributions. We present four sets of
results for the ratios of 75th percentile wage offers. The first, (0,5), imposes the assumption
that five percent of the missing white wage observations are above the corresponding 75th
percentile values in the white distributions of potential wages. The (0,0) column imposes the
assumption that none of the missing wages are above the race-specific 75th percentiles in the
corresponding potential wage distributions. The (5,0) column reverses the rule used in the
first column. The Raw column presents ratios of the 75th percentile observations in the race-
specific distributions of observed wages. For the 90th percentile, we consider only the (0,0)
imputation rule. In both cases, these imputation rules apply to missing wages among those
who are not institutionalized. We restrict the potential wages of institutionalized persons
to be below the 75th or 90th percentiles of the corresponding potential wage distributions,
respectively.
   The theme of Table 12 is quite clear. The 1970s were a time of significant progress for
black men in the top quarter of the black potential wage distribution. However, black men
          THE PRISON BOOM & THE LACK OF BLACK PROGRESS AFTER SMITH & WELCH                   50

at the top of the potential wage distribution lost ground relative to whites between 1980 and
2010, and in many cases, these losses were noteworthy. Over the entire period 1970 to 2010,
we see no relative black improvement at the 75th percentile, and at the 90th percentile, we
only see noteworthy black relative gains among workers with more than 15 years of potential
experience.




                                      CONCLUSION
   More than two decades ago, Smith and Welch (1989) used the 1940 through 1980 census
files to document important relative black economic progress among men, but this progress
did not continue. Our analyses of labor market outcomes suggest that, although there were
periods of relative progress for black men after 1970, black-white differences in potential
wages among most groups of men in 2010 were comparable to the corresponding differences
observed in 1970 and greater, in absolute value, than those recorded in 1980.
   Since 1980, prison populations have grown tremendously in the United States, and here,
we show that, at least for the seven states that provide fairly reliable NCRP data, this growth
was driven by changes in policy that influenced the distribution of punishments that arrested
offenders expect to receive. This move toward more punitive treatment of offenders involved
a shift toward harsher punishment for those arrested in each major crime category. Further,
although these changes in policy increased expected punishments for arrested offenders of all
races, they have had a much larger impact on black communities than white communities
because arrest rates have historically been much greater for blacks than whites.
   Many factors other than the prison boom affected wage inequality overall and between
blacks and whites in recent decades. A significant literature explores the role of technical
change as a driver of labor market inequality in recent decades,64 and the Great Recession
has had important impacts on both black-white inequality and overall earnings inequality.
Nonetheless, the literature we review in section 7 provides much suggestive evidence that
prison spells harm the future labor market prospects of arrested offenders, and black men
likely now face worse labor market prospects relative to white men than they faced when
policy shifts in the late 1970s and early 1980s ignited the prison boom. More research is
needed to determine whether or not the changes in corrections policy that drove prison
growth have significantly harmed the employment and earnings prospects of less skilled
men, and less-skilled black men in particular. In addition, economists need to carefully
investigate the intergenerational consequences for families and communities of policy changes
that promote mass incarceration.


64See   Acemoglu and Autor (2011).
       THE PRISON BOOM & THE LACK OF BLACK PROGRESS AFTER SMITH & WELCH                    51

                                       References
Acemoglu, D., and D. Autor (2011): “Skills, Tasks and Technologies: Implications for
  Employment and Earnings,” in Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. 4, ed. by O. Ashen-
  felter, and D. E. Card, pp. 1043–1171. Elsevier.
Aizer, A., and J. J. Doyle (2013): “Juvenile Incarceration, Human Capital, and Future
  Crime: Evidence from Randomly-Assigned Judges,” NBER Working Paper 19102.
Alexander, M. (2012): The New Jim Crow: Mass Incarceration in the Age of Colorblind-
  ness. The New Press, New York, NY.
Auerhahn, K. (2002): “Selective Incapacitation, Three Strikes, and the Problem of Aging
  Prison Populations: Using Simulation Modeling to See the Future,” Criminology & Public
  Policy, 1(3), 353–388.
Bayer, P., R. Hjalmarsson, and D. Pozen (2009): “Building Criminal Capital Behind
  Bars: Peer Effects in Juvenile Corrections,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(1), 105–
  147.
Blumstein, A., and A. J. Beck (1999): “Population Growth in U.S. Prisons, 1980-1996,”
  Crime and Justice, 26, 17–61.
Bonczar, T. P., and A. J. Beck (1997): “Lifetime Likelihood of Going to State or
  Federal Prison,” Bureau of Justice Statistics.
Brown, C. (1984): “Black-White Earnings Ratios Since the Civil Rights Act of 1964: The
  Importance of Labor Market Dropouts,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 99(1), 31–44.
Butler, R., and J. J. Heckman (1977): “The Impact of the Government on the Labor
  Market Status of Black Americans: A Critical Review,” in Equal Rights and Industrial
  Relations, ed. by L. J. Hausman, and F. E. Bloch, pp. 235–81. Industrial Relations Research
  Association, Madison, WI.
Card, D., and A. B. Krueger (1992): “School Quality and Black-White Relative Earn-
  ings: A Direct Assessment,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107(1), 151–200.
Chandra, A. (2000): “Labor-Market Dropouts and the Racial Wage Gap: 1940 - 1990,”
  American Economic Review, 90(2), 333–338.
Chen, K. M., and J. M. Shapiro (2007): “Do Harsher Prison Conditions Reduce Re-
  cidivism? A Discontinuity-based Approach,” American Law and Economics Review, 9(1),
  1–29.
Dansky, K. (2008): “Understanding California Sentencing,” University of San Francisco
  Law Review, 43(2), 45–86.
Di Tella, R., and E. Schargrodsky (2013): “Criminal Recidivism after Prison and
  Electronic Monitoring,” Journal of Political Economy, 121(1), 28–73.
Ditton, P. M., and D. J. Wilson (1999): “Truth in Sentencing in State Prisons,” Bureau
  of Justice Statistics.
       THE PRISON BOOM & THE LACK OF BLACK PROGRESS AFTER SMITH & WELCH                   52

Donohue, J. J., and J. Heckman (1991): “Continuous Versus Episodic Change: The
  Impact of Civil Rights Policy on the Economic Status of Blacks,” Journal of Economic
  Literature, 29(4), 1603–1643.
Durlauf, S. N., and D. S. Nagin (2010): “The Deterrent Effect of Imprisonment,” in
  Controlling Crime: Strategies and Tradeoffs, ed. by P. J. Cook, J. Ludwig, and J. McCrary,
  pp. 43–94. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL.
Flanagan, A., and D. Grissmer (2002): “The Role of Federal Resources in Closing the
  Achievement Gap,” in Bridging the Achievement Gap, ed. by J. E. Chubb, and T. Loveless.
  Brookings Institution, Washington, DC.
Frase, R. S. (2005): “State Sentencing Guidelines: Diversity, Consensus, and Unresolved
  Policy Issues,” Columbia Law Review, 105(4), 1190–1232.
Gould, E. D., B. A. Weinberg, and D. B. Mustard (2002): “Crime Rates and Local
  Labor Market Opportunities in the United States: 1979 - 1997,” Review of Economics and
  Statistics, 84(1), 45–61.
Green, D. P., and D. Winik (2010): “Using Random Judge Assignments to Estimate
  the Effects of Incarceration and Probation on Recidivism Among Drug Offenders,” Crim-
  inology, 48(2), 357–387.
Grogger, J. (1995): “The Effect of Arrests on the Employment and Earnings of Young
  Men,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 110(1), 51–71.
          (1998): “Market Wages and Youth Crime,” Journal of Labor Economics, 16(4),
  756–91.
Harcourt, B. E. (2006): “From the Asylum to the Prison: Rethinking the Incarceration
  Revolution,” Texas Law Review, 84, 1751–1786.
Helland, E., and A. Tabarrok (2007): “Does Three Strikes Deter?: A Nonparametric
  Estimation,” Journal of Human Resources, 42(2), 309–330.
Holzer, H. J. (2009): “Collateral Costs: Effects of Incarceration on Employment and
  Earnings among Young Workers,” in Do Prisons Make Us Safer? The Benefits and Costs of
  the Prison Boom, ed. by S. Raphael, and M. A. Stoll, pp. 239–268. Russell Sage Foundation
  Publications, New York, NY.
Holzer, H. J., P. Offner, and E. Sorenson (2005): “Declining Employment among
  Young Black Less-Educated Men: The Role of Incarceration and Child Support,” Journal
  of Policy Analysis and Management, 49(2), 329–350.
Johnson, R. C. (2009): “Ever-Increasing Levels of Parental Incarceration and the Con-
  sequences for Children,” in Do Prisons Make Us Safer? The Benefits and Costs of the
  Prison Boom, ed. by S. Raphael, and M. A. Stoll, pp. 177–206. Russell Sage Foundation
  Publications, New York, NY.
Johnson, R. C., and S. Raphael (2012): “How Much Crime Reduction Does the Mar-
  ginal Prisoner Buy?,” Journal of Law and Economics, 55(2), 275–310.
       THE PRISON BOOM & THE LACK OF BLACK PROGRESS AFTER SMITH & WELCH               53

Kling, J. R. (2006): “Incarceration Length, Employment, and Earnings,” American Eco-
  nomic Review, 96(3), 863–876.
Langan, P. A. (1991): “America’s Soaring Prison Population,” Science, 251(5001), 1568–
  1573.
Lee, D. S., and J. McCrary (2009): “The Deterrence Effects of Prison: Dynamic Theory
  and Evidence,” Working Paper.
Levitt, S. D. (1996): “The Effect of Prison Population Size on Crime Rates: Evidence
  from Prison Overcrowding Litigation,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111(2), 319–351.
Lofstrom, M., and S. Raphael (2013): “Incarceration and Crime: Evidence from Cali-
  fornia’s Realignment Sentencing Reform,” Working Paper.
Marvell, T. B. (1995): “Sentencing Guidelines and Prison Population Growth,” Journal
  of Criminal Law & Criminology, 85(3), 696–709.
Marvell, T. B., and C. E. Moody (1996): “Determinate Sentencing and Abolishing
  Parole: The Long-Term Impacts on Prisons and Crime,” Criminology, 34(1), 107–128.
McCrary, J. (2010): “Dynamic Perspectives on Crime,” in Handbook of the Economics of
  Crime, ed. by B. L. Benson, and P. R. Zimmerman, pp. 82–106. Edward Elgar Publishing.
McCrary, J., and S. Sanga (2012): “General Equilibrium Effects of Prison on Crime:
  Evidence from International Comparisons,” Cato Papers on Public Policy, 2, 165–193.
Murnane, R. J. (2013): “U.S. High School Graduation Rates: Patterns and Explanations,”
  Journal of Economic Literature, 51(2), 370–422.
Myrdal, G. (1944): An American Dilemma. Harper and Brothers, New York, NY.
Nagin, D. S. (2013): “Deterrence: A Review of the Evidence by a Criminologist for
  Economists,” Annual Review of Economics, 5, 83–105.
Neal, D. A. (2006): “Why Has Black-White Skill Convergence Stopped?,” in Handbook of
  the Economics of Education, Vol. 1, ed. by E. A. Hanushek, and F. Welch, pp. 511–576.
  Elsevier.
Nicholson-Crotty, S. (2004): “The Impact of Sentencing Guidelines on State-Level
  Sanctions: An Analysis Over Time,” Crime & Delinquency, 50(3), 395–411.
Owens, E. G. (2009): “More Time, Less Crime? Estimating the Incapacitative Effect of
  Sentence Enhancements,” Journal of Law and Economics, 52(3), 511–579.
Pettit, B. (2012): Invisible Men: Mass Incarceration and the Myth of Black Progress.
  Russell Sage Foundation Publications, New York, NY.
Pettit, B., B. Sykes, and B. Wester (2009): “Technical Report on Revised Population
  Estimates and NLSY79 Analysis Tables for the Pew Public Safety and Mobility Project,”
  Working Paper.
Pfaff, J. F. (2011): “The Myths and Realities of Correctional Severity: Evidence from
  the National Corrections Reporting Program on Sentencing Practices,” American Law and
  Economics Review, 13(2), 491–531.
       THE PRISON BOOM & THE LACK OF BLACK PROGRESS AFTER SMITH & WELCH               54

Raphael, S. (2007): “Early Incarceration Spells and the Transition to Adulthood,” in The
  Price of Independence, ed. by S. Danzinger, F. Furstenberg, and C. Rouse. Russell Sage
  Foundation Publications, New York, NY.
Raphael, S., and M. Stoll (2013): Why Are So Many Americans in Prison? Russell
  Sage Foundation Publications, New York, NY.
Rehavi, M. M., and S. B. Starr (2013): “Racial Disparity in Federal Criminal Charging
  and its Sentencing Consequences,” Working Paper.
Reitz, K. R. (2006): “Don’t Blame Determinacy: U.S. Incarceration Growth Has Been
  Driven by Other Forces,” Texas Law Review, 84(7), 1787–1802.
Smith, J. P., and F. R. Welch (1989): “Black Economic Progress After Myrdal,” Journal
  of Economic Literature, 27(2), 519–564.
Stemen, D., and A. F. Rengifo (2011): “Policies and Imprisonment: The Impact of
  Structured Sentencing and Determinate Sentencing on State Incarceration Rates, 1978 -
  2004,” Justice Quarterly, 28(1), 174–201.
Stemen, D., A. F. Rengifo, and J. Wilson (2006): “Of Fragmentation and Ferment:
  The Impact of State Sentencing Policies on Incarceration Rates, 1975-2002,” Working
  Paper.
The Bureau of Justice Assistance (1996): National Assessment of Structured Sen-
  tencing. US Department of Justice, Washington, D.C.
The Pew Center on the States (2010): Prison Count 2010: State Population Declines
  for First Time in 38 Years. Washington, DC.
The Pew Charitable Trusts (2010): Collateral Costs: Incarceration’s Effect on Eco-
  nomic Mobility. Washington, DC.
          (2012): Time Served: The high Cost, Low Return of Longer Prison Terms. Wash-
  ington, DC.
Wasem, R. E. (2013): “U.S. Immigration Policy: Chart Book of Key Trends,” Congres-
  sional Research Service.
Western, B. (2002): “The Impact of Incarceration on Wage Mobility and Inequality,”
  American Sociological Review, 67(4), 526–546.
          (2006): Punishment and Inequality in America. Russell Sage Foundation Publica-
  tions, New York, NY.
Wildeman, C., and B. Western (2010): “Incarceration in Fragile Families,” The Future
  of Children, 20(2), 157–177.
Wilson, W. J. (1987): The Truly Disadvantaged: The Inner City, the Underclass, and
  Public Policy. The University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Zhang, Y., C. D. Maxwell, and M. S. Vaughn (2009): “The impact of state sentencing
  policies on the U.S. prison population,” Journal of Criminal Justice, 37(2), 190–199.
                                                                                Figure 1
                                                             Prison Populations for Three Samples
               100 150 200 250 300 350
Index Number




                                         1985             1990             1995              2000              2005             2010
                                                                                     Year

                                                            All States + Federal                                   All States
                                                            CA, CO, MI, NJ, SC, WA, WI
                                          Ths figure shows prison populations for 3 different scopes of the prison system.
                                          All data taken from the National Prisoner Statistics program.
                                          The vertical axis is indexed such that 1985 is 100.
                                                            Figure 2a
                                                          Violent Crimes
               160
               140
Index Number

               120
               100
               80




                     1985             1990              1995               2000              2005          2010
                                                                  year

                                    National Estimates                       CA, CO, MI, NJ, SC, WA, WI
                      This figure plots reports of violent offenses (murder, rape, robbery, and assault)
                      as calculated from the FBI’s Uniform Crime Reporting program.
                      The vertical axis is indexed such that 1985 is 100.
                                                            Figure 2b
                                                           Violent Arrests
               180
               160
Index Number

               140
               120
               100




                     1985             1990               1995              2000               2005          2010
                                                                  year

                                    National Estimates                       CA, CO, MI, NJ, SC, WA, WI
                      This figure plots arrests for violent offenses (murder, rape, robbery, and assault)
                      as calculated from the FBI’s Uniform Crime Reporting program.
                      The vertical axis is indexed such that 1985 is 100.
                                                             Figure 2c
                                                          Property Crimes
               120
               110
Index Number

               100
               90
               80
               70




                     1985             1990               1995              2000               2005                  2010
                                                                   year

                                    National Estimates                       CA, CO, MI, NJ, SC, WA, WI
                      This figure plots reports of property offenses (burglary, larceny, and motor vehicle theft)
                      as calculated from the FBI’s Uniform Crime Reporting program.
                      The vertical axis is indexed such that 1985 is 100.
                                                             Figure 2d
                                                          Property Arrests
               120
               110
Index Number

               100
               90
               80
               70




                     1985             1990               1995               2000              2005               2010
                                                                   year

                                    National Estimates                       CA, CO, MI, NJ, SC, WA, WI
                      This figure plots arrests for property offenses (burglary, larceny, and motor vehicle theft)
                      as calculated from the FBI’s Uniform Crime Reporting program.
                      The vertical axis is indexed such that 1985 is 100.
                                                             Figure 2e
                                                            Drug Arrests
               250
               200
Index Number

               150
               100




                     1985             1990               1995              2000                  2005   2010
                                                                  year

                                    National Estimates                       CA, CO, MI, NJ, SC, WA, WI
                      This figure plots arrests for drug offenses (trafficking and possession)
                      as calculated from the FBI’s Uniform Crime Reporting program.
                      The vertical axis is indexed such that 1985 is 100.
                                                                                                 Figure 3
                              100 150 200 250 300 350                    Counterfactual Prison Populations: Baseline
Prison Population in 1000’s



                                                                                                                                                 325




                                                                                                                                                 165



                                                        1985                 1990                  1995                  2000                 2005
                                                                                                    Year

                                                                           Prison Population in NCRP States
                                                                           Counterfactual Prison Population (under 1985 policies)
                                                         This figure shows the growth of prison populations over time in the 7 states we examine.
                                                         The solid line plots the observed populations in the NCRP for those states while the dashed
                                                         line plots the counterfactual growth under the assumption that incarceration policies do not
                                                         change from their 1985 baselines.
                                                                                                 Figure 4
                                                             Counterfactual Prison Populations: Adjusted for Incapacitation
Prison Population in 1000’s

                              100 150 200 250 300 350

                                                                                                                                                  325




                                                                                                                                                  189



                                                        1985                 1990                  1995                  2000                  2005
                                                                                                    Year

                                                                           Prison Population in NCRP States
                                                                           Counterfactual Prison Population (under 1985 policies)
                                                         This figure shows the growth of prison populations over time in the 7 states we examine.
                                                         The solid line plots the observed populations in the NCRP for those states while the dashed
                                                         line plots the counterfactual growth under the assumption that incarceration policies do not
                                                         change from their 1985 baselines. This figure also accounts for the incapacitation effects of
                                                         imprisonment, whereby a smaller prison population implies a larger population of potential
                                                         criminals.
                                                                            Figure 5
                              200                     Counterfactual Prison Populations: Whites
Prison Population in 1000’s



                                                                                                                            193
                              150
                              100




                                                                                                                             91
                              50




                                    1985                1990                 1995                  2000                 2005
                                                                              Year

                                                      Prison Population in NCRP States
                                                      Counterfactual Prison Population (under 1985 policies)
                                     The solid line plots the observed populations in the NCRP for our seven−state sample
                                     while the dashed line plots the counterfactual growth under the assumption that
                                     incarceration policies do not change from their 1985 baselines.
                                                                                    Figure 6
                              100 120 140                     Counterfactual Prison Populations: Blacks
Prison Population in 1000’s




                                                                                                                                    124
                              80




                                                                                                                                     71
                              60
                              40




                                            1985                1990                 1995                  2000                 2005
                                                                                      Year

                                                              Prison Population in NCRP States
                                                              Counterfactual Prison Population (under 1985 policies)
                                             The solid line plots the observed populations in the NCRP for our seven−state sample
                                             while the dashed line plots the counterfactual growth under the assumption that
                                             incarceration policies do not change from their 1985 baselines.
                                      Table 1
                Employment and Institutionalization Rates
                             Black Males
Birth Year                             Age
                 20-24        25-29        30-34       35-39        40-44        45-49
1910-1914                                                                        0.827
                                                                                 0.028
1915-1919                                                           0.825
                                                                    0.038
1920-1924                                               0.828                    0.823
                                                        0.044                    0.025
1925-1929                                  0.818                    0.842
                                           0.054                    0.028
1930-1934                     0.807                     0.856                    0.782
                              0.053                     0.038                    0.016
1935-1939        0.696                     0.846                    0.794
                 0.048                     0.040                    0.021
1940-1944                     0.811                     0.792                    0.748
                              0.054                     0.031                    0.029
1945-1949        0.647                     0.761                    0.748
                 0.055                     0.044                    0.044
1950-1954                     0.710                     0.725                    0.660
                              0.053                     0.065                    0.057
1955-1959        0.569                     0.703                    0.658
                 0.048                     0.083                    0.079
1960-1964                     0.679                     0.661                    0.640
                              0.095                     0.100                    0.066
1965-1969        0.574                     0.657                    0.650
                 0.085                     0.115                    0.079
1970-1974                     0.625                     0.662
                              0.122                     0.084
1975-1979        0.509                     0.607
                 0.116                     0.108
1980-1984                     0.571
                              0.110
1985-1989          0.445
                   0.086
The top number is the employment rate and the bottom number is the
institutionalization rate. This table was created using 1960-2000 census data and the
2010 ACS from IPUMS. The IPUMS website is available at http://usa.ipums.org/usa.
The IPUMS variables for employment and institutionalization were EMPSTAT (=1) and
GQTYPE (=1 for 1990 and later; =2, 3, 4 for 1980 and earlier). After the 1980 census,
the data no longer distinguish between different types of institutionalization. Thus, to
be consistent we calculate total institutionalization rates for all years. All samples are
weighted by the IPUMS variable PERWT.
                                 Table 2
               Employment and Institutionalization Rates
                            White Males
Birth Year                            Age
                20-24    25-29     30-34   35-39    40-44   45-49
1910-1914                                                   0.919
                                                            0.012
1915-1919                                           0.928
                                                    0.011
1920-1924                                  0.936            0.923
                                           0.011            0.008
1925-1929                          0.932            0.934
                                   0.011            0.009
1930-1934                0.900             0.939            0.899
                         0.012             0.009            0.006
1935-1939       0.783              0.934            0.913
                0.015              0.009            0.006
1940-1944                0.901             0.918            0.890
                         0.011             0.007            0.007
1945-1949       0.738              0.906            0.900
                0.013              0.008            0.009
1950-1954                0.865             0.900            0.852
                         0.010             0.011            0.010
1955-1959       0.732              0.896            0.856
                0.011              0.013            0.015
1960-1964                0.873             0.853            0.811
                         0.016             0.019            0.014
1965-1969       0.757              0.851            0.826
                0.015              0.020            0.016
1970-1974                0.833             0.835
                         0.021             0.020
1975-1979       0.735              0.824
                0.022              0.022
1980-1984                0.788
                         0.024
1985-1989       0.654
                0.020
See notes for Table 1.
                                    Table 3
               Employment and Institutionalization Rates
                   Black Males With Less Than HS
Birth Year                            Age
                20-24       25-29       30-34       35-39       40-44       45-49
1910-1914                                                                   0.816
                                                                            0.029
1915-1919                                                       0.810
                                                                0.041
1920-1924                                           0.808                    0.799
                                                    0.048                    0.029
1925-1929                               0.799                   0.820
                                        0.061                   0.031
1930-1934                   0.783                   0.821                    0.718
                            0.067                   0.051                    0.022
1935-1939       0.680                   0.801                   0.727
                0.067                   0.058                   0.030
1940-1944                   0.752                   0.700                    0.617
                            0.086                   0.051                    0.044
1945-1949       0.580                   0.640                   0.598
                0.095                   0.078                   0.069
1950-1954                   0.562                   0.528                    0.439
                            0.108                   0.110                    0.117
1955-1959       0.453                   0.462                   0.414
                0.099                   0.172                   0.169
1960-1964                   0.394                   0.379                    0.369
                            0.214                   0.242                    0.174
1965-1969       0.329                   0.337                   0.333
                0.212                   0.323                   0.218
1970-1974                   0.302                   0.344
                            0.331                   0.239
1975-1979       0.278                   0.290
                0.298                   0.278
1980-1984                   0.249
                            0.322
1985-1989        0.192
                 0.264
See notes for Table 1. This table was created using only data for Black males whose
value for the IPUMS variable EDUCD was either less than or equal to 50 (completed
less than 12 years of schooling). GED recipients are not included in this sample.
                                 Table 4
               Employment and Institutionalization Rates
                   White Males With Less Than HS
Birth Year                            Age
                20-24    25-29     30-34   35-39    40-44   45-49
1910-1914                                                   0.892
                                                            0.016
1915-1919                                           0.893
                                                    0.018
1920-1924                                  0.896            0.883
                                           0.019            0.015
1925-1929                          0.894            0.894
                                   0.021            0.016
1930-1934                0.861             0.890            0.816
                         0.026             0.019            0.013
1935-1939       0.782              0.879            0.822
                0.034              0.023            0.014
1940-1944                0.852             0.816            0.750
                         0.029             0.020            0.018
1945-1949       0.745              0.793            0.742
                0.044              0.027            0.028
1950-1954                0.756             0.746            0.629
                         0.036             0.032            0.029
1955-1959       0.693              0.747            0.649
                0.036              0.039            0.041
1960-1964                0.734             0.656            0.653
                         0.045             0.047            0.033
1965-1969       0.688              0.664            0.684
                0.051              0.052            0.042
1970-1974                0.677             0.715
                         0.052             0.048
1975-1979       0.659              0.710
                0.056              0.058
1980-1984                0.674
                         0.067
1985-1989       0.576
                0.070
See notes for Table 3.
                       Table 5
     Abolish / Restrict   Sentencing            Truth In
     Discretionary Parole Commission            Sentencinge
AL                         1998 2000d, f
AK   1980 (partial)a       1980c                      Other
AZ   1994b                                             85%
AR   1994 (partial)a       1994c                      Other
CA   1976b                                             85%
CO   1979-85b                                         Other
CT   1981-90b              2010f                       85%
DE   1990a, b              1987c                       85%
FL   1983a, b              1983 - 98c                  85%
GA                                                     85%
HI
ID                                                    100%
IL   1978b                 2010f                       85%
IN   1977b                                             50%
IA                                                     85%
KS   1993a, b              1993c                       85%
KY                                                     85%
LA                         2010f                       85%
ME   1976b                                             85%
MD                         1983c 1996d                 50%
MA                         1994f                       75%
MI                         1984c 1995 - 2002d          85%
MN   1980a, b              1980c                       85%
MS   1995b                                             85%
MO                         1997c                       85%
MT
NE                                                     50%
NV                                                    100%
NH                                                    100%
NJ                                                     85%
NM   1977b                 1978f
NY                         2010f                       85%
NC   1994a                 1994c                       85%
ND                                                     85%
                        Abolish / Restrict      Sentencing               Truth In
                        Discretionary Parole    Commission               Sentencinge
          OH            1996a, b                1996c                             85%
          OK                                                                      85%
          OR            1989a, b                1989c                             85%
          PA                                    1982c                             85%
          RI
          SC                                                                      85%
          SD
          TN            1989 (partial)a         1989-95c                          85%
          TX                                                                      50%
          UT                                    1979c 1983d                       85%
          VT
          VA            1995 (partial)a, b      1991 1995c, d                     85%
         WA             1984a, b                1984c                             85%
         WV
          WI            1999b                   1985 - 95c 2002 - 7f             Other
         WY
Notes:
a: Listed in Table 1 of Frase (2005) as abolishing parole release in the given year.
b: Listed in tables 1-3 of Stemen et al. (2006) as having enacted determinate sentencing in

the given year. Date ranges are used when indeterminate sentencing was reinstated in a
later year. Mississippi reinstated indeterminate sentencing for first-time non-violent
offenses in 2000.
c: Listed in Table 1 of Frase (2005) as establishing a state sentencing commission in the

given year. Date ranges are used when a sentencing commission was abolished.
d: First year is date when commission was first established. Bolded date is the year when

the commission was made permanent. In all other cases, the commission was permanent
when established.
e: Listed in Table 1 of Ditton (1999) as requiring prisoners to serve the listed percentage of

their minimum sentence.
f: Sources gathered from state sentencing commission and legislative websites. For more

information, see Appendix D.
Table 7a: Sentencing and Time Served Outcomes (Violent Crime)
Admission Types:       Court Commitments and Probation Revocations
Races:                 All
States:                CA, CO, MI, NJ, SC, WA, WI
Prior Jail Time:       Excluded
                 Murder and Homicide                 Forcible Rape                                                             Robbery                                 Aggravated Assault                                   Other Assault
                                        Prisoners. left per                             Prisoners. left per                             Prisoners. left per                             Prisoners. left per                               Prisoners. left per
                                            1000 adm.                                       1000 adm.                                       1000 adm.                                       1000 adm.                                         1000 adm.
                                Adm.                                            Adm.                                            Adm.                                            Adm.                                            Adm.
                          Prs.                                            Prs.                                            Prs.                                            Prs.                                            Prs.
               Arrests           per                           Arrests           per                           Arrests           per                           Arrests           per                           Arrests           per
    Year                adm. in          2      5      10               adm. in          2      5      10               adm. in          2      5      10               adm. in          2      5      10               adm. in            2      5      10
              in 1000s          1000                          in 1000s          1000                          in 1000s          1000                          in 1000s          1000                          in 1000s          1000
                         1000s                                           1000s                                           1000s                                           1000s                                           1000s
                                 arr.                                            arr.                                            arr.                                            arr.                                            arr.
   1985             6.2     2.7   437    786    548     385        10.5     1.3   123    751    315     125        40.7     5.3   131    508    155      55        83.2     2.7    33    363     84      33       171.2     0.5       3    220     44      24
   1986             6.4     2.9   452    800    558     389        10.7     1.3   117    768    356     153        40.7     5.4   133    507    169      64       106.7     3.1    29    359     86      35       192.9     0.6       3    330     71      44
   1987             6.7     3.0   440    830    590     429        10.9     1.1   103    752    357     149        38.0     5.6   146    491    174      72       115.8     3.2    27    391     96      43       199.2     0.6       3    361     78      46
   1988             7.0     3.2   449    825    595     440        11.0     1.0    92    766    378     181        38.7     5.4   140    503    172      75       128.2     3.5    27    386     97      46       213.1     0.6       3    325     86      59
   1989             7.9     3.3   417    829    596     440        11.3     1.2   102    777    374     181        43.7     5.8   133    497    180      84       145.7     4.0    27    380    111      50       236.1     0.6       2    243     98      81
   1990             8.2     3.6   435    835    612     441        11.6     1.3   113    718    352     158        50.1     6.5   131    491    175      79       159.5     4.5    28    369    100      47       248.2     0.7       3    207     84      53
   1991             8.0     3.8   472    841    618     444        11.3     1.3   119    747    410     196        50.1     7.2   143    512    188      78       158.0     4.9    31    383    115      50       241.8     0.9       4    284    111      55
   1992             7.3     4.0   548    869    659     474        10.8     1.4   130    751    423     192        48.8     7.6   156    523    198      77       161.4     5.1    31    373    118      48       248.7     1.0       4    269     95      48
   1993             7.4     4.0   540    870    673     481        10.3     1.4   134    755    429     181        48.0     7.7   160    536    201      70       166.3     5.1    31    379    123      48       262.8     1.2       4    269    117      43
   1994             6.9     3.7   530    874    686     499         9.9     1.3   129    742    409     183        47.0     7.2   152    571    240      82       177.9     5.5    31    402    126      46       282.7     1.4       5    257     94      41
   1995             6.5     3.8   586    885    702     514         9.2     1.3   138    798    449     193        46.5     7.3   157    571    269      99       185.6     5.8    31    415    165      58       296.1     1.6       5    254    101      40
   1996             6.1     3.9   631    890    738     555         9.3     1.4   152    844    513     248        43.5     7.5   171    584    295     112       179.2     6.3    35    426    172      56       295.7     1.8       6    259    101      29
   1997             5.6     3.6   643    908    753     589         8.8     1.3   151    860    536     277        40.5     7.1   176    599    294     113       183.3     6.5    36    421    158      57       291.7     2.1       7    273     87      24
   1998             5.5     3.5   633    899    760     584         8.4     1.3   154    852    531     282        36.4     7.0   191    583    304     136       172.2     6.7    39    427    163      55       279.4     2.4       8    274     84      22
   1999             4.8     3.1   654    904    772     599         7.9     1.3   159    863    530     273        32.5     6.4   196    594    331     162       163.0     6.3    39    440    166      58       261.9     2.2       8    255     80      21
   2000             4.7     3.0   625    891    765     603         7.6     1.2   153    840    524     295        30.9     6.1   198    635    352     183       163.0     6.2    38    432    176      63       266.7     2.3       9    269     75      16
   2001             4.3     3.1   711    884    749                 7.2     1.2   162    827    525                30.4     6.0   196    670    367               164.5     6.4    39    423    166               259.3     2.4       9    267     72
   2002             4.2     3.1   751    892    757                 7.3     1.2   160    803    550                30.3     6.2   204    676    382               162.5     6.6    41    425    166               257.4     2.7    10      260     67
   2003             4.1     3.1   758    881    753                 7.1     1.3   181    805    578                30.6     6.2   203    685    371               160.4     7.0    44    405    168               265.3     2.9    11      237     80
   2004             4.0     3.0   741    872    744                 6.6     1.2   184    800    571                30.6     6.2   203    672    346               151.8     7.2    47    383    151               251.9     3.0    12      225     72
   2005             3.9     3.3   857    874    756                 6.3     1.2   183    818    664                31.2     5.9   190    656    367               149.2     7.2    48    399    191               247.9     2.9    12      212     81
Percentage
Change           -24%      9%    43%    13%    40%     57%       -28%    -10%   24%     12%    67% 136%          -24%    15%    51%     25% 127% 236%            96%    127%    16%     19% 111%       90%        56%    367% 200%        22%    70% -34%
1985 - 2000
(1) Arrests and prison admissions reported in 1000's. Rates reported in percent. (2) If states stop reporting before 2009 (MI(2006), NJ(2005), WI(2007)), calculations are based on the assumption that the cohort hazard rates of the remaining states
match the cohort hazard rates for our full seven-state sample. Arrest figures from FBI Uniform Crime Reports; admissions and time-served figures from National Corrections Reporting Program.
Table 7b: Sentencing and Time Served Outcomes (Property Crime)
Admission Types:                Court Commitments and Probation Revocations
Races:                          All
States:                         CA, CO, MI, NJ, SC, WA, WI
Prior Jail Time:                Excluded
                                Burglary                   Motor Vehicle Theft                                             Larceny/Theft                                Other Property Crime
                                        Prisoners. left per                             Prisoners. left per                             Prisoners. left per                               Prisoners. left per
                                            1000 adm.                                       1000 adm.                                       1000 adm.                                         1000 adm.
                                Adm.                                            Adm.                                            Adm.                                            Adm.
                          Prs.                                            Prs.                                            Prs.                                            Prs.
               Arrests           per                           Arrests           per                           Arrests           per                           Arrests           per
    Year                adm. in          2      5      10               adm. in          2      5      10               adm. in          2      5      10               adm. in            2      5      10
              in 1000s          1000                          in 1000s          1000                          in 1000s          1000                          in 1000s          1000
                         1000s                                           1000s                                           1000s                                           1000s
                                 arr.                                            arr.                                            arr.                                            arr.
   1985           134.4     7.9    59    258     54      22        44.4     0.9    21    125     28      21       408.4     4.5    11    158     34      13        76.2     0.5       6    326     50       4
   1986           131.1     8.7    67    291     73      29        51.4     1.1    22    112     27      17       422.1     4.9    12    173     35      20        77.0     0.6       7    274     39       7
   1987           126.0     9.2    73    297     75      28        55.5     1.2    22    119     37      28       433.0     5.3    12    184     39      20        76.6     0.6       8    272     48      12
   1988           127.3     9.2    73    294     74      27        63.7     1.4    22    116     32      19       447.8     5.8    13    171     35      20        80.1     0.6       7    293     67      26
   1989           135.2     9.7    72    281     75      33        71.9     1.7    23    114     42      32       475.9     6.2    13    164     33      21        85.9     0.7       8    306     65      22
   1990           129.7     9.5    73    273     74      34        69.4     1.9    28    144     42      30       470.2     6.4    14    148     35      18        89.9     0.7       8    320     70      14
   1991           128.0     9.3    73    285     85      32        67.1     2.4    36    146     38      25       465.0     6.6    14    141     29      14        89.7     0.7       8    230     50      16
   1992           126.0     9.7    77    277     83      29        65.6     2.7    41    138     37      18       445.5     6.6    15    144     41      15        89.8     0.7       8    266     58      16
   1993           122.6     9.6    79    281     86      29        63.0     2.6    41    132     44      20       441.6     6.5    15    139     41      14        95.2     0.7       7    305     74      21
   1994           116.1     9.2    79    302     97      30        60.8     2.7    45    135     36      10       445.5     6.6    15    147     31       9        96.4     0.7       7    288     84      22
   1995           112.9     9.4    83    313    106      37        57.8     3.1    53    162     42      17       449.1     7.9    18    174     36      11        94.7     0.7       7    300     91      17
   1996           108.3     9.4    87    318    110      40        49.5     2.8    57    182     36      10       428.8     8.2    19    172     35      10        92.3     0.6       7    334    118      36
   1997           102.2     9.0    88    327    106      40        45.0     2.8    62    169     34      13       403.2     7.9    20    182     37      11        88.3     0.7       8    346     98      27
   1998            94.9     9.1    95    338    109      45        39.2     2.9    74    181     38      11       361.4     7.8    21    179     31       7        83.1     0.7       9    354    112      33
   1999            83.6     8.2    98    331     96      38        33.9     2.6    76    153     34      10       328.8     7.4    23    180     31       7        78.8     0.7       9    371     97      23
   2000            81.4     7.9    97    342    100      39        36.0     2.5    70    144     25       9       319.0     7.1    22    181     32       8        79.4     0.7       8    332    106      37
   2001            80.8     8.1   100    315     96                38.5     2.7    71    164     32               305.9     7.3    24    190     32                76.8     0.7    10      341     91
   2002            82.1     8.5   103    316     90                40.6     3.3    80    153     26               305.2     8.0    26    175     25                76.8     0.9    12      335    102
   2003            85.1     8.9   104    299     98                43.8     3.8    87    125     21               314.8     8.4    27    155     22                78.8     0.8    11      318    104
   2004            83.9     9.3   111    286     90                43.8     4.3    99    104     13               308.2     9.0    29    159     17                73.9     1.0    13      281     88
   2005            84.6     9.3   110    314    112                45.6     4.6   102    108     20               294.2     9.1    31    169     28                74.8     1.0    13      298     60
Percentage
Change           -39%     -1%    64%    33%    86%     76%       -19%   168% 231%       15%     -8% -56%         -22%    59% 103%       14%     -7% -40%           4%      39%    33%      2% 113% 784%
1985 - 2000
See notes to table 7a
Table 7c: Sentencing and Time Served Outcomes (Drug-Related And Other Crime)
Admission Types:             Court Commitments and Probation Revocations
Races:                       All
States:                      CA, CO, MI, NJ, SC, WA, WI
Prior Jail Time:             Excluded
                         Drug Trafficking               Drug Possession/Use                                              Other Sex Crime                                White Collar Crime                                     Other Crime
                                        Prisoners. left per                             Prisoners. left per                             Prisoners. left per                             Prisoners. left per                                Prisoners. left per
                                            1000 adm.                                       1000 adm.                                       1000 adm.                                       1000 adm.                                          1000 adm.
                                Adm.                                            Adm.                                            Adm.                                            Adm.                                             Adm.
                          Prs.                                            Prs.                                            Prs.                                            Prs.                                             Prs.
               Arrests           per                           Arrests           per                           Arrests           per                           Arrests           per                             Arrests          per
    Year                adm. in          2      5      10               adm. in          2      5      10               adm. in          2      5      10               adm. in          2      5      10                adm. in            2      5      10
              in 1000s          1000                          in 1000s          1000                          in 1000s          1000                          in 1000s          1000                            in 1000s         1000
                         1000s                                           1000s                                           1000s                                           1000s                                            1000s
                                 arr.                                            arr.                                            arr.                                            arr.                                             arr.
   1985            56.2     4.2    74    190     47      29       211.9     2.2    10    108     45      35        34.2     2.7    78    652    252     105        78.6     1.9    24    129     17         5     1830.8     4.9       3    155     54      37
   1986            59.1     5.8    98    188     41      23       211.1     3.0    14     91     39      32        34.4     2.9    84    645    263     132        82.9     2.2    26    132     18         5     1866.9     5.5       3    169     52      31
   1987            72.7     7.9   109    209     44      21       234.0     4.3    18     92     35      24        34.2     2.9    84    641    261     133        83.7     2.2    26    149     17         3     1928.0     6.1       3    175     53      31
   1988            90.2    10.8   120    231     40      20       259.1     6.1    23    100     30      18        32.8     3.1    95    662    269     140        87.4     2.3    26    155     16         6     1945.0     6.9       4    176     54      34
   1989           136.2    15.4   113    252     44      22       329.9     8.2    25     96     25      16        33.9     3.1    92    640    281     139        91.3     2.6    28    138     16         5     2072.5     9.3       4    137     42      25
   1990           121.6    17.9   147    240     43      20       254.6     8.0    31    100     28      16        36.2     3.5    95    652    307     156        93.8     2.6    28    136     18         6     2148.4    11.3       5    115     38      23
   1991           106.7    17.9   168    237     48      20       216.7     7.0    32     99     32      18        34.4     3.6   104    684    338     159        98.2     2.6    27    127     18         6     2029.7    11.7       6    127     44      24
   1992           103.5    18.5   179    248     52      20       232.5     7.3    31    106     36      15        34.1     3.8   112    678    331     156        96.6     2.9    30    136     24         8     1913.3    12.0       6    130     42      22
   1993           100.4    19.0   189    261     58      16       250.5     7.6    31     96     37      15        32.7     4.1   126    710    345     152       103.1     2.8    27    132     27         7     1890.0    12.9       7    145     47      22
   1994           104.4    18.5   177    264     55      14       307.4     8.0    26     94     27      10        31.3     3.8   121    721    347     156       107.4     2.8    26    124     23         5     1916.9    12.5       7    160     50      22
   1995           109.7    19.7   180    281     66      16       337.8     9.9    29    119     27       7        28.7     3.8   131    760    386     176       108.2     2.6    24    170     33         7     1949.2    11.7       6    201     66      27
   1996           109.7    20.0   182    274     59      14       337.0    10.3    31    124     28      10        29.9     3.9   129    738    378     176       112.6     3.2    28    145     29         7     2104.3    11.9       6    202     63      24
   1997           107.4    19.4   181    291     57      12       368.3    11.9    32    125     26       8        30.9     4.2   135    735    399     197       107.5     3.6    34    162     29         5     2107.5    11.9       6    227     67      30
   1998           103.9    20.1   194    311     58      12       353.6    12.3    35    131     27       7        29.5     4.3   145    740    391     189        97.7     3.7    38    151     20         5     2075.7    12.2       6    234     64      26
   1999            86.6    18.4   213    303     54      10       343.3    12.0    35    131     26       6        28.4     4.1   144    727    386     189        93.3     3.4    37    152     19         3     1981.7    12.0       6    228     63      25
   2000            95.2    16.8   176    310     54      11       353.0    11.6    33    138     26       6        27.7     4.5   163    720    386     211        94.8     3.5    37    151     18         6     1962.4    12.3       6    241     63      27
   2001            92.3    16.5   178    311     56               348.0     9.8    28    152     26                27.5     4.4   159    702    379                93.6     3.9    42    146     20               1874.1    13.6       7    242     65
   2002            85.4    16.8   196    306     64               351.6     9.2    26    157     28                28.6     4.6   162    706    404                98.7     4.5    46    136     18               1887.0    15.1       8    235     69
   2003            88.5    16.9   191    282     68               381.7    10.4    27    150     26                27.4     4.6   169    670    387                92.8     4.9    52    132     20               1895.8    15.6       8    230     71
   2004            86.9    16.6   191    285     55               391.0    11.9    31    143     18                27.1     4.5   165    674    380                94.7     5.0    52    119     15               1910.5    16.4       9    223     70
   2005            87.1    16.6   191    268     66               419.4    12.6    30    126     20                25.9     4.7   181    666    416                93.6     4.9    52    117     15               1932.1    16.9       9    258     85
Percentage
Change           69%     305% 139%      63%    13% -60%          67%    428% 217%       28% -42% -83%            -19%    70% 110%       11%    53% 101%          21%     85%    54%     17%      8%    11%           7%    153% 136%       55%    18% -26%
1985 - 2000
See notes to table 7a.
                                           Table 8
           Number of Persons per 1000 Arrests Who Serve Prison Terms of t
                                     All Races
Violent Crime                       0-1 years 1-2 years 2-3 years 3-4 years 4-5 years 5+ years
                             1985        37.84     55.55     45.56     35.58     23.02  239.74
Murder & Homicide            2000        31.26     36.96     29.36     25.35     23.87  478.39
                        Ratio             0.83      0.67      0.64      0.71      1.04     2.00
                             1985        9.01     21.72      22.77     20.68      10.34     38.80
Forcible Rape                2000       11.00     13.36      20.04     13.36      14.93     80.04
                        Ratio            1.22      0.62       0.88      0.65       1.44      2.06
                             1985       26.76     37.75      22.85     14.90       8.61     20.37
Robbery                      2000       34.62     37.67      24.78     17.49      13.73     69.76
                        Ratio            1.29      1.00       1.08      1.17       1.60      3.43
                             1985        9.76     11.24       5.59       2.48      1.14      2.75
Aggravated Assault           2000       11.74      9.90       4.48       3.26      2.02      6.72
                        Ratio            1.20      0.88       0.80       1.32      1.77      2.44
                             1985        1.22      1.06       0.30       0.13      0.08      0.13
Other Assault                2000        3.39      3.01       0.90       0.48      0.32      0.66
                        Ratio            2.77      2.85       2.95       3.74      3.94      5.11

Property Crime
                             1985       27.14     16.74       7.33       3.24      1.50      3.17
Burglary                     2000       40.34     23.49      13.54       6.06      3.89      9.67
                        Ratio            1.49      1.40       1.85       1.87      2.59      3.05
                             1985       13.37      5.18       1.46       0.45      0.16      0.59
Motor Vehicle Theft          2000       41.74     18.32       5.59       1.81      0.97      1.78
                        Ratio            3.12      3.54       3.82       4.01      6.17      3.04
                             1985        6.52      2.73       0.82       0.40      0.14      0.38
Larceny/Theft                2000       12.74      5.55       2.07       0.80      0.45      0.71
                        Ratio            1.95      2.03       2.53       1.99      3.21      1.88
                             1985        2.56      1.69       0.97       0.55      0.22      0.32
Other Property Crime         2000        3.29      2.33       1.00       0.55      0.35      0.89
                        Ratio            1.28      1.38       1.02       1.01      1.58      2.84

Drug-Related Crime
                             1985       29.81     29.96       7.29      2.05       1.21      3.50
Drug Trafficking             2000       62.36     59.44      26.84     11.91       6.42      9.45
                        Ratio            2.09      1.98       3.68      5.82       5.31      2.70
                             1985        7.23      2.04       0.42       0.18      0.07      0.46
Drug Possession/Use          2000       21.47      6.92       2.33       0.86      0.51      0.85
                        Ratio            2.97      3.39       5.60       4.80      7.76      1.84

Other
                             1985        9.71     17.29      13.98     11.00       6.00     19.57
Other Sex Crime              2000       21.75     23.70      24.53     12.55      17.28     62.73
                        Ratio            2.24      1.37       1.75      1.14       2.88      3.21
                             1985       14.95      5.95       1.74       0.70      0.23      0.41
White Collar Crime           2000       23.07      8.19       3.12       1.17      0.57      0.68
                        Ratio            1.54      1.38       1.79       1.67      2.49      1.66
                             1985        1.70      0.54       0.16       0.07      0.04      0.14
Other Crime                  2000        3.12      1.63       0.63       0.31      0.17      0.40
                        Ratio            1.84      3.00       3.96       4.13      4.89      2.78
Data Source: National Corrections Reporting Program. Entries are the numbers of arrested offenders
per thousand who serve terms of particular lengths (column).
                     Table 10. Ratio of Median Black and Median White Weekly Wages, Males Only
                                               Mixing Over All Nonworkers
Years of                                                                                                        Percent Inst.       Percent Other
Potential                                                                                Percent Workers        Nonworkers           Nonworkers
Experience Year         10/25           15/15           25/10            Raw              Black   White        Black    White       Black   White
6-10       1960      0.567           0.567           0.588           0.606               90.1%    96.7%        3.6%      0.9%       6.3%      2.4%
           1970      0.642           0.666           0.669           0.689               89.6%    96.4%        3.8%      0.7%       6.6%      2.8%
           1980      0.653 [0.661]   0.673 [0.686]   0.695 [0.690]   0.716 [0.717]       82.1%    95.2%       4.2%       0.7%      13.7%      4.1%
           1990      0.667 [0.650]   0.668 [0.675]   0.721 [0.700]   0.738 [0.750]       79.0%    94.1%       6.7%       1.0%      14.3%      5.0%
           2000      0.700 [0.690]   0.714 [0.703]   0.760 [0.740]   0.828 [0.764]       74.2%    92.1%       10.7%      1.7%      15.1%      6.2%
           2007      0.706 [0.673]   0.733 [0.699]   0.770 [0.733]   0.812 [0.781]       77.8%    92.5%       8.1%       1.5%      14.1%      6.0%
           2010      0.586 [0.613]   0.607 [0.643]   0.682 [0.685]   0.801 [0.750]       68.6%    88.3%       8.6%       1.6%      22.8%     10.1%
11-15       1960     0.578           0.581           0.585           0.601               91.1%     97.2%       3.3%      0.9%       5.6%      1.9%
            1970     0.665           0.683           0.684           0.669               91.1%     97.0%       2.9%      0.7%       6.0%      2.2%
            1980     0.644 [0.661]   0.666 [0.673]   0.697 [0.708]   0.712 [0.742]       83.8%     95.2%      3.7%       0.7%      12.5%      4.1%
            1990     0.615 [0.613]   0.630 [0.632]   0.680 [0.645]   0.713 [0.701]       79.7%     94.2%      6.2%       0.9%      14.1%      4.9%
            2000     0.697 [0.657]   0.718 [0.705]   0.768 [0.750]   0.785 [0.787]       76.3%     92.4%      10.5%      1.7%      13.2%      5.8%
            2007     0.667 [0.673]   0.711 [0.694]   0.737 [0.721]   0.750 [0.769]       79.6%     93.2%      8.3%       1.5%      12.1%      5.3%
            2010     0.591 [0.571]   0.652 [0.585]   0.694 [0.662]   0.750 [0.695]       71.1%     89.2%      8.9%       1.7%      20.0%      9.1%
16-20       1960     0.593           0.593           0.611           0.622               90.9%     96.8%       3.5%      1.0%       5.6%      2.2%
            1970     0.654           0.669           0.669           0.654               91.3%     96.9%       2.5%      0.7%       6.2%      2.4%
            1980     0.652 [0.686]   0.669 [0.694]   0.684 [0.714]   0.718 [0.722]       84.6%     94.9%       2.7%      0.7%      12.7%      4.4%
            1990     0.605 [0.615]   0.634 [0.621]   0.673 [0.655]   0.709 [0.685]       80.0%     93.8%       4.9%      0.8%      15.1%      5.4%
            2000     0.675 [0.652]   0.694 [0.683]   0.722 [0.713]   0.788 [0.757]       76.6%     91.7%       9.1%      1.7%      14.3%      6.6%
            2007     0.690 [0.643]   0.726 [0.670]   0.774 [0.700]   0.791 [0.697]       80.8%     92.6%       7.5%      1.3%      11.7%      6.1%
            2010     0.651 [0.663]   0.690 [0.694]   0.721 [0.734]   0.782 [0.746]       74.2%     89.0%       7.1%      1.5%      18.7%      9.5%
21-25       1960     0.575           0.575           0.589           0.619               90.4%     96.3%       3.0%      1.0%       6.6%      2.7%
            1970     0.640           0.647           0.661           0.641               89.8%     96.1%       2.5%      0.8%       7.8%      3.1%
            1980     0.653 [0.678]   0.663 [0.686]   0.669 [0.714]   0.707 [0.722]       84.1%     93.9%       1.8%      0.6%      14.1%      5.5%
            1990     0.637 [0.636]   0.661 [0.642]   0.686 [0.667]   0.750 [0.705]       80.1%     92.6%       3.8%      0.8%      16.2%      6.6%
            2000     0.608 [0.629]   0.641 [0.659]   0.681 [0.686]   0.750 [0.693]       75.4%     90.8%       7.5%      1.4%      17.2%      7.8%
            2007     0.646 [0.656]   0.689 [0.689]   0.711 [0.726]   0.735 [0.728]       79.8%     90.9%       6.4%      1.3%      13.9%      7.8%
            2010     0.633 [0.601]   0.667 [0.650]   0.693 [0.687]   0.760 [0.722]       71.8%     87.5%       7.0%      1.3%      21.2%     11.2%
Data come from IPUMS. The last six columns provide the percent of respondents whom we classify as workers, institutionalized nonworkers, and other
nonworkers. Workers are those who report employment in the previous year. Among nonworkers, the institutionalized are those who reside in institutions
at the time of the survey. Columns one through four contain the ratio of black to white median wages. For each column, the heading indicates what
percent of black and white nonworkers were assumed to have potential wages above the corresponding median. For example, the 10/25 column
calculates the ratio of median potential wages assuming that 10% of black nonworkers, and 25% of white nonworkers, have potential wages above the
median potential wages for their race*experience*year cells. Column 4 calculates the ratio of median wages ignoring non-workers (equivalent to mixing
50/50). For the bracketed results, we exclude civilian workers from the IPUMS sample who also worked in the past week and were not institutionalized.
We then replace these workers with matching respondents from the CPSMORG data, and we use the sampling weights from the two samples to re-
weight these replacement observations. CPSMORG data are not available for 1960 and 1970.
                     Table 11. Ratio of Median Black and Median White Weekly Wages, Males Only
                                    Mixing Over Only Non-Institutionalized Nonworkers
Years of                                                                                                       Percent Inst.       Percent Other
Potential                                                                                Percent Workers       Nonworkers           Nonworkers
Experience Year         10/25           15/15           25/10            Raw              Black   White       Black    White       Black   White
6-10       1960      0.553           0.567           0.567           0.606               90.1%    96.7%       3.6%      0.9%        6.3%      2.4%
           1970      0.643           0.650           0.666           0.689               89.6%    96.4%       3.8%      0.7%        6.6%      2.8%
           1980      0.645 [0.659]   0.661 [0.676]   0.686 [0.692]   0.716 [0.717]       82.1%    95.2%       4.2%      0.7%       13.7%      4.1%
           1990      0.644 [0.648]   0.673 [0.650]   0.677 [0.680]   0.738 [0.750]       79.0%    94.1%       6.7%      1.0%       14.3%      5.0%
           2000      0.679 [0.673]   0.704 [0.686]   0.730 [0.703]   0.828 [0.764]       74.2%    92.1%       10.7%     1.7%       15.1%      6.2%
           2007      0.696 [0.667]   0.722 [0.673]   0.733 [0.705]   0.812 [0.781]       77.8%    92.5%       8.1%      1.5%       14.1%      6.0%
           2010      0.567 [0.604]   0.593 [0.623]   0.652 [0.684]   0.801 [0.750]       68.6%    88.3%       8.6%      1.6%       22.8%     10.1%
11-15       1960     0.578           0.578           0.581           0.601               91.1%     97.2%      3.3%      0.9%        5.6%     1.9%
            1970     0.666           0.672           0.684           0.669               91.1%     97.0%      2.9%      0.7%        6.0%     2.2%
            1980     0.635 [0.659]   0.657 [0.675]   0.688 [0.692]   0.712 [0.742]       83.8%     95.2%      3.7%      0.7%       12.5%     4.1%
            1990     0.606 [0.601]   0.635 [0.619]   0.650 [0.636]   0.713 [0.701]       79.7%     94.2%      6.2%      0.9%       14.1%     4.9%
            2000     0.667 [0.662]   0.700 [0.667]   0.717 [0.700]   0.785 [0.787]       76.3%     92.4%      10.5%     1.7%       13.2%     5.8%
            2007     0.673 [0.668]   0.684 [0.681]   0.711 [0.697]   0.750 [0.769]       79.6%     93.2%      8.3%      1.5%       12.1%     5.3%
            2010     0.591 [0.573]   0.617 [0.583]   0.667 [0.618]   0.750 [0.695]       71.1%     89.2%      8.9%      1.7%       20.0%     9.1%
16-20       1960     0.593           0.593           0.593           0.622               90.9%     96.8%       3.5%     1.0%        5.6%     2.2%
            1970     0.654           0.657           0.669           0.654               91.3%     96.9%       2.5%     0.7%        6.2%     2.4%
            1980     0.645 [0.686]   0.658 [0.687]   0.684 [0.714]   0.718 [0.722]       84.6%     94.9%       2.7%     0.7%       12.7%     4.4%
            1990     0.600 [0.615]   0.622 [0.615]   0.651 [0.631]   0.709 [0.685]       80.0%     93.8%       4.9%     0.8%       15.1%     5.4%
            2000     0.658 [0.647]   0.692 [0.657]   0.694 [0.685]   0.788 [0.757]       76.6%     91.7%       9.1%     1.7%       14.3%     6.6%
            2007     0.698 [0.642]   0.706 [0.648]   0.743 [0.676]   0.791 [0.697]       80.8%     92.6%       7.5%     1.3%       11.7%     6.1%
            2010     0.632 [0.648]   0.667 [0.688]   0.731 [0.705]   0.782 [0.746]       74.2%     89.0%       7.1%     1.5%       18.7%     9.5%
21-25       1960     0.571           0.575           0.578           0.619               90.4%     96.3%       3.0%     1.0%        6.6%      2.7%
            1970     0.640           0.647           0.661           0.641               89.8%     96.1%       2.5%     0.8%        7.8%      3.1%
            1980     0.651 [0.682]   0.665 [0.686]   0.667 [0.711]   0.707 [0.722]       84.1%     93.9%       1.8%     0.6%       14.1%      5.5%
            1990     0.641 [0.636]   0.645 [0.642]   0.677 [0.667]   0.750 [0.705]       80.1%     92.6%       3.8%     0.8%       16.2%      6.6%
            2000     0.615 [0.620]   0.630 [0.643]   0.658 [0.660]   0.750 [0.693]       75.4%     90.8%       7.5%     1.4%       17.2%      7.8%
            2007     0.652 [0.655]   0.667 [0.676]   0.693 [0.702]   0.735 [0.728]       79.8%     90.9%       6.4%     1.3%       13.9%      7.8%
            2010     0.622 [0.590]   0.653 [0.626]   0.673 [0.670]   0.760 [0.722]       71.8%     87.5%       7.0%     1.3%       21.2%     11.2%

Data come from IPUMS. See note to Table 10 for information about the sample. Columns one through four of this table apply a different mixing rule
than Table 10. For each column, we assume that institutionalized nonworkers all have potential wages below the median of their race*experience*year
cell, and we only apply the mixing rule specified at the top of the column to other nonworkers.
                             Table 12. Ratio of Black and White Weekly Wages, Males Only
                                    Mixing Over Only Non-Institutionalized Nonworkers
Years of
Potential                                             75th Percentile                                               90th Percentile
Experience   Year            0/5                 0/0                  5/0                Raw                   0/0                  Raw
6-10         1960        0.669               0.669              0.669                0.675                 0.684              0.696
             1970        0.721               0.721              0.727                0.761                 0.716              0.732
             1980        0.715 [0.745]       0.715 [0.749]      0.731 [0.769]        0.795 [0.780]         0.796 [0.796]      0.820 [0.822]
             1990        0.683 [0.645]       0.691 [0.657]      0.707 [0.684]        0.764 [0.733]         0.721 [0.700]      0.773 [0.726]
             2000        0.735 [0.685]       0.747 [0.694]      0.747 [0.710]        0.826 [0.762]         0.740 [0.694]      0.801 [0.726]
             2007        0.722 [0.701]       0.722 [0.708]      0.729 [0.716]        0.800 [0.750]         0.722 [0.714]      0.800 [0.819]
             2010        0.660 [0.624]       0.665 [0.624]      0.686 [0.640]        0.800 [0.731]         0.694 [0.666]      0.787 [0.709]
11-15        1960        0.645               0.645               0.645               0.669                 0.654                0.657
             1970        0.697               0.697               0.697               0.699                 0.688                0.708
             1980        0.742 [0.739]       0.746 [0.739]       0.754 [0.750]       0.778 [0.778]         0.767 [0.695]        0.797 [0.733]
             1990        0.680 [0.650]       0.687 [0.656]       0.687 [0.662]       0.742 [0.714]         0.720 [0.643]        0.751 [0.680]
             2000        0.700 [0.687]       0.700 [0.695]       0.700 [0.709]       0.780 [0.768]         0.680 [0.667]        0.741 [0.730]
             2007        0.684 [0.667]       0.684 [0.667]       0.700 [0.667]       0.741 [0.748]         0.670 [0.662]        0.700 [0.693]
             2010        0.650 [0.566]       0.650 [0.580]       0.667 [0.601]       0.759 [0.693]         0.652 [0.617]        0.714 [0.673]
16-20        1960        0.669               0.673               0.673               0.693                 0.647                0.646
             1970        0.668               0.668               0.668               0.668                 0.626                0.657
             1980        0.749 [0.736]       0.749 [0.739]       0.760 [0.748]       0.784 [0.777]         0.756 [0.748]        0.773 [0.770]
             1990        0.703 [0.667]       0.711 [0.667]       0.730 [0.667]       0.762 [0.710]         0.707 [0.698]        0.740 [0.721]
             2000        0.690 [0.692]       0.690 [0.692]       0.691 [0.692]       0.724 [0.740]         0.661 [0.676]        0.704 [0.714]
             2007        0.707 [0.662]       0.718 [0.672]       0.725 [0.672]       0.782 [0.710]         0.714 [0.650]        0.727 [0.673]
             2010        0.671 [0.653]       0.671 [0.666]       0.687 [0.680]       0.743 [0.722]         0.698 [0.660]        0.745 [0.685]
21-25        1960        0.653               0.653               0.655               0.662                 0.640                0.634
             1970        0.668               0.668               0.668               0.669                 0.604                0.620
             1980        0.731 [0.708]       0.731 [0.708]       0.731 [0.717]       0.755 [0.727]         0.718 [0.702]        0.743 [0.703]
             1990        0.698 [0.673]       0.701 [0.681]       0.714 [0.705]       0.763 [0.750]         0.706 [0.682]        0.723 [0.714]
             2000        0.672 [0.643]       0.683 [0.655]       0.701 [0.667]       0.750 [0.703]         0.682 [0.650]        0.711 [0.681]
             2007        0.687 [0.643]       0.694 [0.648]       0.694 [0.657]       0.733 [0.694]         0.661 [0.663]        0.667 [0.703]
             2010        0.668 [0.618]       0.686 [0.625]       0.694 [0.638]       0.734 [0.667]         0.652 [0.636]        0.717 [0.650]
Data come from IPUMS. Columns one through three contain the ratio of black potential wages at the 75th percentile to white potential wages at the
75th percentile. For each column, the heading indicates what percent of black and white other nonworkers are assumed to have potential wages
above the corresponding 75th percentile. For example, the 0/5 column calculates the ratio assuming that 0% of black other nonworkers, and 5% of
white other nonworkers, have potential wages above the 75th percentile of potential wages for their race*experience*year cells. Column four
calculates the ratio ignoring nonworkers (equivalent to mixing 25/25). Columns five and six contain analogous results for the 90th percentile of
potential wages. For the bracketed results, we exclude civilian workers from the IPUMS sample who also worked in the past week and were not
institutionalized. We then replace these workers with matching respondents from the CPSMORG data, and we use the sampling weights from the
two samples to re-weight these replacement observations. CPSMORG data are not available for 1960 and 1970.
