NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

IMPROVING EDUCATIONAL OUTCOMES IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES:
LESSONS FROM RIGOROUS IMPACT EVALUATIONS
Alejandro J. Ganimian
Richard J. Murnane
Working Paper 20284
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20284
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2014

A version of this paper with fewer footnotes is forthcoming in the Review of Educational Research.
An earlier version of this paper was published as NBER Working Paper No. 20284. The authors gratefully
acknowledge comments from Mariana Alfonso, Manuel Álvarez Trongé, Felipe Barrera-Osorio, Diether
Beuermann, Barbara Bruns, Julián Cristia, David Deming, Ariel Fiszbein, Juliana Guaqueta, Heather
Hill, Eduardo Levy Yeyati, Michael Lisman, Juan Llach, Mariano Narodowski, Hugo Ñopo, Joao
Batista Oliveira, Jeffrey Puryear, Axel Rivas, Alonso Sánchez, Ismael Sanz, Norbert Schady, Adela
Soliz, Laura Trucco, Emiliana Vegas, and Eduardo Vélez Bustillo on earlier drafts of this paper. The
authors acknowledge support for research assistance from the President’s Office, Harvard University.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research. The authors acknowledge support for research assistance
from the President’s Office, Harvard University.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Alejandro J. Ganimian and Richard J. Murnane. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Improving Educational Outcomes in Developing Countries: Lessons from Rigorous Impact
Evaluations
Alejandro J. Ganimian and Richard J. Murnane
NBER Working Paper No. 20284
July 2014, Revised February 2016
JEL No. I21,I24,I25,I32
ABSTRACT
This paper reviews and interprets the evidence from 223 rigorous impact evaluations of educational
initiatives conducted in 56 low- and middle-income countries. We consider for inclusion in our review
all studies in recent syntheses, which have reached seemingly conflicting conclusions about which
interventions improve educational outcomes. We group interventions based on their theory of action.
We derive four lessons from the studies we review. First, reducing the costs of going to school and
expanding schooling options increase attendance and attainment, but do not consistently increase student
achievement. Second, providing information about school quality, developmentally appropriate parenting
practices, and the economic returns to schooling affects the actions of parents and the achievement
of children and adolescents. Third, more or better resources improve student achievement only if they
result in changes in children’s daily experiences at school. Finally, well-designed incentives increase
teacher effort and student achievement from very low levels, but low-skilled teachers need specific
guidance to reach minimally acceptable levels of instruction.
Alejandro J. Ganimian
Graduate School of Education
Harvard University
6 Appian Way
Cambridge, MA 02138
alejandro_ganimian@mail.harvard.edu
Richard J. Murnane
Graduate School of Education
Harvard University
6 Appian Way - Gutman 469
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
richard_murnane@harvard.edu

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
Improving Education in Developing Countries:
Lessons from Rigorous Impact Evaluations
Over the past two decades, developing countries have become increasingly interested in
adopting education policies that are backed by rigorous evidence of effectiveness. This interest
in “evidence-based” policies has resulted in a growing number of impact evaluations since the
turn of the century (Vivalt 2015).
In recent years, several researchers have attempted to summarize the evidence from these
impact evaluations (Conn 2014; Glewwe, Hanushek, Humpage, & Ravina 2014; Guerrero, Leon,
Zapata, Sugimaru, & Cueto 2012; Kremer, Brannen, & Glennerster 2013; Krishnaratne, White,
& Carpenter 2013; Masino & Niño-Zarazúa 2015; McEwan 2014). These reviews aim to make
sense of the evidence for policy-makers, who lack the time (and sometimes, the specialized
training) to sift through hundreds of academic papers. They aspire to identify promising
interventions as well as to point out puzzles to examine in future research.
These syntheses reach seemingly conflicting conclusions about which educational
interventions improve educational outcomes (Evans & Popova 2015). The disagreements stem,
in part, from differences in the substantive and methodological criteria for including studies (e.g.,
some focus on studies in a geographic region, others on studies with cost-effectiveness data, and
others on randomized trials). Yet, even reviews with similar inclusion criteria consider different
sets of studies. Moreover, the different ways in which reviews categorize interventions result in
some conflicting conclusions even when they consider the same studies.
We contribute in three ways to the ongoing debate on the lessons from rigorous impact
evaluations of educational interventions in developing countries. First, we consider for
inclusion in our review all of the studies in reviews released in recent years. Thus, we avoid the

1

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
risk of reaching conclusions about the state of the evidence simply due to an incomplete
coverage of existing studies.
Second, instead of categorizing interventions according to whether they look similar or
have similar names, we group them based on their theory of action. This taxonomy, like all
others, has limitations. However, we believe it is helpful in generating hypotheses about why
similar interventions have succeeded or failed, and in identifying areas that would benefit from
further research.
Finally, instead of conducting a meta-analysis, we conduct a narrative review of the
evidence. We do so to bring attention to the aspects of the design and implementation of
successful educational interventions that are not easily captured in meta-analyses.
We derive four lessons from the studies we review:
1. Reducing the costs of going to school and expanding schooling options increase
attendance and attainment, but do not consistently increase student achievement;
2. Providing information about school quality, developmentally appropriate parenting
practices, and the economic returns to schooling affects the actions of parents and the
achievement of children and adolescents;
3. More or better resources improve student achievement only if they result in changes
in children’s daily experiences at school;
4. Well-designed incentives increase teacher effort and student achievement from very
low levels, but low-skilled teachers need specific guidance to reach minimally
acceptable levels of instruction.
This paper is structured as follows. Section 2 presents our initial criteria for including
studies in our review, our strategy for finding studies, our rationale for excluding some studies

2

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
upon closer scrutiny, our classification of the interventions that we discuss, and our standards for
reporting the effects of these interventions. Section 3 discusses the results from our review.
Section 4 reviews key lessons, identifies the limitations of existing evidence, and proposes some
areas for policy experimentation and impact evaluations.
Method
Inclusion Criteria
We review evaluations of educational interventions in pre-primary, primary, and
secondary schools that took place in low- or middle-income countries from 2000 to 2015. 1
Outcomes. We review studies that include at least one of the following education-related
outcomes: enrollment, attendance, repetition, dropout, retention, or measures of student
achievement or cognitive skills.
For a subset of studies for which information on cost-effectiveness is available, we
summarize the evidence. In doing so, we report the effect of interventions on student
participation, student achievement, or teacher attendance for each 100 U.S. dollars (USD).
(Student participation is defined as the school-level average of attendance among enrolled
students—typically, based on unannounced visits). To ensure cost-effectiveness estimates are
consistent across studies, we rely on the calculations of the Abdul Latif Jameel Poverty Action
Lab (J-PAL), which use the methodology described by Dhaliwal, Duflo, Glennerster, & Tulloch
(2012). 2

1

These classifications were developed by the World Bank and can be accessed at: http://bit.ly/1lgFrYy. Appendix

A includes a full list of our inclusion criteria and exceptions: http://bit.ly/1mRJCkx.
2

These estimates can be accessed at: http://bit.ly/1g7L74b (student participation), http://bit.ly/1KZNKGW (student

learning), and http://bit.ly/1Mel4I1 (teacher attendance).

3

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
Interventions. We include studies of educational interventions, such as offering
computer-assisted learning or altering incentives for teachers. We also include studies of health
interventions, such as providing deworming drugs and iron supplements, that include at least one
of the educational outcomes mentioned above.
Methods. We only include studies that take advantage of exogenous variation in the
receipt of the intervention, either by randomly assigning individuals to a treatment or by
exploiting quasi-random variation in treatment assignment from natural experiments. Included
studies based on natural experiments use differences-in-differences, regression discontinuities,
and/or instrumental variables to estimate the causal impacts of interventions. We do not consider
studies that attempt to estimate counterfactual outcomes either by employing matching methods
or fixed effects for individuals in pre-post comparisons.
Literature Search
We searched for studies in English in peer-reviewed journals, working paper series, and
academic conferences. We conducted the final search that we describe below from January to
September 2015. Figure 1 offers an overview of the search and review process. 3
Citation tracking. We consulted eight reviews of impact evaluations of educational
interventions in developing countries and tracked the citations. These included meta-analyses,
narrative, and vote-counting reviews. 4 This search produced 253 studies, of which 119 met our
inclusion criteria.
Working papers. We surveyed the education publications on 16 websites from research
centers, professional associations, development banks, think tanks, and development economics

3

Appendix B includes a list of all studies included in this review: http://bit.ly/1JH3jGi.

4

Appendix C offers a list of the reviews: http://bit.ly/1mRJCkx.

4

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
conferences. Including this “grey” literature was crucial because this is a rapidly evolving field
and we wanted to limit the influence of publication bias. 5 This search produced 1,390 additional
studies, of which 96 met our inclusion criteria.
Academic journals. We searched for academic articles in 18 journals in education,
economics, and public policy. 6 This search produced 10 additional studies, of which 8 met our
inclusion criteria.
Additional Exclusions
In addition to excluding studies that did not meet our initial inclusion criteria, we exclude
some studies for other reasons. We leave out studies that do not focus on a specific intervention,
policy change, or treatment. We leave out three evaluations that only estimate the effect of a
bundle of different interventions because it is not possible to determine the contributions of
specific interventions to the reported effect.
We also exclude some studies due to methodological considerations. We leave out
studies without balancing checks between treatment and control groups at baseline, as well as
studies with imbalance between experimental groups at baseline.
Finally, we also exclude four studies that we could not access during our literature search.
As noted in Figure 1, applying all of these criteria yields 223 unique studies that we include in
our review.
Due to space considerations, we cannot discuss the findings of all studies that satisfied
our inclusion criteria. So, after reviewing the evidence pertaining to studies with the same theory
of action aimed at addressing the same problem, we describe one that illustrated well the

5

Appendix D lists the organizations whose websites we examined: http://bit.ly/1mRJCkx.

6

Appendix E provides the list of journals: http://bit.ly/1mRJCkx.

5

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
evidence from the relevant group of studies. In cases in which the results are sensitive to a
particular detail (e.g., the design of incentive plans to increase teachers’ effort levels), we explain
this pattern. This version of the paper includes in footnotes all studies that support the argument
illustrated by the evidence from each study that we describe in the paper. This version also
includes in footnotes all studies that introduce minor caveats to our summary of the evidence.
Classification Criteria
The authors of reviews of impact evaluations typically develop their own categories to
group what they consider to be similar interventions. Authors of meta-analyses fit categoryspecific meta-regression models, and determine the average treatment effect of each category.
The assumption in these analyses is that if the authors have enough evaluations of interventions
that are similar enough, they can determine whether a category of interventions works.
In this paper, we use a different approach. We group studies according to how they are
trying to solve a specific problem. As shown in Figure 2, we start with the aim school systems
seek to achieve: getting children to enroll in school and learn. Then, we categorize interventions
according to whether they are trying to do this by increasing demand for education (left side) or
by improving the supply of education (right side).
Next, we develop sub-categories of demand and supply interventions. Some
interventions aim to increase demand for education by: (a) reducing the costs of attending
school; (b) preparing children to learn at school; (c) making schooling pay; and/or (d) improving
access to better schools. Other interventions try to improve the supply of education by: (a)
increasing the quantity or quality of resources; (b) addressing students’ individual learning
needs; (c) increasing teacher and/or principal effort; and/or (d) tackling teachers’ capacity.

6

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
Finally, we list strategies employed to increase demand and improve supply. These
strategies are not exhaustive; they simply group the educational interventions that have been
evaluated thus far. Admittedly, this categorization is based on our own interpretation of the
(often explicit, but sometimes implicit) theory of action underlying each of the interventions in
the impact evaluations we review. We believe, however, that our categories provide an intuitive
way to organize the interventions. Moreover, these categories are less consequential than those
used in meta-analyses. The reason is that instead of using the categories to estimate the average
effect of groups of similar interventions, we discuss individual interventions in some detail. If
we chose our categories differently, where we discuss each intervention would change, but what
we write about each intervention would not change.
Reporting Effects
We report the effect of educational interventions using the metrics employed by the
authors of the impact evaluations. We do this for two reasons. First, using the original scales in
reporting the effects of programs on disparate educational outcomes facilitates communication.
Second, many studies do not include the necessary information to calculate effect sizes. Instead
of excluding these studies, we try to contextualize the effects of all interventions by reporting the
target population and impact time frame.
We focus on the average effects of interventions, rather than on subgroup effects, due to
space considerations. We only make two exceptions: we report heterogeneous effects when they
provide insights about the mechanism through which the intervention is making a difference or
when heterogeneous effects are the sole focus of a study. We also focus on the effects of the
offer (not the receipt) of interventions because they are the more relevant parameters for policymakers, who cannot control whether individuals take up the interventions for which they are

7

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
eligible. Whenever this is not possible, we clarify that we are reporting the effect of receiving
the intervention.
Results
Building Demand for Education
Reducing the costs of attending school. One reason children and youths may not go to
school is because the cost of doing so is too high. Several interventions have tried to address this
problem by: (a) reducing the direct costs of schooling; (b) reducing the costs of complements to
schooling; or (c) improving school amenities.
Reducing the direct costs of schooling. The traditional way in which school systems
have reduced the direct costs of schooling has been to lower or eliminate user fees. These
policies have increased enrollments in primary school. Barrera-Osorio, Linden, & Urquiola
(2007) evaluated the impact of an initiative in Bogotá, Colombia that reduced school fees for
low-income families in 2004. They found that the program increased the enrollment of primary
school children in the poorest households by 3% and the enrollment of children in the nextpoorest households by 6%. 7
In countries where many children are not attending school, the sudden influx of students
from low-income families prompted by user fee eliminations can put a strain on the public
school system. Lucas & Mbiti (2012) examined the impact of fee elimination in primary
education in Kenya in 2003. The policy increased the number of students who completed
7

This evidence is consistent with that of Gajigo (2014) in the Gambia. As Borkum (2012) showed in South Africa,

the magnitude of the impact of fee elimination policies depends on the baseline enrollment and socio-economic
status of potential beneficiaries. In Shaanxi, China a tuition relief program for low-income junior high school
students in rural areas increased enrollment in senior high schools by 9.7 percentage points (Liu et al. 2013). Yet,
this type of program has not always improved student achievement (Chen et al. 2013; Yi et al. 2012).

8

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
primary school. However, it led to a small reduction in the achievement of students on track to
graduate. It also prompted parents from wealthier families to switch their children to private
schools (see also Bold, Kimenyi, Mwabu, & Sandefur 2011).
Another popular approach to reducing the direct costs of schooling is to build new
schools closer to the homes of potential students. These initiatives have increased enrollments
by reducing the time children spend commuting to school. Duflo (2001) evaluated the impact of
a large primary school construction program in Indonesia between 1974 and 1978. Each primary
school constructed per 1,000 children led to an average increase of .12 to .19 years of schooling
(depending on how the effect was estimated). 8
Two types of school construction have also led to improvements in student achievement:
village-based schools and pre-schools. Burde & Linden (2013) found that the construction of
“village-based” schools (i.e., schools serving only children in the neighboring area) in Ghor,
Afghanistan in 2007 not only increased girls’ enrollment in schools by 52 percentage points; it
also improved their math and language test scores by .65 standard deviations (SDs). In fact, for
each USD 100, the program yielded a 2.11 SD effect on student achievement. Similarly,
Berlinski, Galiani, & Gertler (2009) found that construction of pre-primary schools in Argentina
between 1993 and 1999 improved the third grade Spanish and math test scores of beneficiaries
by .23 SDs. 9
8

Similarly, Mocan & Cannonier (2012) found that the construction and rehabilitation of basic education facilities in

Sierra Leone in 2001 increased the educational attainment of women by .5 years of schooling. Conversely, Liu,
Zhang, Luo, Rozelle, & Loyalka (2010) found that the consolidation of primary schools with low enrollment in
Shaanxi and Ningxia, China in 2001 did not harm student achievement.
9

This evidence is consistent with that of Martinez, Naudeau, & Pereira (2013), who found that the construction of

community-based pre-schools in Gaza, Mozambique in 2008 improved the cognitive, fine motor, and socio-

9

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
A promising alternative for reducing commuting costs is providing students with a means
of transportation to school. Muralidharan & Prakash (2013) found that a program in Bihar, India
that offered girls in secondary school bicycles to travel to school increased their enrollment by
30% and reduced the gender gap in enrollment by 40%. In fact, the initiative was more costeffective in increasing school attendance than cash transfers for families (reviewed below).
Reducing the costs of complements. Another strategy to increase school enrollments is to
lower the costs of complements to schooling. Such interventions have had positive impacts on
students who take advantage of these cost reductions. Evans, Kremer, & Ngatia (2009) found
that primary school students who received free uniforms in Busia, Kenya in 2002 were 44%
more likely to attend school and they performed .25 SDs better on math, English, and Kiswahili
tests after one year. For each USD 100, the program yielded a .71 years increase in student
participation. Unfortunately, the authors do not report the effect of the offer of free uniforms on
student achievement.
Complementary inputs are more likely to have a positive impact when there are few or no
transaction costs to obtaining them. Ma et al. (2014) found that offering free eyeglasses to fourth
and fifth graders at school in Gansu, China in 2012 improved their math test scores by .11 SDs.

emotional skills of beneficiaries, and improved their school readiness. Bouguen, Filmer, Macours, & Naudeau
(2014), however, found that construction of pre-schools did not yield these benefits in Cambodia, where families
had enrolled pre-primary school aged students in primary when there was no available pre-school and the
introduction of pre-schools prohibited this practice.

10

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
Yet, offering vouchers for free eyeglasses that families could redeem at the local county hospital
had no such effect. 10
Covering the costs of complements to schooling can be budget neutral in terms of the
cost per student if the number of students per classroom is allowed to increase. Kremer, Moulin,
& Namunyu (2003) assessed the impact of an initiative in Busia and Teso, Kenya in 1995 that
covered the costs of textbooks, classroom constructions, and school uniforms. The program led
to a sharp reduction in dropout rates and an influx of new students into participating schools. 11
The authors found no evidence that the higher student-teacher ratios reduced the achievement of
already-enrolled students.
Improving school amenities. Yet another approach to increasing enrollments is to
improve amenities in schools.
Perhaps the most common initiative is to provide free meals at school. Although some
initiatives aim specifically at improving the nutrition of children (we discuss those below), others
are conceived as “food-for-education” programs. These initiatives have a mixed tracked record.
For example, Vermeersch & Kremer (2004) found that free breakfasts in pre-schools in Busia
and Teso, Kenya in 2000 increased student attendance by 30%. The program improved students’
scores on oral and written tests only in schools with experienced teachers. 12 Afridi (2011),

10

This evidence is consistent with that of Glewwe, Park, & Zhao (2014), who evaluated a similar initiative in

Gansu, China in 2004 and found that only 70% of the students with poor vision who were offered eyeglasses
accepted them. Doing so required scheduling an additional meeting with an optometrist.
11

A similar intervention in Manicaland, Zimbabwe also reduced dropout rates (Hallfors et al. 2011).

12

Similarly, Kazianga, De Walque, & Alderman (2012) compared the effectiveness of free lunches and take-home

rations in the Sahel region of Burkina Faso in 2006. After a year, both programs increased the enrollment of
primary school students by 4 to 5 percentage points and improved math test scores.

11

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
however, found that a school meals program in Madhya Pradesh, India in 2003 had no impact on
the attendance and enrollment of primary school students on average. 13
Another way of improving school amenities is to build school latrines. Adukia (2014)
found that a large school-latrine-construction initiative in India in 2003 increased enrollment in
grades 1 through 5 by 12% and that of students in grades 6 through 8 by 8%. At younger ages,
girls and boys benefited from either unisex or sex-specific latrine constructions; at older ages,
however, girls only benefited from sex-specific latrines. In contrast, Oster & Thornton (2011)
found that providing free sanitary products to girls in grades 7 and 8 in Chitwan, Nepal had no
impact on their absenteeism rates. Together, these studies suggest that providing safe, private
spaces for pubescent girls is a more effective way of curbing menstruation-related absences than
improving sanitation technology. 14
Building schools with “girl-friendly” facilities consistently increases enrollments, but it
does not always result in improved student achievement. Kazianga, Levy, Linden, & Sloan
(2013) found that constructing primary schools equipped with sex-specific latrines, canteens,
take-home rations, and textbooks in Burkina Faso in 2005 increased enrollments by 19
percentage points and math and French test scores by .41 SDs after two years and a half. Yet,
Dumitrescu, Levy, Orfield, & Sloan (2011) found that a similar initiative in Niger in 2008
increased enrollment by 4.3 percentage points, but had no impact on student attendance or
French and math test scores.

13

Similarly, Buttenheim, Alderman, & Friedman (2011) found little evidence that a school feeding program in Lao

PDR in 2006 improved enrollment or student achievement.
14

Freeman et al. (2012) found that improving water quality, sanitation, and hygiene in schools in Nyanza, Kenya did

not reduce student absence. Yet, some areas in this study were affected by post-election violence.

12

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
Preparing children to learn at school. Another reason why children may not go to
school is that they are not well prepared (e.g., cognitively or physically). Some interventions
have sought to: (a) provide children with vital medications; (b) improve their nutrition; or (c)
improve parental practices.
Providing children with vital medications. Offering children medications against
preventable diseases is a cost-effective way to increase enrollment and attendance; however, its
impact on student achievement is mixed. Some interventions have provided deworming drugs.
For example, Miguel & Kremer (2004) found that a mass treatment of intestinal helminths (e.g.,
hookworm, roundworm, whipworm, and schistosomiasis) in primary schools in Busia, Kenya in
1998 reduced student absenteeism by one quarter. By reducing the prevalence of the helminths,
the program also reduced the absenteeism of untreated children in treated schools, as well as that
of children in neighboring schools. The program was highly cost-effective: for each USD 100, it
yielded 13.9 additional years of student participation. However, the program did not improve the
English, math, and science test scores of third through eighth graders. Yet, Grigorenko et al.
(2006) assessed a similar initiative in Bagamoyo and Kibaha, Tanzania in 1997 and found that
the offer of access to deworming drugs improved the performance of children in grades 2 to 5 on
a battery of cognitive tests, with impacts ranging from .18 to .36 SDs.
Other interventions have provided treatment for malaria, which is a major cause of child
morbidity in many low-income countries. These initiatives have not improved student
achievement. For example, Brooker & Halliday (2015) found that an intermittent screening and
treatment program for malaria for students in grades 1 through 5 in Kwale and Msambweni,

13

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
Kenya in 2010 had no impact on literacy or numeracy. 15 Effects on cognitive skills do not
emerge later in life either. Jukes et al. (2006) tracked the beneficiaries of a malaria prevention
treatment in Farafenni, the Gambia after 14 to 16 years and found no effects on memory,
attention, reasoning, knowledge, or language, even though the intervention resulted in an
increase of .52 years of schooling. 16
Improving nutrition. There are essentially two approaches to improving the nutrition of
students from low-income families: providing them with nutrients that they often lack in their
diet or offering them free school meals.
A number of interventions have provided children with basic nutrients. Iron supplements
have generally succeeded in improving students’ cognitive skills. For example, Baumgartner et
al. (2012) compared the effects of providing iron and fatty acid supplements to primary school

15

This evidence is consistent with that of Fernando, De Silva, Carter, Mendis, & Wickremasinghe (2006), who

found that a similar program in Moneragala, Sri Lanka in 1999 had no impact on the language and reading
achievement of students in grades 1 through 5. Only Clarke et al. (2008) found that beneficiaries of a malaria
treatment in primary and secondary school in Bondo, Kenya in 2005 performed better on assessments of sustained
attention and counting sounds. Yet, beneficiaries did no better in inattentive or hyperactive-compulsive behavior or
on a social science exam.
16

These findings are consistent with those of Cutler, Fung, Kremer, Singhal, & Vogl (2007), who found that a

malaria eradication program in India in the 1950s did not lead to gains in literacy or primary school completion. An
approach that has received comparatively less attention in this body of literature is to offer incentives to schools to
provide children with vital medications. Sylvia et al. (2013) found that this approach benefited disadvantaged
students in China, but at the expense of their healthier peers.

14

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
children in KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa in 2009 and found that only iron supplements improved
the number of words children could recall. 17
Other nutrients have increased school participation, but not student achievement. For
example, Hamazaki et al. (2008) found that fatty acids provision in Lampung, Indonesia made
fourth through sixth graders .4 times more likely to attend school. 18 Yet, Osendarp et al. (2007)
found that providing micronutrients (iron, zinc, folate, and vitamins), fatty acids, or both had no
impact on the verbal skills, memory, general intelligence, or attention of primary school students
in Jakarta, Indonesia in 2003.
Combining deworming drugs with micronutrients has improved school participation, but
it has not always improved children’s cognitive skills. Bobonis, Miguel, & Puri-Sharma (2006)
found that delivering iron supplements and deworming drugs to pre-school students in Delhi,
India in 2001 reduced student absenteeism by one fifth. For each USD 100, it increased student
participation by 2.7 years. Jinabhai et al. (2001) assessed the impact of providing deworming
drugs, iron, and/or vitamin A to primary school children in KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa in
1995. They found that deworming drugs, by themselves and jointly with vitamin A and/or iron

17

Similarly, Manger et al. (2008) found that micronutrient fortification in Ubon Ratchathani, Thailand in 2002

increased the number of words that primary school children could recall. Luo et al. (2012) also found that iron
tablets improved the math achievement of fourth graders in Shaanxi, China in 2008. The only exception has been
Rico et al. (2006), who found that providing iron, zinc, or both had no impact on cognitive performance among first
graders exposed to lead in Torreón, Mexico in 2001. As Kleiman-Weiner et al. (2013) showed in Gansu, China the
mode of delivery of iron supplements matters. Chewable vitamins improved the math achievement of fourth
graders, but eggs (a popular alternative) did not.
18

Similarly, Mahawithanage et al. (2007) found that vitamin A provision improved the attendance of primary school

children in Moneragala, Sri Lanka in 2001.

15

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
fortification, had impacts of similar magnitude on auditory and intellectual functions, memory,
and math achievement. 19 Yet, Solon et al. (2003) found that combining micronutrients with
deworming drugs had no impact on the verbal, non-verbal, and quantitative abilities of primary
school children in Batangas, the Philippines in 1998.
The evidence on the effects of free school meals on student achievement varies widely.
Part of that variation stems from the type of food the intervention provides. Whaley et al. (2003)
compared three school feeding programs for first graders in Embu, Kenya in 1998: a vegetable
stew that was complemented with meat, another one that was served with milk, and a third one
with additional oil equivalent to the energy provided in the meat and milk versions. Children
who were offered the stew with meat outperformed all other groups in their ability to organize
perceptual detail, reason by analogy, and draw comparisons. Children assigned to the meat- and
oil-based stews outperformed their control group peers in arithmetic skills. 20
Improving parenting practices. Many different initiatives have tried to help parents
support their children. Interventions that improve parent-child interactions have had positive
impacts on childhood cognitive outcomes, by themselves and when combined with other
19

There is some evidence that these interventions may positively impact achievement in the long term. Maluccio et

al. (2009) tracked individuals who were exposed to the delivery of protein-rich energy in Guatemala from 1969 to
1977 a quarter century later. They found that beneficiaries performed .25 SDs better on nonverbal cognitive
assessments.
20

How school meals are delivered also matters, but it is not clear how. Adelman, Alderman, Gilligan, & Lehrer

(2008) compared an on-site school-feeding program to take-home rations offered to children of primary school age
in Pader and Lira, Uganda in 2005 and found they affected different outcomes. The caloric content of school meals
has not been found to make a difference in educational outcomes. McEwan (2013) compared meal rations with
different calories in Chile in 2001 and found that additional calories had no impact on enrollment, attendance, school
entrance age, repetition, or language and math achievement.

16

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
treatments. 21 Attanasio et al. (2014) found that weekly home visits from community members to
show mothers activities they could do with their children aged 12 to 24 months improved
children’s cognitive skills by .26 SDs and their receptive language by .22 SDs.
The educational and cognitive effects of these interventions persist over time. For
example, Walker, Chang, Powell, & Grantham-McGregor (2005) assessed the long-term effects
of a similar home visitation program that targeted the mothers of children aged 9 to 24 months in
Kingston, Jamaica from 1986 to 1989. They found that students assigned to the intervention had
higher IQ, better vocabulary, and better verbal and reading skills 17 to 18 years after the
intervention. 22
Helping parents to support their children’s learning is more difficult once children are
older. Banerji, Berry, & Shotland (2014) compared adult literacy classes for mothers of children
aged 5 to 8, training for mothers to enhance their children’s learning at home, and a combination

21

These interventions have also improved school participation. Tieffenberg, Wood, Alonso, Tossutti, & Vicente

(2000) found that a program in Buenos Aires, Argentina that trained children with asthma and epilepsy and their
parents to manage the chronic illnesses reduced student absenteeism. Similarly, Rocha & Soares (2010) found that
professional health care teams assigned to a group of families in Brazil in 1995 increased the enrollment of children
ages 10 to 17 in school almost every year for eight years.
22

Similarly, Kagitcibasi, Sunar, & Bekman (2001) compared two types of early enrichment activities for children

ages 3 and 5 in Istanbul, Turkey: a child-focused, center-based version; and a mother-centered, home-based version.
They found that both versions improved children’s cognitive skills at the end of the four years of the program. Yet,
children assigned to the mother-centered version had higher educational attainment, primary school grades, and
vocabulary scores seven years after the end of the intervention. The positive effects on children assigned to the
child-centered version had dissipated by then. Rosero & Oosterbeek (2011) compared the effects of home visits and
childcare centers on children from low-income families in Ecuador in 2006. They found that home visits improved
children’s cognitive skills and reduced mothers’ labor force participation; childcare centers had the opposite effect.

17

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
of both treatments in Bihar and Rajasthan, India. These programs improved math scores only
modestly—.04, .05, and .07 SDs, respectively—and only the third treatment had an effect (.05
SDs) on language scores.
Most efforts to improve parental practices that have been rigorously evaluated require
considerable commitment from parents over a sustained period of time. An approach that has
received relatively little attention in developing countries is nudging parents to adopt better
practices via text messages. Mo et al. (2014) found that weekly text messages to parents in
Ningxia, China improved students’ math achievement when accompanied by monthly quiz
questions to assess parents’ understanding of the messages. Text messages by themselves had no
such effect.
Making schooling pay. Low-income families may not send their children to school
because the cost of foregoing the alternative (e.g., employing children at home or in the labor
market) seems too high. Some interventions have tried to: (a) compensate families for foregone
opportunities; (b) inform them of the long-term benefits of schooling; or (c) offer incentives to
students.
Compensating families for foregone opportunities. The most common approach to
compensating low-income parents for the opportunity cost of schooling is to offer them cash if
they enroll their children in school. Many versions of these “conditional cash transfers” or CCTs
(sometimes labeled as scholarships) have been rigorously evaluated in a wide variety of contexts.
Nearly every CCT that has been evaluated has increased student enrollment. 23 Yet, the
magnitude of this impact has depended on the characteristics of the beneficiaries. CCTs have

23

There is some evidence that CCTs are more effective at improving some educational outcomes than alternative

supply-side interventions. Glewwe & Olinto (2004) found that CCTs in Honduras in 2000 increased enrollment

18

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
had especially large impacts on the enrollment of students transitioning between levels of
schooling (e.g., from primary to lower secondary school) (Schultz 2004), 24 children of age to be
in grades with especially low enrollment rates (Maluccio & Flores 2005), 25 and students from the
poorest families (Galiani & McEwan 2013). 26
The magnitude of the impact of cash transfers has also depended on several features of
program design. Treatment exposure makes a difference. Behrman, Parker, & Todd (2009)
found that children who were exposed for a longer time to CCTs in Mexico from 1997 to 2003
experienced greater impacts on educational attainment. 27
rates by 1 to 2 percentage points, school attendance (conditional on enrollment) by about .8 days per month, annual
promotion rates by 2 to 4 percentage points, and reduced the dropout rate by 2 to 3 percentage points. Grants to
parent-teacher associations had no impact on these outcomes.
24

In fact, for each USD 100, the program yielded .03 additional years of student participation. There have been

multiple impact evaluations of the CCT in Mexico that find positive effects (Attanasio, Meghir, & Santiago 2012;
De Janvry, Finan, Sadoulet, & Vakis 2006; Dubois & Rubio-Codina 2012; Skoufias 2001; Skoufias, Parker,
Behrman, & Pessino 2001; Todd & Wolpin 2003). CCTs have increased educational attainment in many other
contexts (Levy & Ohls 2007; Mo et al. 2013; Ravallion & Wodon 2000; Rogers, Chanturidze, & MacAuslan 2013;
Sparrow 2007).
25

These findings are consistent with those of Behrman, Sengupta, & Todd (2005) in Mexico, of Attanasio,

Fitzsimmons, & Gomez (2005) in Colombia, and of Maluccio, Murphy, & Regalia (2010) in Nicaragua.
26

These findings are very similar to those of Oosterbeek, Ponce, & Schady (2008) in Ecuador. Other characteristics

of beneficiaries, however, seem to be less important. For example, Behrman, Gallardo-García, Parker, Todd, &
Vélez-Grajales (2012) found that the Mexican CCT, typically assessed in rural areas, also had positive impacts on
enrollment and attainment in urban areas.
27

See also Behrman, Parker, & Todd (2011). However, Fernald, Gertler, & Neufeld (2009) found that children with

longer program exposure did not perform better on a language assessment. Perova & Vakis (2012) found suggestive
evidence that CCTs in Peru in 2006 benefited children who had been exposed to the program for a longer period of

19

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
The schooling outcomes on which cash transfers are made conditional also matter. For
example, Barrera-Osorio, Bertrand, Linden, & Perez-Calle (2011) compared the effects of three
CCTs in Bogotá, Colombia in 2005. One version transferred money to low-income parents if
their child was enrolled in school and attended 80% of the days of each month. The second
made a third of the transfer conditional on the child enrolling in the next grade. The third
provided a smaller monthly transfer, but also provided a lump sum transfer when the child
graduated from high school. All versions increased school attendance, but the second one also
increased grade promotion by 4 percentage points, and the third increased tertiary enrollment by
48.9 percentage points.
One fear about CCTs is that they might reduce the school enrollment of non-eligible
siblings of recipients. The limited available evidence indicates that this rarely occurs. For
example, Ferreira, Filmer, & Schady (2009) found that CCTs in Cambodia in which eligibility
varied substantially among siblings made recipients 20 percentage points more likely to be
enrolled in school without affecting the enrollment of ineligible siblings. 28
Families’ perceptions of the conditionality of cash transfers matters. For example,
Schady & Araujo (2008) found that CCTs in Ecuador in 2003 improved enrollment in primary

time. These findings are consistent with those of Chitolina, Foguel, & Menezes-Filho (2013) in Brazil and those of
Dammert (2009) in Nicaragua.
28

These findings are consistent with those of CCTs that target girls. For example, Alam, Baez, & Del Carpio (2011)

found that a CCT that targeted girls in Punjab, Pakistan in 2003 increased their enrollment in middle school by 9
percentage points at no detriment to their male siblings. CCTs targeting girls have also improved their educational
outcomes in Punjab, Pakistan (Chaudhury & Parajuli 2010) and Cambodia (Filmer & Schady 2008). In fact, Hasan
(2010) found that CCTs targeting girls in grades 6 through 8 in Punjab, Pakistan in 2003 also made boys more likely
to enroll.

20

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
and secondary school by 3.7 percentage points even when the enrollment requirement was never
enforced. 29 Benhassine, Devoto, Duflo, Dupas, & Pouliquen (2013) found that “labeled cash
transfers” (i.e., not conditional on school attendance, but labeled as an education support
program) in Morocco in 2008 had roughly the same impact on attendance (about 7.3 percentage
points) as CCTs. 30 However, conditionality may serve as a commitment device in the mediumterm. Baird, McIntosh, & Ozler (2011) found that although “unconditional cash transfers”
(UCTs) targeting adolescent girls in Malawi in 2008 reduced dropout after two years, the impact
was only 43% as large as that of otherwise comparable CCTs. The authors found that the CCTs
produced a .06 SD impact on English test scores for each USD 100. 31
Only one type of CCTs has improved student achievement: merit scholarships. For
example, Kremer, Miguel, & Thornton (2009) assessed a program in Busia and Teso, Kenya that
awarded a scholarship for two years to girls in grade 6 with the top scores on district exams of
English, geography/history, mathematics, science, and Swahili. The program improved the
average test scores of girls in schools assigned to the program by .19 SDs across the five
subjects. In Busia, where the program was most successful, it produced .27 additional years of

29

The fact that beneficiaries thought that the conditions would be enforced, however, was crucial. Amarante,

Ferrando, & Vigorito (2011) found that CCTs in Uruguay in 2005 had no impact on school enrollment, but they
noted that only 20% of households were aware of the enrollment conditionality.
30

Ambler, Aycinena, & Yang (2013), however, found that matching grants for remittances intended for, but not

conditioned on education in El Salvador in 2011 did not increase student enrollment.
31

Conditionality may have other benefits. Akresh, De Walque, & Kazianga (2013) found that in Burkina Faso,

CCTs were more effective than UCTs in improving the enrollment of children who were initially less likely to go to
school. Bursztyn & Coffman (2012) found that in Distrito Federal, Brazil parents preferred CCTs over UCTs when
they lacked mechanisms to ensure that their children attend school.

21

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
student participation, a 1.37 SD increase in test scores, and 50 more days of teacher attendance
for each USD 100. 32
There is mixed evidence on whether the impact of CCTs on children’s developmental
outcomes depends on the size of the cash transfers. Fernald, Gertler, & Neufeld (2008) found
that doubling the size of a cash transfer in Mexico in 1998 improved children’s cognitive
development and receptive language. 33 Yet, Macours, Schady, & Vakis (2012) compared two
CCTs of different amounts in Nicaragua in 2005 and found that children in families assigned to
receive the larger transfers did not have better development outcomes than those assigned to
receive the smaller transfers.
Informing families of the long-term benefits of schooling. Some low-income parents do
not enroll their children in school because they underestimate the economic returns to
education. 34 Informing low-income families about the economic returns to schooling has

32

This evidence is consistent with that of Barrera-Osorio & Filmer (forthcoming), who compared need- and merit-

based scholarships in Cambodia in 2008 and found that both increased enrollment and attendance, but only the latter
had an effect on math achievement and memory (by .17 SDs and .14 SDs, respectively). Conventional CCTs have
been less successful in improving student achievement. For example, Filmer & Schady (2014) found that CCTs in
Cambodia in 2006 improved school enrollment and attendance, but cash recipients did no better on math and
vocabulary tests. This evidence is consistent with that of Baez & Camacho (2011) in Colombia. However, regular
CCTs may impact student achievement over the long run. For example, Barham, Macours, & Maluccio (2014)
found that a CCT in Nicaragua improved the reading, spelling, word identification, math fluency and problems, and
vocabulary of boys who were 9 to 12 years old at the start of the program (in 2000) 10 years later (in 2010).
33

See also Manley, Fernald, & Gertler (2015).

34

The traditional way in which governments have tried to influence the schooling decisions of these families is by

raising the number of compulsory years of education. This approach has increased educational attainment. For
example, Fang, Eggleston, Rizzo, Rozelle, & Zeckhauser (2012) found that extending the number of years of

22

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
increased both attainment and achievement. For example, Jensen (2010) found that providing
boys in eighth grade in the Dominican Republic in 2001 with information about the wages of
adults with different levels of education resulted in an average increase of .20 to .35 more years
of completed schooling. For each USD 100, the program yielded 3.1 additional years of student
participation. 35
What and how information is delivered matters. Nguyen (2009) found that asking
teachers to convey to parents and their children the economic returns to schooling in Madagascar
in 2007 improved student attendance by 3.5 percentage points and test scores in math, French,
and Malagasy by .20 SDs. For each USD 100, this program yielded a 118.34 SD effect on test
scores and 20.7 years of student participation. However, asking a “role model” of poor
background to share his/her educational experience and achievements had an impact on poor
children's test scores, but asking a role model of rich background had no effect.
Providing information about economic returns has had unintended consequences in some
settings. Loyalka et al. (2013) found that asking teachers in Hebei and Shaanxi, China to deliver
a lesson to their seventh graders about the economic returns to schooling and the availability and
cost of high schools had no effect on dropout rates, math achievement, or students’ plans to go to
high school. However, combining this lesson with three additional lessons about China’s

mandatory tuition-free education from six to nine in 1968 increased the attainment of Chinese children by .8 years of
schooling. Similarly, Spohr (2003), found that the same law increased the attainment of males and females in
Taiwan by .40 and .25 years of schooling, respectively. Yet, these papers cannot tease out whether the effects are
caused by the part of the reform that extended compulsory schooling or by the part that made the compulsory years
tuition-free.
35

Similarly, Jensen (2012) found that recruiting for the business processing industry in India in 2003 increased the

enrollment of girls ages 6 to 17 by 5 percentage points.

23

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
economy, and strategies for identifying career interests and navigating China’s education system
resulted in a 2 percentage point increase in the student dropout rate and reduced math
achievement by .14 SDs. The authors speculated that providing information about the relatively
high wages for unskilled labor may have dissuaded students from going to high school. 36
Offering incentives to students. Many students have a hard time seeing how behaving
and/or doing well in school will pay off. One policy response has been to offer students
incentives to perform better in school.
Interventions that reward students for obtaining a minimum score on an exam have
generally not succeeded in raising student achievement. For example, Angrist & Lavy (2009)
found that offering cash to students for passing the national high school exit exam in Israel in
2000 had no effect on the average passing rates of students. Interventions that reward students
for their scores (i.e., so that students’ rewards are proportional to their performance) have fared
better. For example, Sharma (2010) found that offering cash to eighth graders in Nepal in 2009
based on their average grades in nine compulsory subjects improved their average aggregate
scores by .09 SDs. 37
The design of incentives matters. For example, Li, Han, Zhang, & Rozelle (2014) found
that providing cash rewards to the parents of primary school students in Beijing, China that made

36

In a related intervention, Dinkelman & Martínez (2013) found that providing low-income eighth graders with

information about how to finance higher education in Chile in 2009 reduced student absenteeism in primary school
by 8 to 10 percentage points, and increased enrollment in college preparatory secondary schools by 6 percentage
points. However, providing this information to parents had no effects.
37

Different rewards may appeal to different types of students. For example, Berry (2014) found that in Gurgaon,

India non-cash incentives were more effective for low-achieving students, whereas cash incentives were more
effective for high performers.

24

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
the greatest improvement in school grades had no impact on students’ test scores. Yet, offering
an additional reward to a high-achieving student for serving as a peer tutor improved math and
reading test scores by .14 SDs. They also found that calling parents to explain the intervention to
them (in addition to the cash incentives and peer tutoring) improved math and reading
achievement by .2 SDs. 38
Cash incentives for students based on measures of academic performance may elicit
dysfunctional responses. Behrman, Parker, Todd, & Wolpin (2015) found that providing
Mexican high school students with cash incentives for reaching minimum scores on a math exam
led between 8.4 and 14.9% of students to cheat in the first year of the experiment, and the
percentage increased in each of the next two years.
Improving access to better schools. Even if parents understand the potential value of
schooling, they may choose not to enroll their children if they perceive the quality of their local
schools to be too low to yield benefits. To address this problem, several interventions have tried
to: (a) provide families with information about the quality of available schools; or (b) expand
schooling options for these families.
Providing information about school quality. Some argue that providing parents with
information about the performance of schools can help them make better decisions about where
to send their children to school, and demand improvements in their schools. The modest amount
of evidence bearing on this hypothesis is encouraging.
38

This evidence is consistent with that of Blimpo (2014), who found that providing cash incentives for individual

students in Benin in 2008 improved the average aggregate test scores in seven subjects by .29 SDs, offering the
incentives to teams of students improved test scores by .27 SDs, and making teams compete for the incentives
improved test scores by .34 SDs. Although the impacts of the different treatments varied, the author could not rule
out the possibility that they are all equally effective.

25

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
Andrabi, Das, & Khwaja (2009) provided parents (and schools) in Punjab, Pakistan in
2004 with a report card that displayed the test scores of their own children and the average scores
of students in all schools in each village. As a result, children’s test scores in English, math, and
Urdu improved by an average of .11 SDs. The gain persisted for two years after the intervention.
Much of this improvement was driven by a .31 SD increase in the test scores of students’
enrolled in private schools. Student test scores in public schools also improved, albeit only by
.10 SDs. These findings suggest that information spurs competition among private schools and
also enables parents to demand changes in public schools. 39
Expanding schooling options. A number of interventions have tried to make private
schools more accessible to children from low-income families. In some countries, all public

39

As Mizala & Urquiola (2013) contend, however, a school’s average test score is a poor indicator of their quality;

schools with more students from low-income families may have low average scores even if they are improving the
achievement of their students. Thus, they assessed whether schools that were identified as being among the top 25%
within a group of schools serving students of similar socio-economic status in Chile in 2002 improved educational
outcomes. They found no impact of this policy on school enrollment. Yet, this study is problematic for at least two
reasons. First, unlike the one in Pakistan, it did not compare responses across educational markets with different
levels of information, but rather schools within a market with the same level of information. Second, and perhaps
more importantly, schools that rank in the top 25% also received a monetary bonus, so this study estimated the effect
of information and bonuses rather than the effect of information alone. Other studies on this subject are also
problematic. For example, Camargo, Camelo, Firpo, & Ponczek (2011) found that a reform in 2006 that disclosed
the average scores of the college entrance exam of high schools with more than 10 students improved the
performance of private schools by .2 to .6 SDs, but did not affect the performance of public schools. However, it
has been widely documented that schools with too few students have noisier average test scores (Kane & Staiger
2001, 2002), which is probably why the minimum threshold of students was instituted in the first place. This makes
the effects difficult to interpret.

26

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
school students are eligible to receive vouchers. These are known as “universal” voucher
systems. 40 In other countries, only low-income families are eligible. These are known as
“targeted” voucher systems.
In some contexts, targeted vouchers have had positive short- and medium-term impacts.
For example, Angrist, Bettinger, Bloom, King, & Kremer (2002) found that a voucher program
in Colombia in 1991 had no impact on enrollment in secondary school, but it increased the
attainment of students assigned to vouchers by .10 years of schooling and their test scores on
math, reading, and writing by .20 SDs after three years. Angrist, Bettinger, & Kremer (2006)
found that the voucher offer increased the probability that youths from low-income families
graduated from secondary school by 6 to 7 percentage points, and it improved their performance
on college entrance exams. 41

40

Hsieh & Urquiola (2006) found that a universal voucher system in Chile, in place since 1981, which provided all

families with children with the same valued vouchers had no effect on test scores, repetition rates, or years of
schooling. This system increased school segregation by income, with low-income students concentrated in different
schools than those serving students from higher-income families. Contreras (2001) found that students who were
more likely to attend private, voucher-accepting schools in Chile because they had more such schools in their
neighborhood performed better on standardized scores. However, school density is likely to be influenced by the
intensity of families’ interest in school quality.
41

Bettinger, Kremer, & Saavedra (2010) report that, among voucher applicants to vocational schools, students who

were offered a voucher were less likely to attend an academic secondary school than those not offered a voucher and
consequently had lower-achieving peers. Yet, the students offered vouchers had better educational outcomes. This
suggests that improved peer groups was not the only mechanism through which vouchers resulted in improved
academic performance.

27

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
These findings are encouraging. 42 However, it is possible that the initiative influenced
the achievement of students other than those who used vouchers to switch to private schools.
One plausible mechanism is that public school students who switched to private schools may
have reduced peer group quality both in the public schools they left and in the private schools to
which they moved.
Muralidharan & Sundararaman (2015) designed an experiment in Andhra Pradesh, India
in 2008 to address both of these concerns. First, they invited students attending public schools in
a number of villages to apply for vouchers to attend private schools (we call these students
“voucher applicants”). Then, they randomly selected some of those villages to be those in which
some applicants would be awarded vouchers for private schooling (we call these villages
“voucher villages”). In voucher villages, a random subset of voucher applicants was awarded
vouchers. This two-stage lottery allowed the authors to examine the impact of the vouchers on
lottery winners as well as the potential spillover effects of the program on non-applicants in
public schools and on students who were already in private schools at the start of the experiment.
Muralidharan and Sundararaman assessed the skills of students in participating villages
two and four years after the start of the experiment. They found that voucher winners in voucher
villages performed about the same in Telugu and math as voucher applicants in non-voucher

42

These findings are also consistent with those of other studies that sought to increase student choice. For example,

Lavy (2010) found that a program that ended forced busing and allowed students greater choice among secondary
schools in Tel Aviv, Israel in 1994 significantly reduced dropout rates and increased the cognitive achievement of
high school students after six years. As Wong, Luo, Zhang, & Rozelle (2013) found in Henan, China, the quality of
the schools where the vouchers can be redeemed is crucial in understanding why some vouchers have impacts and
others do not. The authors found that vouchers for pre-school attendance improved attendance by 20 percentage
points, but had no impact on school readiness. They attributed these results to the poor quality of pre-schools.

28

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
villages. However, after four years, students in the first group performed .12 SDs better in
English and .55 SDs better in Hindi (a subject taught only at private schools) than students in the
second group. Importantly, this improvement did not occur at the expense of non-applicants or
lottery losers in public schools, or of non-applicants who already attended private schools. Since
the cost of schooling in the private schools was considerably less than the cost of public
schooling (because teacher salaries were much lower), the authors contend that this voucher
system was a cost-efficient way to improve the schooling of children from low-income families.
An alternative approach to vouchers is to offer per-student subsidies to private schools
that serve low-income students without charging tuition or fees. In Pakistan, the only developing
country where these initiatives have been rigorously evaluated, they have had promising results.
For example, Barrera-Osorio et al. (2013) found that per-student subsidies to private primary
schools in Sindh, Pakistan in 2009 increased enrollment by 30 percentage points and language
and math test scores by .67 SDs. 43
However, the success of per-student subsidies may depend on the level of capacity to set
up and maintain private schools. Alderman, Kim, & Orazem (2003) compared two programs in
Balochistan, Pakistan that invited local associations in urban and rural areas to set up their own
private schools and paid them per girl enrolled. The program in urban areas increased girls’
enrollment, but the one in rural areas did not. The authors speculated that this was because urban

43

Similarly, Barrera-Osorio & Raju (forthcoming) found that accountability-based per-student subsidies in Punjab,

Pakistan increased enrollment by 59 percent. An approach that has received far less attention in developing
countries is the creation of excellent schools for disadvantaged students. Loyalka, Wei, & Zhong (2015) found that
building two “elite” secondary schools in Ningxia, China in 2003 and 2006 increased college attendance by 8.6 to
14.4 percentage points, depending on how the effect was estimated.

29

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
areas had more out-of-school children not served by public schools, a better local pool of
teachers, and more adults with the knowledge needed to manage private schools successfully.
Improving the Supply of Education
Increasing the quantity or quality of resources. Children from low-income families
typically live in homes and attend schools with few educational resources. Many interventions
have: (a) increased resources at school; (b) increased resources at students’ homes; or (c)
expanded instructional time.
Increasing resources at school. A number of interventions have provided schools with
teaching inputs, such as textbooks, libraries, or flipcharts. These inputs have not improved
student achievement for two reasons: sometimes, they are not used; and other times, they are
used but they do not markedly alter children’s daily experiences at school.
The case of textbooks illustrates the first reason. Glewwe, Kremer, & Moulin (2009)
found that providing free official textbooks in English, math, and science to students in grades 3
through 8 in Busia and Teso, Kenya in 1995 had no impact on English, math, or science test
scores on average. The authors explain that most students could not read the books because they
were written in English, most students’ third language. 44
The case of flipcharts illustrates the second reason additional resources did not produce
greater student achievement. Glewwe, Kremer, Moulin, & Zitzewitz (2004) found that providing
flipcharts to primary schools in Busia and Teso, Kenya in 1998 (charts for science, health, and
math; a teacher’s guide for science; and a map for geography) had no impact on eighth grade test
44

Similarly, Sabarwal, Evans, & Marshak (2013) found that providing free textbooks to government, government-

assisted, and community primary schools in Sierra Leone in 2008 had no impact on enrollment, attendance, or
achievement. Yet, these results are explained by the actions of school principals who, fearing a shortage of
textbooks in the future, stored the textbooks instead of giving them to students.

30

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
scores. This occurred even though 98% of teachers knew that their school had received
flipcharts, 91% said they had used them, and 92% reported that they were useful. A likely
explanation is that teachers lacked the knowledge of how to use these resources to improve
instruction and thereby to change students’ experiences in school. 45
This problem also emerges in recent initiatives that provide schools with desktop
computers or laptops. Barrera-Osorio & Linden (2009) found that installing refurbished
computers in public schools and encouraging teachers to use them to teach reading in Colombia
in 2002 had no impact on students’ Spanish or math test scores. 46 The reason was that teachers
of core subjects did not integrate them into their classroom instruction. Cristia, Ibarrarán, Cueto,
Santiago, & Severín (2012) found the same pattern of results from an initiative that provided free
laptops with 39 educational applications and 200 e-books to students in rural regions of Peru.
An alternative to providing schools with specific inputs, which they may not know how
to use, is to offer funds that schools may use to purchase whatever inputs they feel they need.
Interestingly, however, Das et al. (2013) found that school grants in Andhra Pradesh, India and
Zambia had a positive impact on student outcomes when they were unexpected, but had no
impact when they were expected. In India, school grants that were announced late in the school
year improved language and math scores by .08 and .09 SDs, respectively, but had no impact in
the following year, when they were expected. In Zambia, well-publicized grants in 2001 had no
45

The pressure to use resources may take away from regular instruction. Borkum, He, & Linden (2013) found that

equipping schools with libraries and having librarians provide reading-focused activities in Bangalore, India in 2007
had no impact on students’ scores on a language test. In fact, a version of the program in which schools did not
house the libraries, but had librarians visit schools reduced test scores.
46

This evidence is consistent with that of Angrist & Lavy (2002), who found that the installation of computers in

primary and lower secondary schools in Israel in 1994 did not improve test scores.

31

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
impact on student achievement, but discretionary district-level funding, which is harder to
predict, improved English and math test scores by .10 SDs. A clue to the explanation for this
puzzling pattern is that in both settings parents responded to grants that were anticipated by
reducing their own expenditures on education. Thus, these increases in public funds did not
markedly increase the total resources devoted to children’s education. 47
Increasing resources at home. Many children in developing countries lack basic
educational resources at home. To stimulate their learning at school, several interventions have
provided children with resources they can take home—typically, desktop computers or laptops.
These initiatives have not improved student achievement. For example, Malamud & PopEleches (2011) found that low-income students aged 7 to 19 in Romania who were offered
vouchers to purchase personal computers in 2004 performed worse in math, English, and

47

Bjorkman (2007) studied how funds for schools in different districts of Uganda affected student achievement.

She took advantage of variation across districts in newspaper penetration, and consequently, in the potential impact
of a newspaper campaign aimed at preventing substitution of public funds for private funds. She found that students
in districts exposed to the information campaign (and hence to the grant program) scored .40 SDs higher on a test
that covered math, English, science, and social studies. However, before the intervention, student achievement in
districts with high newspaper penetration may not have increased at the same rate as in districts with low newspaper
penetration. An alternative to school grants that has received less attention is the introduction of school-based
savings accounts. Karlan & Linden (2013) compared two variations of this approach in Busoga, Uganda in 2009.
The first version set up savings accounts for students at their school and gave them back the money in cash they had
deposited at the end of each trimester, in time for purchasing school supplies. The second version gave them back
the money in vouchers, so that their parents could only use it to buy school supplies. They found the first version
improved students’ test scores in grammar and reading, but only when it was combined with a program that
informed parents about how they could support their children’s education. The second version had no effect on any
educational outcomes.

32

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
Romanian by .25, .33, and .30 SDs, respectively, although they increased their computer skills
and performed better on a test of intelligence. The apparent explanation is that students offered a
voucher reported spending more time playing computer games and less time reading and doing
homework. 48
Expanding instructional time. In many low-income countries, the average student
attends schools for only half the day (about four hours). In response to concerns that this may
not provide enough time for children to master critical skills, many developing countries have
lengthened their school days. Typically, they have accompanied this with an increase in material
resources. Studies of these combined initiatives typically find that they produced small
improvements in student achievement.
To our knowledge, there is only one study of the consequences of simply increasing
instructional time. 49 Orkin (2013) found that lengthening the school day from four to six hours

48

Similarly, Beuermann, Cristia, Cruz-Aguayo, Cueto, & Malamud (2013) found that providing students in Lima,

Peru with laptops in 2011 did not improve their performance on general personal computer and Internet skills, even
thought it did improve their performance by .88 SDs on an assessment of proficiency in handling the speciallydesigned laptop they were given. This policy also made children less likely to read books, stories, or magazines.
There was little evidence of spillover effects on general skills, even though friends of students assigned to receive a
laptop performed better on the assessment measuring how to handle that special laptop.
49

Bellei (2009) evaluated the full school day program in Chile in 1996 and found that every 10% increase in the

number of hours per day improved the Spanish and math test scores of tenth graders by .02 and .03 SDs,
respectively. Yet, this reform was accompanied by a one-time investment in school facilities (to construct or renew
classrooms, cafeteria, bathrooms, etc.) and a permanent increase in the amount of the public per-student subsidy.
Similarly, Lavy (2012) found that every 10% expansion in the hours devoted to English, math, and science per week
in Israel in 2004 improved the test scores of fifth graders in these subjects by .03 SDs. Yet, this increase was
accompanied by a change in funding formulas that altered school budgets. Agüero & Beleche (2013) found that

33

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
in Ethiopia in 2005 resulted in first through third graders being 2.17 to 2.74 times more likely to
be proficient in math and 3.51 to 4.18 times more likely to be proficient in writing, but had no
impact on their writing proficiency.
Addressing students’ individual learning needs. Teachers in many low- and middleincome countries struggle to meet the individual learning needs of heterogeneous student
populations. Several interventions have tried to: (a) help teachers personalize instruction; (b)
provide additional help to struggling students; or (c) use technology to facilitate students learning
at their own pace.
Helping teachers personalize instruction. A common strategy to enable teachers to cater
to students’ individual needs is to reduce the number of students per classroom. A number of
countries have done this, often by imposing a maximum class size rule. Evaluating the impact of
these rules, however, has been difficult because responses by principals, teachers, and parents
create differences between the characteristics of students in small and larger classes. 50 These
responses render invalid the common strategy of estimating the impact of class size by

every 10 additional days in school in Mexico in 2005-2007 improved the math achievement of students in grades 4
and 5 by .04 and .05 SDs, respectively. Yet, their estimation relies on arbitrary variation in testing dates, which does
not allow teachers to plan to use their time differently.
50

For example, Urquiola & Verhoogen (2009) showed that a maximum class size rule in Chile led to two important

responses: high-income parents of children who were assigned to a large class moved them to another school, and
principals of private schools manipulated admissions to avoid triggering class size reductions that would necessitate
hiring additional teachers.

34

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
comparing the performances of students in classrooms just below and just above the maximum
class size. 51
The best available evidence is that class size reductions in developing countries are
effective only when initial class sizes are very large, the reductions radically change the number
of students in the classroom, and students are tracked by their initial achievement. Duflo, Dupas,
& Kremer (2011) compared two interventions in Western Province, Kenya in 2005. One offered
funds to primary schools to split their first grade class into two sections and hire a teacher on a
contractual basis to teach the extra section. The second did the same, but also required schools
to assign students to classes based on their prior achievement. On average, class size reductions
lowered the average number of students per class from 91 to 44 students in non-tracking schools
and from 89 to 42 students in tracking schools. After 18 months, math and literacy test scores
were .14 SDs higher in tracking than in non-tracking schools. In fact, the combination of smaller
classes and tracking raised the scores of students of all initial achievement levels. This
intervention yielded a 34.56 SD effect for each USD 100 when the authors accounted for the
baseline characteristics of the treatment and control groups.
Tracking students across schools has had different consequences than tracking them to
different classes within schools. In some developing countries, students are assigned to
secondary schools based on their performance at the end of primary school. For example, PopEleches & Urquiola (2013) found that a rule in Romania that allows students to choose their
secondary school based on their performance on a nationwide exam improved the performance

51

Two papers that meet our search criteria used this strategy (Asadullah 2005; Urquiola 2006). As Chin (2005)

showed in the case of India, an alternative is to compare students in different cohorts and states. Yet, in the reform
she evaluated, due to misallocation of teachers, class sizes were ultimately not reduced.

35

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
of students right above a pre-determined cutoff by .02 to .10 SDs. 52 This policy, however, also
had unintended consequences. Teachers with higher certification credentials gravitated to betterranked schools. Parents reduced their effort (e.g., helping students with their homework) when
their children were admitted to a better school. And finally, children who were admitted to a
better school by a small margin perceived themselves as weak and marginalized. 53
Another approach to helping teachers personalize instruction is to give them feedback on
their students’ achievement. Existing evidence suggests that simply providing teachers with
diagnostics is not effective. For example, Muralidharan & Sundararaman (2010) found that
providing teachers in grades 1 through 5 in Andhra Pradesh, India in 2005 with the results of
diagnostic tests increased teacher effort, but did not improve the achievement of their students.
Feedback for teachers only improves student achievement when it is accompanied by
initiatives that build teachers’ capacity or make their jobs more manageable. For example,
Duflo, Berry, Mukerji, & Shotland (2015) found that simply replacing high stakes exams with
more frequent evaluation of students by teachers had no impact on the achievement of students
in grades 1 through 8 in Haryana, India in 2012. Yet, assessing students’ skills at the start of the
52

This evidence is consistent with that of De Hoop (2010), who found that students assigned to better-ranked

schools in Malawi increased progression to the second year of secondary school by 50%, without a reduction in
student achievement. Similarly, Jackson (2010) found that students assigned to better-ranked schools in Trinidad
and Tobago performed better on secondary school exit exams. As Jackson (2013) showed, much of the benefit
derived from these schools is from interacting with high-achieving peers. Yet, the dimension along which students
are tracked across schools matters. Jackson (2012) found that, on average, students assigned to single-sex schools in
Trinidad and Tobago perform no better on their tenth grade exams.
53

A related, but different policy that aims to help teachers personalize instruction is grade retention. To our

knowledge, there is only one rigorous evaluation of this type of policy. Chen, Liu, Zhang, Shi, & Rozelle (2010)
found that a grade retention policy in Shaanxi, China had no impact on Chinese language scores.

36

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
year and setting aside a portion of the school day to group and teach students according to their
ability level improved the achievement of students in grades 1 through 5 in oral and written
Hindi by .15 and .14 SDs, respectively. 54
Providing additional help to students. Another way to address students’ needs is to offer
additional support to low-achieving students. Banerjee, Cole, Duflo, & Linden (2007) assessed
the effect of hiring young female high school graduates in Mumbai, India in 2001 to take lowachieving students in grades 3 and 4 out of class for two hours during the school day and provide
them with remedial instruction using a highly structured curriculum. The program increased
math and language test scores by .14 SDs after the first year, and by .28 SDs after the second
year. For every USD 100, the program yielded a 3.05 SD effect after the first year. 55
Some interventions provide students with a mix of academic and non-academic support.
These programs have been difficult to implement. For example, Cabezas, Cuesta, & Gallego
(2011) assessed a three-month program in Gran Santiago and Bío Bío, Chile in which fourth
graders met 15 times with college volunteers who read them age-appropriate texts. On average,
54

Similarly, Piper & Korda (2011) found that a program with four components in Liberia in 2008 had a positive

impact on seven positive literacy outcomes ranging from .39 to 1.23 SDs. The components included assessing the
reading proficiency of students in grades 2 and 3 in Liberia in 2008, training teachers on how to assess student
performance, providing them with pedagogical support and books, and providing parents and the community with
student report cards.
55

This evidence is consistent with that of Lavy & Schlosser (2005), who found that a short-term remedial education

program that provided additional instruction to underperforming secondary school students in Israel in 1999 raised
the school mean matriculation rate. Duc & Baulch (2012) used the enrollment of a child’s peers in extra classes in
Vietnam to estimate the effect of that child’s attending extra classes. They found that the number of hours students
spent in extra classes had no impact on mathematics and vocabulary assessments. Yet, the enrollment of peers in
extra classes is likely to directly influence achievement.

37

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
the program did not improve the cognitive skills of the students. One reason may be that
volunteer turnover was high in Gran Santiago. 56
Using technology to facilitate students learning at their own pace. Instead of asking
teachers to cater to students’ individual needs, some initiatives have experimented with
computer-assisted learning (CAL). These are (typically, game-based) computer programs that
include exercises focusing on basic skills required by the official curricula.
These programs have generally improved student achievement. For example, Banerjee et
al. (2007) assessed a program that provided children in grade 4 with two hours of shared
computer time per week (one hour during class time and one hour either before or after school)
to interact with game-based CAL software focused on the basic competencies of the official
math curriculum in Gujarat, India in 2002. The program improved math achievement by .35 SDs
after one year and .47 SDs after two years. For every USD 100, the program yielded a 1.54 SD
effect after two years. 57
These programs are most effective when they are a complement to, rather than a
substitute for conventional classroom instruction. Linden (2008) compared two versions of the
CAL program discussed above in Gujarat, India in 2004: an out-of-school time version, which

56

Similarly, Huan et al. (2014) found that providing school counseling to seventh and eighth graders in Shaanxi,

China in 2013 reduced dropout rates by 25% after six months, but it had no impact on dropout rates after a year. In
part, this seemed to be because students found counseling more important and interesting after six months than at the
end of the year.
57

The benefits of some programs persist over time. For example, Lai et al. (2013) found that a game-based CAL

program for math held outside of regular school hours in Shaanxi, China in 2011 improved the math test scores of
third and fifth graders by .12 SDs after six months. Mo et al. (2014) then found that after a year and a half of being
implemented, the program improved the math scores of third and fifth graders by .25 and .26 SDs, respectively.

38

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
took place either before or after school, and a pull-out program, which took place for two hours
during school. The first version improved students’ math test scores by .28 SDs. The second
version, however, reduced achievement by .57 SDs from what it would have been in the absence
of the program. 58
In other settings, these programs have been found effective when implemented during
time allotted to computer class. For example, Mo et al. (2014) assessed use of game-based CAL
software for math in Shaanxi, China in 2011. The initiative entailed two 40-minute instructorsupervised sessions per week, in which two students shared one computer. Participation was
compulsory and instructors took attendance regularly. The program improved the math test
scores of third and fifth graders by .16 SDs.
These programs can be combined with provision of laptops, which by themselves have
had no impact on student achievement. Mo et al. (2013) assessed a program in Beijing, China in
2011 that provided third grade migrant students with free laptops on which three tutoring
programs were installed: a commercial, game-based, math CAL program, a similar program for
Chinese, and a math CAL program devised by the research team jointly with experts. The
researchers trained students and their parents to interact with the computer, so that parents could

58

This evidence is consistent with that of Lai, Luo, Zhang, Huang, & Rozelle (forthcoming), who found that a

game-based CAL program in Beijing, China in 2010 that included two 40-minute sessions per week during lunch
break or after school improved the math test scores of third graders by .14 SDs. Similarly, Lai et al. (2012) found
that a game-based CAL program for Mandarin held outside of regular school hours in Qinghai, China in 2011
improved the test scores of third graders in Mandarin and math by .14 to .20 SDs and .22 to .23 SDs, respectively.
Yang et al. (2013) found that girls and boys benefited equally from three programs in Beijing, Shaanxi, and Qinghai,
China. Yet, when Huang et al. (2014) considered two more programs, they found some evidence that boys benefited
more from CAL programs for Chinese than girls.

39

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
supervise children at home. The program improved students’ computer skills by .33 SDs and
math test scores by .17 SDs. 59
Increasing teacher and/or principal effort. In some developing countries, teachers are
often absent from school; when they are in school, they are not always teaching or preparing
classes; and when they are teaching, they devote too much time to non-instructional tasks. In
response to these problems, a number of interventions have: (a) increased the role of parents and
communities in school management; (b) offered incentives to teachers and principals; and (c)
hired teachers on fixed-term, renewable contracts.
Increasing the role of parents and communities in school management. Many
interventions have tried to involve parents and community members in monitoring teacher and
principal performance and managing schools. The rationale behind most of these initiatives is
twofold. First, parents and communities have a clear incentive to make schools work. Second,
parents and communities may also understand the needs of their schools better than national or
regional authorities.
The least intrusive of these interventions provide information to communities about
opportunities to get involved. Evaluations indicate that more information does not consistently
translate into greater involvement. For example, Banerjee, Banerji, Duflo, Glennerster, &
Khemani (2010) found that providing information to communities in Uttar Pradesh, India in
2005 about the existence of village education councils, their membership, resources, and roles
59

CAL programs have also been useful complements to programs that donate computers to schools. Carrillo,

Onofa, & Ponce (2011) assessed a program in Guayaquil, Ecuador in 2007 that donated four computers to primary
schools, installed on those computers a CAL program for math and language, trained teachers and principals on
computing skills and the software, and engaged parents at various stages. They found that the program improved
the math achievement of third through fifth graders by .38 SDs after two years, but had no impact on language skills.

40

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
did not increase the involvement of parents, local authorities, and teachers in public schools, and
did not reduce student and teacher absenteeism. Combining this information with training for
community members about how to administer a testing tool for children had similar results. 60
Similar interventions have affected intermediate outcomes, but have had only small and
isolated effects on student achievement. Pandey, Goyal, & Sundararaman (2009) assessed the
impact of providing information to communities on their oversight roles in schools and education
services in Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, and Uttar Pradesh, India in 2006. The intervention
increased teacher attendance by 7 percentage points in Uttar Pradesh, but on average it had no
effect in Madhya Pradesh. It had no effect on teacher activity (i.e., whether the teacher was
teaching) in Uttar Pradesh, but it increased teacher activity in Madhya Pradesh by 9 percentage
points. The intervention produced small improvements (from .03 to .08 SDs) only on some subtests of math and reading for some grades, and did not do so consistently across sites. 61
A more intrusive approach is to provide schools with monetary grants that community
members play a role in administering. The effect of these interventions has depended on the preexisting level of community capacity. For example, Beasley & Huillery (2015) found that

60

As Barr, Mugisha, Serneels, & Zeitlin (2012) have shown in Uganda, one reason why more information does not

always lead to more participation is because of coordination problems. They found that an intervention that trained
and supported members of management committees of primary schools to administer a report card with information
on school performance had no effect on student or teacher absenteeism, or on student test scores. However, a
similar intervention in which the members of these committees were engaged in a dialogue to design their own
monitoring instrument reduced student and teacher absenteeism and improved test scores.
61

Similarly, Reinikka & Svensson (2011) found that in 1997, when the government of Uganda began publishing

information about the amounts of funds for education transferred to districts in national newspapers, enrollment in
primary school increased. However, they found small effects on test scores.

41

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
providing monetary grants to primary schools in Tahoua and Zinder, Niger in 2007 increased
parental participation and student enrollment in the early grades. However, teacher absenteeism
increased, and there was no impact on student achievement. The authors concluded that parents
lacked the authority and capacity to use the additional funds to improve school quality. 62
School grants seem to be most effective when they are combined with interventions that
build the capacity of communities. For example, Pradhan et al. (2014) compared the impact of
seven variations of a school grants program in Indonesia in 2007: grants by themselves; grants
combined with training on planning, budgeting, and management; grants combined with
guidelines for school committee elections and roles; grants combined with joint planning
meetings between school committees and village councils; and combinations of the last three
variations. They found that grants combined with joint planning meetings improved language
test scores by .17 SDs. For each USD 100, this intervention yielded a 34.62 SD effect. When
the grants were also combined with guidelines for school committee elections, they improved

62

This evidence is consistent with that of Gertler, Patrinos, & Rubio-Codina (2012), who found that providing

monetary grants to parent associations that they could use for infrastructure or materials for schools in Mexico in
1996 reduced grade failure by 7.4% and grade repetition by 5.5% in grades 1 to 3. However, the program had no
effects on extremely poor communities. Similarly, Blimpo & Evans (2011) found that a program that combined
school grants with school management training for principals, teachers, and community members in primary schools
in the Gambia reduced student absenteeism by 21% and teacher absenteeism by 23%. However, it had no impact on
average math and English test scores after three years. Finally, Carneiro, Koussihouèdé, Lahire, Meghir, &
Mommaerts (2015) found that a school grants program in Senegal in 2010 had a positive effects on the oral
proficiency of female third graders. Yet, the effects were driven by schools in the south of the country, which spent
the funds on human resources improvements rather than school materials.

42

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
language test scores by .23 SDs. For each USD 100, this intervention yielded a 13.34 SD effect.
On average, no intervention improved math achievement. 63
Offering incentives to teachers and/or principals. The evidence from impact evaluations
of initiatives that provide additional compensation to educators indicates that it is not the size,
but the structure of compensation that matters. Even small pay increases can improve teacher
effort and student achievement when made conditional on desired and attainable outcomes.
There are very few evaluations of unconditional pay increases that meet our inclusion
criteria. One that does was conducted by de Ree, Muralidharan, Pradhan, & Rogers (2015).
They assessed the impact of permanently doubling the base pay of teachers in 120 randomly
selected primary and junior secondary public schools in Indonesia in 2009. They found that,
after two and three years, the doubling in pay led to no improvements in teacher effort or student
learning outcomes. 64
There are two types of conditional pay increases that have been rigorously evaluated:
those that reward teachers for additional effort and those that reward them for improving the
performance of their students on standardized tests. Several interventions have offered cash or

63

This evidence is consistent with that of Lassibille, Tan, Jesse, & Nguyen (2010), who found that the

implementation of tools to streamline and tighten the workflow process of all actors across the service delivery chain
in Madagascar in 2005 improved school attendance and reduced repetition, but on average, did not improve student
achievement on French, math, and Malagasy. The impact of the reform did not vary by teacher type (i.e., regular v.
contract teachers) (Glewwe & Maïga 2011).
64

In contrast, Menezes-Filho & Pazello (2007) found that increases in the relative salaries of public school teachers

in Brazil in 1998 improved student achievement on the national exam of Portuguese, math, and science. However,
as the authors discuss, their estimation relies on the assumption that unobserved differences in proficiency across
systems within municipalities are constant over time.

43

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
in-kind rewards to teachers for regular attendance. The results indicate that these programs work
only when monitoring is systematic and non-discretional. Duflo, Hanna, & Ryan (2012)
assessed a program in Rajasthan, India in 2003 that provided teachers in non-formal education
centers with tamper-proof cameras, required that they took pictures of themselves and their
students in school every day, and offered them bonuses based on the number of days they
attended. The program reduced teacher absenteeism by 21 percentage points and improved
students’ math and Hindi test scores by .17 SDs after 30 months. For every USD 100, the
intervention yielded a 2.27 SD improvement in student achievement and 45 days of additional
teacher attendance.
Teacher incentive programs that rely on principals or parents to monitor attendance and
distribute incentives have not been successful. For example, Chen, Glewwe, Kremer, & Moulin
(2001) assessed a program that provided teacher training, classroom materials, and incentives for
teacher attendance to pre-schools in Busia and Teso, Kenya in 1997. Principals had to track
teacher attendance and distribute the bonuses. Funds not paid as bonuses could be used for other
school-related purposes. Principals typically paid the entire bonus to teachers regardless of
attendance. The program had no impact on teacher attendance or students’ test scores. 65
Several interventions have offered teachers cash incentives for improving the
performance of their students on standardized tests. Some of these programs have increased
student achievement. For example, Muralidharan & Sundararaman (2011) compared two teacher
incentive programs in Andhra Pradesh, India in 2005. One provided a group bonus that was
65

Similarly, de Laat, Kremer, & Vermeersch (2008) assessed a program in Busia, Kenya in 2002 in which school

committees were asked to evaluate teachers on ten dimensions (e.g., attendance and punctuality, pedagogical
methods, student discipline, relations with parents, attitudes towards students) and nominate teachers for in-kind
rewards (e.g., bicycles, household items, or pens). The program did not increase the average attendance of teachers.

44

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
distributed to all teachers in a school, based on the average improvement of all students in that
school on tests of math and language; a second provided an individual bonus to each teacher that
was based on the average improvement of his or her students on standardized tests. After one
year, both programs performed equally well: the group bonus and individual bonuses improved
test scores in math and Telugu by .14 and .16 SDs, respectively. Yet, after two years, the
individual bonus performed better, increasing test scores by .28 SDs compared to an increase of
.15 SDs for the group bonus. 66
In some cases, incentive programs have elicited dysfunctional responses. For example,
Glewwe, Ilias, & Kremer (2010) assessed a program in Busia and Teso, Kenya in 1997 that
offered teachers of grades 4 through 8 in-kind prizes (e.g., suits, plates, and bed linens) based on
the average performance and improvement of students on government exams of multiple subjects
(English, math, science/agriculture, Swahili, geography, arts/music, and business). The program
improved the achievement of students on the tests linked to the incentives by .14 SDs after two
years. For each USD 100, the intervention yielded a 4.54 SD improvement. Yet, it did not
improve students’ scores on tests of the same subjects that were not linked to the incentives.
This pattern suggests that teachers focused on drilling students on the types of items included on
the tests that affected bonuses and that this did not produce meaningful increases in students’
skills.
66

This evidence is consistent with that of McEwan & Santibáñez (2005), who found that teachers who were

assigned to receive a bonus based on their performance on an evaluation system in Mexico in 1999 had better
classroom-level test scores. Similarly, Lavy (2009) found that a program that offered individual bonuses to teachers
based on the performance of their students on secondary school matriculation exams in English and math in Israel in
2000 increased test-taking rates, pass rates, and mean test scores. Lavy (2013) found that male and female teachers
performed equally well and that female performance did not differ by the gender mix of the competition group.

45

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
Some of these programs include provisions to discourage dysfunctional responses, but
these provisions generate their own responses. For example, Barrera-Osorio & Raju (2015)
compared three teacher incentive programs in Punjab, Pakistan in 2010: one that rewarded
teachers based on their school’s average gain on fifth grade assessments of math, science, and
Urdu; a similar one that rewarded principals based on the same metric; and another that rewarded
both teachers and principals based on this measure. To prevent schools from discouraging lowachieving students from enrolling or taking the tests, the formula used to allocate the incentives
also considered gains in schools’ enrollment in grades 1 to 5 and the test-taking participation rate
in grade 5. After three years, the program had no impact on test scores, but it increased
enrollment by 4.6% and test-taking participation rates by 3.4%. These findings suggest that,
when faced with incentives for multiple outcomes, some of which are difficult to attain, teachers
and principals respond by trying to influence the outcomes that they can affect most easily.
Hiring teachers on fixed-term, renewable contracts. In many developing nations, it is
very difficult to dismiss public school teachers for low effort or performance. This has led some
countries to try to reduce class sizes by hiring additional teachers on fixed-term, renewable
contracts. These “contract teachers” are often not professionally trained and are paid much
lower salaries than civil service teachers.
In the short-term, these initiatives have resulted in high effort among contract teachers
and higher student achievement. For example, Muralidharan & Sundararaman (2013) found that
contract teachers in primary schools in Andhra Pradesh, India in 2005 were much less likely than
regular teachers to be absent from school (18% v. 27%). After two years, students in schools
with an extra contract teacher performed .16 and .15 SDs better in assessments of math and
language, respectively.

46

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
Yet, hiring contract teachers may also lead to some undesirable responses. For example,
Duflo, Dupas, & Kremer (2015) assessed the impact of an initiative that divided grade 1 classes
in Western Province, Kenya in 2005 and hired contract teachers to teach the extra class. They
found that first graders assigned to civil service teachers did not improve their achievement in
math and literacy, even though the reform reduced the number of students per class from 82 to
42 on average. This was at least partly due to civil service teachers reducing their effort: after
the reform, they were less likely to be found in their classes teaching. In contrast, first graders
assigned to a contract teachers performed .24 SDs better in math and literacy. In fact, replacing
civil servants with contract teachers both increased student achievement and lowered costs. 67
In the settings where pay for performance or contract teachers have shown positive
impacts, student achievement and teacher attendance were extremely low. In such contexts,
well-designed incentives that reward outcomes that teachers can directly affect by increasing
their effort (e.g., less absence or more “time-on-task”) may produce gains that are “low hanging
fruit.” However, once this low-hanging fruit has been picked, further student learning
improvements may be constrained by the low skills of teachers in many developing countries. In
these cases, it is necessary to build the capacity of existing teachers.

67

How these reforms are taken to scale matters. Bold, Kimenyi, Mwabu, Ng'ang'a, & Sandefur (2013) compared

two ways of scaling-up a contract teacher reform in all Kenyan provinces in 2009: relying on the government or on
an international non-government organization. The first version improved math and English test scores by .18 SDs.
The second version had no effects on student achievement. The difference in the effectiveness of these two
approaches was possibly due to the fact that hiring of contract teachers in government schools showed more
evidence of nepotism and local capture, schools in the government treatment arm received fewer monitoring visits,
and teachers experienced longer salary delays.

47

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
Tackling teachers’ capacity. Classifying interventions aimed at increasing teachers’
effectiveness is difficult because there are often common elements across categories. However,
the following categories capture much of the variation: (a) increasing teachers’ skills; (b)
preparing lessons for teachers; and/or (c) encouraging students to teach each other.
Increasing teachers’ skills. The traditional approach to improving teacher capacity is to
provide in-service training (also called professional development). Developing countries often
spend large sums of money on these programs, but few have been rigorously evaluated.
Implementing professional development programs well is difficult. For example,
Yoshikawa et al. (2015) assessed a professional development program for pre-K and
kindergarten teachers in Santiago, Chile in 2008, that combined workshops and in-classroom
coaching on oral language and literacy development, socio-emotional development, and
coordination of early childhood development with health services. The quality of
implementation of the professional development varied widely. This was at least part of the
reason that the initiative had no impact on child outcomes. 68
Even training programs that have been implemented faithfully have not consistently
improved student achievement. For example, Zhang, Lai, Pang, Yi, & Rozelle (2013) found that

68

Angrist & Lavy (2001) found that an in-service training program that focused on pedagogical strategies to teach

Hebrew language skills, math, and English in Jerusalem, Israel in 1995 improved test scores in secular schools, but
not test scores of students in religious schools. The authors conclude that this was partly because the program
started later in religious schools and was implemented on a smaller scale.

48

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
an intensive, three-week in-service teacher training program for English teachers in Beijing,
China in 2009 had no impact on students’ scores on assessments of English. 69
Not all professional development efforts have been ineffective, however. Abeberese,
Kumler, & Linden (2014) assessed a month-long reading marathon in Tarlac, the Philippines in
2009, which trained teachers to incorporate reading into their curriculum, provided reading
materials appropriate for the age of their students, and encouraged children to read as many
books as possible during a 31-day period. This program increased the number of books students
read and improved the reading test scores of fourth graders by .13 SDs. In fact, for each USD
100, the program yielded a 1.18 SD effect. These effects persisted: after three months, students
assigned to the reading marathon performed .06 SDs better in reading.
Preparing lessons for teachers. Low-income countries where teacher capacity is very
low have experimented with scaffolding (i.e., providing teachers with very specific instructions
about how to deliver each of a set of lessons). These programs have improved student
achievement.
Lucas, McEwan, Ngware, & Oketch (2014) assessed the impact of a program that guides
teachers through a highly structured five-step process for developing children’s literacy skills,
and is accompanied by resources and mentoring. This initiative improved the scores of students
in grades 1 and 2 on an assessment of oral literacy in Kenya by .08 SDs and the scores of

69

Similarly, Yue et al. (2012) found that a training program for “life teachers” (i.e., teachers that support students in

boarding schools) in Shaanxi, China in 2007 that focused on students’ health, behavior, and academic performance
had no impact on students’ math achievement.

49

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
students in the same grades on assessments of written and oral literacy in Uganda by .20 and .18
SDs, respectively. It did not improve numeracy in either setting. 70
In some cases, teachers are given pre-recorded or scripted lessons. For example,
Naslund-Hadley, Parker, & Hernandez-Agramonte (2014) found that a program in Cordillera,
Paraguay in 2011 that integrated a 30-to-40-minute pre-recorded audio in Spanish and Guaraní
into math lessons, complemented with additional resources and teacher-led activities, improved
the math achievement of pre-school students by .15 SDs. 71
Tailoring the scaffolding approach to students’ skill levels matters. For example, He,
Linden, & MacLeod (2008) compared two approaches for teaching English in Maharashtra, India
in 2005: flashcards for teacher-led drills and a machine that let students learn at their own pace.
Both approaches improved the English test scores of students in grades 1 through 5: the first one
by .34 SDs and the second one by .55 SDs. Both also improved students’ math test scores: the
first one by .25 SDs and the second one by .39 SDs. However, low-achieving students benefited

70

Impact evaluations of similar interventions have also found that these initiatives improve student achievement in

the targeted subject or skill. Githua & Nyabwa (2008) found that “advance organizers” (i.e., analogies to illustrate
concepts) for math instruction in Nakuru, Kenya improved the math achievement of third graders. Spratt, King, &
Bulat (2013) found that a program that offered structured lessons, activities, and accompanying materials for
teaching early reading skills in Mali in 2009 improved the reading skills of students in grades 1 and 2, after one and
two years of exposure, respectively. Van Staden (2011) found that a four-step process to teach reading, which
included small-group discussions, a “word wall”, exercise of word association, an assessment of reading
proficiency, and teacher-led discussions improved the reading proficiency of English language learners in Free
State, South Africa.
71

Similarly, Piper (2009) found that a heavily scripted program to teach reading, composed of 45 lessons, in

Limpopo, Mpumalanga and North West, South Africa raised the reading achievement of first graders.

50

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
more from the teacher-directed method, whereas high-achieving students benefited more from
the method that allowed them to learn at their own pace.
The setting in which these pre-prepared lessons are delivered also matters. For example,
He, Linden, & MacLeod (2009) assessed a program in Mumbai, India in 2006 to teach children
aged four to five to read. The program combined storybooks, flashcards, and charts with a
library with age-appropriate texts. The program was implemented in three different settings:
public pre-schools, public primary schools, and pre-school classes outside of school created
specifically for this program. The versions of the program in public pre-schools and primary
schools produced more robust gains in students’ reading skills. In public schools, the program
was most effective when it took place outside of the hours of the regular school day.
Encouraging students to teach each other. Several interventions have attempted to
compensate for low teacher capacity by encouraging peer-to-peer learning. These programs
have worked best in secondary school, when students are most independent of the teacher. For
example, Wachanga & Mwangi (2004) found that a five-week intervention in which secondary
school chemistry students in Nakuru, Kenya performed experiments and then discussed the
results with their peers improved students’ performance in chemistry. 72
These programs have worked less well in lower grades, where the teacher needs to play a
more active role as facilitator. For example, Berlinski & Busso (2013) assessed the impact of an
approach to teaching seventh grade geometry in Costa Rica in 2011 that required students to
formulate and explain hypotheses, teachers to explain the material, and students to practice

72

Similarly, Ajaja & Eravwoke (2011) found that a six-week program that required junior secondary school students

in integrated science classes in Nigeria to discuss the material, help each other, and develop projects in groups,
improved their achievement in integrated science.

51

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
together. The program included a teachers’ manual and a students’ workbook with exercises.
The authors evaluated four versions of the program: one that only implemented the new
program, one in which the teacher had an interactive whiteboard, one in which student pairs
shared a laptop for two hours per week, and one in which each student had his or her own
computer. All four versions of the program resulted in lower student achievement in seventh
grade geometry than in regular classes without the program or the additional materials. 73
Discussion
In this concluding section, we summarize the evidence that led us to the four substantive
lessons listed in the introduction to the paper. We also suggest guidelines for describing
evidence from program evaluations.
Some of the lessons from the 223 recent rigorous impact evaluations we reviewed
concern increasing demand for more and better education. Reducing the cost of attending
school, by lowering the direct costs of schooling, reducing the costs of complements, or
improving school amenities, has generally increased children’s enrollment and attendance in
school. Yet, more time in school has not consistently resulted into higher achievement.
Preparing children to learn at school by providing medications or improving nutrition has
typically increased children’s participation in school, but it has rarely improved student
achievement. Initiatives aimed at influencing parental practices have been more effective in
improving the developmental and academic skills of children during their first few years of life.
73

Similarly, Beuermann, Naslund-Hadley, Ruprah, & Thompson (2013) assessed a program that aimed to teach

science in third grade in Lima, Peru in 2010 in which the teacher posed a problem, provided the materials to solve it,
and students had to conduct their own experiments and report their results. The program improved test scores on the
physical world assessment by .18 SDs, but not scores on assessments of understanding of the human body and the
environment.

52

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
Making schooling pay by compensating parents for the opportunity cost of sending their
children to school has increased children’s time in school. However, except for merit
scholarships, it has not resulted in higher student achievement. Informing families of the longterm benefits of schooling has increased schooling and achievement, but only when students (and
their parents) see it in their own interest to stay in school and learn more. Offering incentives to
students to perform better in school has improved student achievement, but in some cases it has
elicited dysfunctional responses.
Improving access to better schools by providing information about school quality and
expanding schooling options has improved student achievement in some settings, but not others.
We need to learn more about the roles of design and contextual factors in explaining this pattern.
Our review yields some useful lessons for improving the supply of education. Increasing
the quantity or quality of resources, at home or at school, has had at best modest impacts on
student achievement. The same is true for initiatives that have expanded the length of the school
day. One potential explanation is that these reforms have typically offered “more of the same”;
they have rarely changed children’s daily experiences.
There is mounting evidence that addressing students’ individual learning needs, by
helping teachers personalize instruction, providing additional help to struggling students, or
letting students learn at their own pace, increases student achievement. Perhaps equally
important, these strategies are often most effective in increasing the skills of low-achieving
students and do so without harming their high-ability peers.
Increasing teacher and/or principal effort by involving parents and communities in school
management has not been effective in enhancing student outcomes—especially, in settings where
pre-existing capacity is low. Offering incentives to principals and/or teachers has improved

53

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
student achievement. However, it has proven difficult to design incentive systems that do not
elicit dysfunctional responses. Hiring teachers on fixed-term, renewable contracts has increased
student achievement in the short-run, but taking this policy to scale and maintaining it over time
presents many challenges.
Professional development aimed at increasing teachers’ knowledge of substance and
pedagogy has not increased student achievement. Pre-prepared lessons for teachers have
improved student achievement in settings of low teacher capacity. Encouraging older students to
teach each other shows promise.
Finally, our review offers some guidelines for discussing the evidence. First, the details
of design and implementation of educational interventions matter (Pritchett & Sandefur 2013).
A corollary of this lesson is that blanket statements about the effectiveness of particular
interventions, such as vouchers or computers, are neither accurate nor helpful.
Second, the average effects of interventions typically mask considerable heterogeneity
across groups. It is critical to understand the effects of an intervention for specific groups
because they sometimes drive average effects and because these impacts shed light on whether
an intervention will work with a different population.
Third, the consequences of any school improvement strategy are likely to depend on the
circumstances in the particular setting. In settings where many children are out of school, it may
make sense to focus on demand-side interventions. However, in countries where most children
are going to school and learning is low, improving instruction is crucial. Similarly, in settings
where teacher capacity is very low, making their job easier—e.g., by tracking students by ability
or preparing lessons for teachers—may produce incremental improvements. In countries where
teachers have moderate capacity but low effort, aligning the incentives of students, parents, and

54

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
teachers may make more sense, provided that there are mechanisms to discourage, identify, and
correct dysfunctional responses.
Finally, most of what we know about these interventions concerns short-term outcomes
for students. In the United States, a number of interventions have had only short-lived impacts
on test scores, but large effects on important adult outcomes (Chetty et al. 2011; Kemple &
Willner 2008; Ludwig & Miller 2007). Examining longer-term consequences of promising
interventions in developing countries is an important goal for future research.

55

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
References
Abeberese, A. B., Kumler, T. J., & Linden, L. L. (2014). Improving reading skills by
encouraging children to read in school: A randomized evaluation of the Sa Aklat Sisikat
reading program in the Philippines. Journal of Human Resources, 49, 611-633. doi:
10.1353/jhr.2014.0020
Adelman, S., Alderman, H., Gilligan, D. O., & Lehrer, K. (2008). The impact of alternative food
for education programs on learning achievement and cognitive development in Northern
Uganda. Unpublished manuscript. The World bank. Washington, DC.
Adukia, A. (2014). Sanitation and education. Unpublished manuscript. Harvard Graduate School
of Education. Cambridge, MA.
Afridi, F. (2011). The impact of school meals on school participation: Evidence from rural India.
Journal of Development Studies, 47, 1636-1656. doi: 10.1080/00220388.2010.514330
Agüero, J. M., & Beleche, T. (2013). Test-mex: estimating the effects of school year length on
student performance in Mexico. Journal of Development Economics, 103, 353-361. doi:
10.1016/j.jdeveco.2013.03.008
Ajaja, O. P., & Eravwoke, O. U. (2011). Effects of cooperative learning strategy on junior
secondary school students achievement in integrated science. Electronic Journal of
Science Education, 14(1).
Akresh, R., De Walque, D., & Kazianga, H. (2013). Cash transfers and child schooling:
Evidence from a randomized evaluation of the role of conditionality. (World Bank Policy
Research Working Paper No. 6340). The World Bank. Washington, DC.

56

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
Alam, A., Baez, J. E., & Del Carpio, X. V. (2011). Does cash for school influence young
women’s behavior in the longer term? Evidence from Pakistan. (Policy Research
Working Paper No. 5669). The World Bank. Washington, DC.
Alderman, H., Kim, J., & Orazem, P. F. (2003). Design, evaluation, and sustainability of private
schools for the poor: The Pakistan urban and rural fellowship school experiments.
Economics of Education Review, 22, 265-274. doi: 10.1016/s0272-7757(02)00051-1
Amarante, V., Ferrando, M., & Vigorito, A. (2011). School attendance, child labor, and cash
transfers: An impact evaluation of PANES. Poverty and Economic Policy Research 9th
General Meeting. Siem Reap, Cambodia.
Ambler, K., Aycinena, D., & Yang, D. (2013). Subsidizing remittances for education: A field
experiment among migrants from El Salvador. Unpublished manuscript. Department of
Economics, University of Michigan. Ann Arbor, MI.
Andrabi, T., Das, J., & Khwaja, A. I. (2009). Report cards: The impact of providing school and
child test scores on educational markets. (Policy Research Working Paper No. 7226).
The World Bank. Washington, DC.
Angrist, J., Bettinger, E., Bloom, E., King, E., & Kremer, M. (2002). Vouchers for private
schooling in Colombia: Evidence from a randomized natural experiment. American
Economic Review, 1535-1558. doi: 10.3386/w8343
Angrist, J., Bettinger, E., & Kremer, M. (2006). Long-term educational consequences of
secondary school vouchers: Evidence from administrative records in Colombia. American
Economic Review, 96, 847-862. doi: 10.2307/30034075

57

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
Angrist, J., & Lavy, V. (2001). Does teacher training affect pupil learning? Evidence from
matched comparisons in Jerusalem public schools. Journal of Labor Economics, 19. doi:
10.1086/319564
---. (2002). New evidence on classroom computers and pupil learning. The Economic Journal,
112, 735-765. doi: 10.1111/1468-0297.00068
---. (2009). The effects of high stakes high school achievement awards: Evidence from a
randomized trial. American Economic Review, 1384-1414. doi: 10.1257/aer.99.4.1384
Asadullah, M. N. (2005). The effect of class size on student achievement: Evidence from
Bangladesh. Applied Economics Letters, 12, 217-221. doi:
10.1080/1350485042000323608
Attanasio, O., Fitzsimmons, E., & Gomez, A. (2005). The impact of a conditional education
subsidy on school enrollment in Colombia (Vol. 1). Unpublished manuscript. The
Institute of Fiscal Studies, Centre for the Evaluation of Development Policies.
Attanasio, O. P., Fernández, C., Fitzsimons, E. O., Grantham-McGregor, S. M., Meghir, C., &
Rubio-Codina, M. (2014). Using the infrastructure of a conditional cash transfer program
to deliver a scalable integrated early child development program in Colombia: cluster
randomized controlled trial. BMJ, 349, g5785.
Attanasio, O. P., Meghir, C., & Santiago, A. (2012). Education choices in Mexico: Using a
structural model and a randomized experiment to evaluate Progresa. The Review of
Economic Studies, 79, 37-66. doi: 10.1093/restud/rdr015
Baez, J. E., & Camacho, A. (2011). Assessing the long-term effects of conditional cash transfers
on human capital: Evidence from Colombia. (Policy Research Working Paper No. 5681).
The World Bank. Washington, DC.

58

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
Baird, S., McIntosh, C., & Ozler, B. (2011). Cash or condition? Evidence from a cash transfer
experiment. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126, 1709-1753.
doi:10.1093/qje/qjr032
Banerjee, A. V., Banerji, R., Duflo, E., Glennerster, R., & Khemani, S. (2010). Pitfalls of
participatory programs: Evidence from a randomized evaluation in education in India.
American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2, 1-30. doi: 10.3386/w14311
Banerjee, A. V., Cole, S., Duflo, E., & Linden, L. (2007). Remedying education: Evidence from
two randomized experiments in India. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122, 1235-1264.
doi: 10.3386/w11904
Banerji, R., Berry, J., & Shotland, M. (2014). The impact of mother literacy and participation
programs on child learning: Evidence from a randomized evaluation in India.
Unpublished manuscript. Abdul Latif Jameel Poverty Action Lab (J-PAL). Cambridge,
MA.
Barham, T., Macours, K., & Maluccio, J. A. (2014). Assessing long-term impacts of conditional
cash transfers on children and young adults in rural Nicaragua. (Impact Evaluation
Report No. 17). International Initiative for Impact Evaluation (3ie). New Delhi, India.
Barr, A., Mugisha, F., Serneels, P., & Zeitlin, A. (2012). Information and collective action in
community-based monitoring of schools: Field and lab experimental evidence from
Uganda. Unpublished manuscript. University of Nottingham. Nottingham, UK.
Barrera-Osorio, F., Bertrand, M., Linden, L. L., & Perez-Calle, F. (2011). Improving the design
of conditional transfer programs: Evidence from a randomized education experiment in
Colombia. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 3, 167-195. doi:
10.1257/app.3.2.167

59

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
Barrera-Osorio, F., Blakeslee, D. S., Hoover, M., Linden, L., Raju, D., & Ryan, S. P. (2013).
Leveraging the private sector to improve primary school enrolment: Evidence from a
randomized controlled trial in Pakistan. Unpublished manuscript. Harvard Graduate
School of Education (HGSE). Cambridge, MA.
Barrera-Osorio, F., & Filmer, D. (forthcoming). Incentivizing schooling for learning: Evidence
on the impact of alternative targeting approaches. Journal of Human Resources.
Barrera-Osorio, F., & Linden, L. (2009). The use and misuse of computers in education:
Evidence from a randomized experiment in Colombia. (Impact Evaluation Series No. 29).
The World Bank. Washington, DC.
Barrera-Osorio, F., Linden, L. L., & Urquiola, M. (2007). The effects of user fee reductions on
enrollment: Evidence from a quasi-experiment. Unpublished manuscript. Department of
Economics at The University of Texas at Austin. Austin, TX.
Barrera-Osorio, F., & Raju, D. (2015). Teacher performance pay: Experimental evidence from
Pakistan. Unpublished manuscript. The World Bank. Washington, DC.
---. (forthcoming). Evaluating the impacts of public student subsidies to low-cost private schools
in Pakistan. Journal of Development Studies.
Baumgartner, J., Smuts, C. M., Malan, L., Kvalsvig, J., van Stuijvenberg, M. E., Hurrell, R. F.,
& Zimmermann, M. B. (2012). Effects of iron and n−3 fatty acid supplementation, alone
and in combination, on cognition in school children: A randomized, double-blind,
placebo-controlled intervention in South Africa. The American Journal of Clinical
Nutrition, 96, 1327-1338. doi: 10.3945/ajcn.112.041004

60

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
Beasley, E., & Huillery, E. (2015). Willing but unable: Short-term experimental evidence on
parent empowerment and school quality. Unpublished manuscript. Sciences Po. Paris,
France.
Behrman, J. R., Gallardo-García, J., Parker, S. W., Todd, P. E., & Vélez-Grajales, V. (2012). Are
conditional cash transfers effective in urban areas? Evidence from Mexico. Education
Economics, 20, 233-259. doi: 10.2139/ssrn.1916083
Behrman, J. R., Parker, S. W., & Todd, P. E. (2009). Schooling impacts of conditional cash
transfers on young children: Evidence from Mexico. Economic Development and
Cultural Change, 57, 439-477. doi: 10.1086/596614
Behrman, J. R., Parker, S. W., & Todd, P. E. (2011). Do conditional cash transfers for schooling
generate lasting benefits? A five-year followup of PROGRESA/Oportunidades. Journal
of Human Resources, 46, 93-122. doi: 10.1353/jhr.2011.0028
Behrman, J. R., Parker, S. W., Todd, P. E., & Wolpin, K. I. (2015). Aligning learning incentives
of students and teachers: Results from a social experiment in Mexican high schools.
Journal of Political Economy, 123, 325-364. doi: 10.1086/675910
Behrman, J. R., Sengupta, P., & Todd, P. (2005). Progressing through PROGRESA: An impact
assessment of a school subsidy experiment in rural Mexico. Economic Development and
Cultural Change, 54, 237-275. doi: 10.1086/431263
Bellei, C. (2009). Does lengthening the school day increase students’ academic achievement?
Results from a natural experiment in Chile. Economics of Education Review, 28, 629640. doi: 10.1016/j.econedurev.2009.01.008

61

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
Benhassine, N., Devoto, F., Duflo, E., Dupas, P., & Pouliquen, V. (2013). Turning a shove into a
nudge? A “labeled cash transfer” for education. American Economic Journal: Economic
Policy, 7, 86-125.
Berlinski, S., & Busso, M. (2013). Pedagogical change in mathematics teaching: Evidence from
a randomized control trial. Unpublished manuscript. Inter-American Development Bank.
Washington, DC.
Berlinski, S., Galiani, S., & Gertler, P. (2009). The effect of pre-primary education on primary
school performance. Journal of Public Economics, 93, 219-234. doi:
10.1016/j.jpubeco.2008.09.002
Berry, J. (2014). Child control in education decisions: An evaluation of targeted incentives to
learn in India. Unpublished manuscript. Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT).
Cambridge, MA.
Bettinger, E., Kremer, M., & Saavedra, J. E. (2010). Are educational vouchers only
redistributive? The Economic Journal, 120, F204-F228. doi: 10.1111/j.14680297.2010.02374.x
Beuermann, D. W., Cristia, J. P., Cruz-Aguayo, Y., Cueto, S., & Malamud, O. (2013). Home
computers and child outcomes: Short-term impacts from a randomized experiment in
Peru. (NBER Working Paper No. 18818). National Bureau of Economic Research
(NBER). Cambridge, MA.
Beuermann, D. W., Naslund-Hadley, E., Ruprah, I. J., & Thompson, J. (2013). The pedagogy of
science and environment: Experimental evidence from Peru. The Journal of Development
Studies, 49, 719-736. doi: 10.1080/00220388.2012.754432

62

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
Bjorkman, M. (2007). Does money matter for student performance? Evidence from a grant
program in Uganda. (Working Paper No. 326). Institute for International Economic
Studies (IIES), Stockholm University. Stockholm, Sweden.
Blimpo, M. P. (2014). Team incentives for education in developing countries: A randomized
field experiment in Benin. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 6, 90-109.
doi: 10.1257/app.6.4.90
Blimpo, M. P., & Evans, D. K. (2011). School-based management and educational outcomes:
Lessons from a randomized field experiment Unpublished manuscript. Stanford, CA:
Stanford University.
Bobonis, G. J., Miguel, E., & Puri-Sharma, C. (2006). Anemia and school participation. Journal
of Human Resources, 41, 692-721.
Bold, T., Kimenyi, M., Mwabu, G., Ng'ang'a, A., & Sandefur, J. (2013). Scaling-up what works:
Experimental evidence on external validity in Kenyan education. Unpublished
manuscript. Center for Global Development. Washington, DC.
Bold, T., Kimenyi, M., Mwabu, G., & Sandefur, J. (2011). Why did abolishing fees not increase
public school enrollment in Kenya? Unpublished manuscript. Center for Global
Development. Washington, DC.
Borkum, E. (2012). Can eliminating school fees in poor districts boost enrollment? Evidence
from South Africa. Economic Development and Cultural Change, 60, 359-398. doi:
10.1086/662580
Borkum, E., He, F., & Linden, L. L. (2013). School libraries and language skills in Indian
primary schools: A randomized evaluation of the Akshara Library program. Unpublished
manuscript. Abdul Latif Jameel Poverty Action Lab (J-PAL). Cambridge, MA.

63

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
Bouguen, A., Filmer, D., Macours, K., & Naudeau, S. (2014). Preschools and early childhood
development in a second best world: Evidence from a scaled-up experiment in Cambodia.
(Discussion Paper No. 10170). Centre for Economic Policy Research. London, UK.
Brooker, S., & Halliday, K. (2015). Impact of malaria control and enhanced literacy instruction
on educational outcomes among Kenyan school children: A multi-sectoral, prospective,
randomised evaluation. Unpublished manuscript. International Initiative for Impact
Evaluation (3ie). New Delhi, India.
Burde, D., & Linden, L. L. (2013). The effect of village-based schools: Evidence from a
randomized controlled trial in Afghanistan. American Economic Journal: Applied
Economics, 5, 27–40. doi: 10.1257/app.5.3.27
Bursztyn, L., & Coffman, L. C. (2012). The schooling decision: Family preferences,
intergenerational conflict, and moral hazard in the Brazilian favelas. Journal of Political
Economy, 120, 359-397. doi: 10.1086/666746
Buttenheim, A. M., Alderman, H., & Friedman, J. (2011). Impact evaluation of school feeding
programs in Lao PDR. (World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 5518). The
World Bank. Washington, DC.
Cabezas, V., Cuesta, J. I., & Gallego, F. A. (2011). Effects of short-term tutoring on cognitive
and non-cognitive skills: Evidence from a randomized evaluation in Chile. Unpublished
manuscript. Abdul Latif Jameel Poverty Action Lab (J-PAL). Santiago, Chile.
Camargo, B., Camelo, R., Firpo, S., & Ponczek, V. (2011). Test score disclosure and school
performance (Sao Paulo School of Economics Working Paper No. 11/2011). Sao Paulo,
Brazil: Center for Applied Economics.

64

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
Carneiro, P., Koussihouèdé, O., Lahire, N., Meghir, C., & Mommaerts, C. (2015).
Decentralizing education resources: School grants in Senegal. (NBER Working Paper
No. 21063). National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER). Cambridge, MA.
Carrillo, P., Onofa, M., & Ponce, J. (2011). Information technology and student achievement:
Evidence from a randomized experiment in Ecuador. (IDB Working Paper No. IDB-WP223). Inter-American Development Bank. Washington, DC.
Chaudhury, N., & Parajuli, D. (2010). Conditional cash transfers and female schooling: The
impact of the female school stipend programme on public school enrolments in Punjab,
Pakistan. Applied Economics, 42, 3565-3583. doi: 10.1080/00036840802167376
Chen, D., Glewwe, P., Kremer, M., & Moulin, S. (2001). An interim report on a teacher
attendance incentive program in Kenya. Unpublished manuscript. Development
Economics Department, Harvard University Cambridge, MA.
Chen, X., Liu, C., Zhang, L., Shi, Y., & Rozelle, S. (2010). Does taking one step back get you
two steps forward? Grade retention and school performance in poor areas in rural China.
International Journal of Educational Development, 30, 544-559. doi:
10.1016/j.ijedudev.2009.12.002
Chen, X., Shi, Y., Mo, D., Chu, J., Loyalka, P., & Rozelle, S. (2013). Impact of a Senior High
School Tuition Relief Program on Poor Junior High School Students in Rural China.
China & World Economy, 21, 80-97.
Chetty, R., Friedman, J. N., Hilger, N., Saez, E., Schanzenbach, D. W., & Yagan, D. (2011).
How does your kindergarten classroom affect your earnings? Evidence from project
STAR. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126, 1593-1660. doi: 10.1093/qje/qjr041

65

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
Chin, A. (2005). Can redistributing teachers across schools raise educational attainment?
Evidence from Operation Blackboard in India. Journal of Development Economics, 78,
384-405. doi: 10.1016/j.jdeveco.2004.09.004
Chitolina, L., Foguel, M. N., & Menezes-Filho, N. (2013). The impact of the expansion of the
Bolsa Família programme on the time allocation of youths and labour supply of adults
(Working Paper No. 120). Sao Paulo, Brazil: International Policy Centre for Inclusive
Growth.
Clarke, S. E., Jukes, M. C., Njagi, J. K., Khasakhala, L., Cundill, B., Otido, J., Crudder, C.,
Estambale, B. B., & Brooker, S. (2008). Effect of intermittent preventive treatment of
malaria on health and education in schoolchildren: A cluster-randomised, double-blind,
placebo-controlled trial. The Lancet, 372, 127-138. doi: 10.1016/s0140-6736(08)61034-x
Conn, K. (2014). Identifying effective education interventions in Sub-Saharan Africa: A metaanalysis of rigorous impact evaluations. Unpublished manuscript. Columbia University.
New York, NY.
Contreras, D. (2001). Evaluating a voucher system in Chile: Individual, family and school
characteristics. Unpublished manuscript. Universidad de Chile, Facultad de Ciencias
Económicas y Administrativas, Departamento de Economía. Santiago, Chile.
Cristia, J., Ibarrarán, P., Cueto, S., Santiago, A., & Severín, E. (2012). Technology and child
development: Evidence from the One Laptop per Child program. (Working Paper No.
IDB-WP-304). Inter-American Development Bank. Washington, DC.
Cutler, D., Fung, W., Kremer, M., Singhal, M., & Vogl, T. (2007). Mosquitoes: The long-term
effects of malaria eradication in India (NBER Working Paper No. 13539). Cambridge,
MA: National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER).

66

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
Dammert, A. C. (2009). Heterogeneous impacts of conditional cash transfers: Evidence from
Nicaragua. Economic Development and Cultural Change, 58, 53-83. doi:
10.1086/605205
Das, J., Dercon, S., Habyarimana, J., Krishnan, P., Muralidharan, K., & Sundararaman, V.
(2013). School inputs, household substitution, and test scores. American Economic
Journal: Applied Economics, 5, 29-57. doi: 10.1257/app.5.2.29
De Hoop, K. (2010). Selective secondary education and school participation in Sub-Saharan
Africa: Evidence from Malawi. (Tinbergen Institute Discussion Paper No. TI 2010041/2). Tinbergen Institute Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
De Janvry, A., Finan, F., Sadoulet, E., & Vakis, R. (2006). Can conditional cash transfer
programs serve as safety nets in keeping children at school and from working when
exposed to shocks? Journal of Development Economics, 79, 349-373. doi:
10.1016/j.jdeveco.2006.01.013
de Laat, J., Kremer, M., & Vermeersch, C. (2008). Teacher incentives and local participation.
Unpublished manuscript. Harvard University. Cambridge, MA.
de Ree, J., Muralidharan, K., Pradhan, M., & Rogers, F. H. (2015). Double for nothing?
Experimental evidence on the impact of an unconditional teacher salary increase on
student performance in Indonesia. Unpublished manuscript. The World Bank.
Washington, DC.
Dhaliwal, I., Duflo, E., Glennerster, R., & Tulloch, C. (2012). Comparative Cost-Effectiveness
Analysis to Inform Policy in Developing Countries: A General Framework with
Applications for Education. Abdul Latif Jameel Poverty Action Lab (J-PAL). Cambridge,
MA.

67

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
Dinkelman, T., & Martínez, A. C. (2013). Investing in schooling In Chile: The role of
information about financial aid for higher education. Review of Economics and Statistics,
96, 244-257. doi: 10.1162/REST_a_00384
Dubois, P., & Rubio-Codina, M. (2012). Child care provision: Semiparametric evidence from a
randomized experiment in Mexico. Annals of Economics and Statistics, 105/106, 155184. doi: 10.2139/ssrn.1338713
Duc, L. T., & Baulch, B. (2012). Do extra classes improve cognitive test scores? Evidence from
Vietnam. (Young Lives Working Paper No. 87). Young Lives. London, UK.
Duflo, E. (2001). Schooling and labor market consequences of school construction in Indonesia:
Evidence from an unusual policy experiment. American Economic Review, 91, 795-813.
doi: 10.1257/aer.91.4.795
Duflo, E., Berry, J., Mukerji, S., & Shotland, M. (2015). A wide angle view of learning:
Evaluation of the CCE and LEP programmes in Haryana, India. (Impact Evaluation
Report No. 22). International Initiative for Impact Evaluation (3ie). New Delhi, India.
Duflo, E., Dupas, P., & Kremer, M. (2011). Peer effects, teacher incentives, and the impact of
tracking: Evidence from a randomized evaluation in Kenya. The American Economic
Review, 101, 1739-1774. doi: 10.1257/aer.101.5.1739
---. (2015). School governance, teacher incentives, and pupil-teacher ratios: Experimental
evidence from Kenyan primary schools. Journal of Public Economics, 123, 92–110. doi:
10.1016/j.jpubeco.2014.11.008
Duflo, E., Hanna, R., & Ryan, S. P. (2012). Incentives work: Getting teachers to come to school.
The American Economic Review, 102, 1241-1278. doi: 10.1257/aer.102.4.1241

68

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
Dumitrescu, A., Levy, D., Orfield, C., & Sloan, M. (2011). Impact evaluation of Niger’s
IMAGINE program: Final report. Mathematica Policy Research. Washington, DC.
Evans, D. K., Kremer, M., & Ngatia, M. (2009). The impact of distributing school uniforms on
children’s education in Kenya. Unpublished manuscript. The World Bank. Washington,
DC.
Evans, D. K., & Popova, A. (2015). What really works to improve learning in developing
countries? An analysis of divergent findings in systematic reviews. (Policy Research
Working Paper No. 7203). The World Bank. Washington, DC.
Fang, H., Eggleston, K. N., Rizzo, J. A., Rozelle, S., & Zeckhauser, R. J. (2012). The returns to
education in China: Evidence from the 1986 Compulsory Education Law. (NBER
Working Paper No. 18189). National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER).
Cambridge, MA.
Fernald, L. C., Gertler, P. J., & Neufeld, L. M. (2008). Role of cash in conditional cash transfer
programmes for child health, growth, and development: An analysis of Mexico's
Oportunidades. The Lancet, 371, 828-837. doi: 10.1016/s0140-6736(08)60382-7
---. (2009). 10-year effect of Oportunidades, Mexico's conditional cash transfer programme, on
child growth, cognition, language, and behaviour: A longitudinal follow-up study. The
Lancet, 374, 1997-2005. doi: 10.1016/s0140-6736(09)61676-7
Fernando, D., De Silva, D., Carter, R., Mendis, K. N., & Wickremasinghe, R. (2006). A
randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, clinical trial of the impact of malaria
prevention on the educational attainment of school children. The American Journal of
Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, 74, 386-393.

69

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
Ferreira, F. H., Filmer, D., & Schady, N. (2009). Own and sibling effects of conditional cash
transfer programs: Theory and evidence from Cambodia. (Policy Research Working
Paper No. 5001). The World Bank. Washington, DC.
Filmer, D., & Schady, N. (2008). Getting girls into school: Evidence from a scholarship program
in Cambodia. Economic Development and Cultural Change, 96, 150-157. doi:
10.1596/1813-9450-3910
---. (2014). The medium-term effects of scholarships in a low-income country. Journal of Human
Resources, 49, 663-694. doi: 10.1353/jhr.2014.0022
Freeman, M. C., Greene, L. E., Dreibelbis, R., Saboori, S., Muga, R., Brumback, B., &
Rheingans, R. (2012). Assessing the impact of a school‐based water treatment, hygiene
and sanitation programme on pupil absence in Nyanza Province, Kenya: A cluster‐
randomized trial. Tropical Medicine & International Health, 17, 380-391. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-3156.2011.02927.x
Gajigo, O. (2014). Closing the education gender gap: Estimating the impact of Girls' Scholarship
Program in The Gambia. Education Economics, 1-22. doi:
10.1080/09645292.2014.985287
Galiani, S., & McEwan, P. (2013). The heterogeneous impact of conditional cash transfers.
Journal of Public Economics, 103, 85-96. doi: 10.1016/j.jpubeco.2013.04.004
Gertler, P. J., Patrinos, H. A., & Rubio-Codina, M. (2012). Empowering parents to improve
education: Evidence from rural Mexico. Journal of Development Economics, 99, 68-79.
doi: 10.1596/1813-9450-3935
Githua, B. N., & Nyabwa, R. A. (2008). Effects of advance organiser strategy during instruction
on secondary school students’ mathematics achievement in Kenya’s Nakuru district.

70

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
International Journal of Science and Mathematics Education, 6, 439-457. doi:
10.1007/s10763-006-9037-8
Glewwe, P., Hanushek, E. A., Humpage, S. D., & Ravina, R. (2014). School resources and
educational outcomes in developing countries: A review of the literature from 1990 to
2010. In P. Glewwe (Ed.), Education Policy in Developing Countries. Chicago, IL and
London, UK: University of Chicago Press.
Glewwe, P., Ilias, N., & Kremer, M. (2010). Teacher incentives. American Economic Journal:
Applied Economics, 2, 205-227. doi: 10.1257/app.2.3.205
Glewwe, P., Kremer, M., & Moulin, S. (2009). Many children left behind? Textbooks and test
scores in Kenya. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 1, 112-135. doi:
10.1257/app.1.1.112
Glewwe, P., Kremer, M., Moulin, S., & Zitzewitz, E. (2004). Retrospective vs. prospective
analyses of school inputs: The case of flip charts in Kenya. Journal of Development
Economics, 74, 251-268. doi: 10.1016/j.jdeveco.2003.12.010
Glewwe, P., & Maïga, E. W. (2011). The impacts of school management reforms in Madagascar:
Do the impacts vary by teacher type? Journal of development effectiveness, 3, 435-469.
doi: 10.1080/19439342.2011.604729
Glewwe, P., & Olinto, P. (2004). Evaluating the impact of conditional cash transfers on
schooling: An experimental analysis of Honduras’ PRAF program. Unpublished
manuscript. University of Minnesota. Minneapolis, MN.
Glewwe, P., Park, A., & Zhao, M. (2014). A better vision for development: Eyeglasses and
academic performance in rural primary schools in China. Abdul Latif Jameel Poverty
Action Lab (J-PAL). Cambridge, MA.

71

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
Grigorenko, E. L., Sternberg, R. J., Jukes, M., Alcock, K., Lambo, J., Ngorosho, D., Nokes, C.,
& Bundy, D. A. (2006). Effects of antiparasitic treatment on dynamically and statically
tested cognitive skills over time. Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology, 27, 499526. doi: 10.1016/j.appdev.2006.08.005
Guerrero, G., Leon, J., Zapata, M., Sugimaru, C., & Cueto, S. (2012). What works to improve
teacher attendance in developing countries? A systematic review. Unpublished
manuscript. EPPI-Centre, Social Science Research Unit, Institute of Education,
University of London. London, UK.
Hallfors, D., Cho, H., Rusakaniko, S., Iritani, B., Mapfumo, J., & Halpern, C. (2011). Supporting
adolescent orphan girls to stay in school as HIV risk prevention: Evidence from a
randomized controlled trial in Zimbabwe. American journal of public health, 101, 10821088.
Hamazaki, K., Syafruddin, D., Tunru, I. S., Azwir, M. F., Puji, B. A., Sawazaki, S., & Hamazaki,
T. (2008). The effects of docosahexaenoic acid-rich fish oil on behavior, school
attendance rate and malaria infection in school children: A double-blind, randomized,
placebo-controlled trial in Lampung, Indonesia. Asia Pacific Journal of Clinical
Nutrition, 17, 258-263. doi: 10.1097/00004703-200208000-00022
Hasan, A. (2010). Gender-targeted conditional cash transfers: Enrollment, spillover effects and
instructional quality. (Policy Research Working Paper No. 5257). The World Bank.
Washington, DC.
He, F., Linden, L., & MacLeod, M. (2008). How to teach English in India: Testing the relative
productivity of instruction methods within the Pratham English language education
program. Unpublished manuscript. Columbia University. New York, NY.

72

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
He, F., Linden, L. L., & MacLeod, M. (2009). A better way to teach children to read? Evidence
from a randomized controlled trial. Unpublished manuscript. Abdul Latif Jameel Poverty
Action Lab (J-PAL). Cambridge, MA.
Hsieh, C.-T., & Urquiola, M. (2006). The effects of generalized school choice on achievement
and stratification: Evidence from Chile's voucher program. Journal of Public Economics,
90, 1477-1503. doi: 10.1016/j.jpubeco.2005.11.002
Huan, W., Chu, J., Loyalka, P., Tao, X., Shi, Y., Qu, Q., Yang, C., & Rozelle, S. (2014). Can
school counseling reduce school dropout in developing countries? (REAP Working
Paper No. 275). Rural Education Action Program (REAP). Stanford, CA.
Huang, W., Mo, D., Shi, Y., Zhang, L., Boswell, M., & Rozelle, S. (2014). Computer technology
in education: Evidence from a pooled study of computer assisted learning programs
among rural students in China. (REAP Working Paper No. 278). Rural Education Action
Program (REAP). Stanford, CA.
Jackson, C. K. (2010). Do students benefit from attending better schools? Evidence from rulebased student assignments in Trinidad and Tobago The Economic Journal, 120, 13991429. doi: 10.1111/j.1468-0297.2010.02371.x
---. (2012). Single-sex schools, student achievement, and course selection: Evidence from rulebased student assignments in Trinidad and Tobago. Journal of Public Economics, 96,
173-187. doi: 10.1016/j.jpubeco.2011.09.002
---. (2013). Can higher-achieving peers explain the benefits to attending selective schools?
Evidence from Trinidad and Tobago. Journal of Public Economics, 108, 63-77. doi:
10.1016/j.jpubeco.2013.09.007

73

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
Jensen, R. (2010). The (perceived) returns to education and the demand for schooling. Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 125, 515-548. doi: 10.1162/qjec.2010.125.2.515
---. (2012). Do labor market opportunities affect young women's work and family decisions?
Experimental evidence from India. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127, 753–792.
doi: 10.1093/qje/qjs002
Jinabhai, C. C., Taylor, M., Coutsoudis, A., Coovadia, H. M., Tomkins, A. M., & Sullivan, K. R.
(2001). A randomized controlled trial of the effect of antihelminthic treatment and
micronutrient fortification on health status and school performance of rural primary
school children. Annals of Tropical Paediatrics: International Child Health, 21, 319-333.
doi: 10.1080/07430170120093508
Jukes, M. C., Pinder, M., Grigorenko, E. L., Smith, H. B., Walraven, G., Bariau, E. M.,
Sternberg, R. J., Drake, L. J., Milligan, P., & Cheung, Y. B. (2006). Long-term impact of
malaria chemoprophylaxis on cognitive abilities and educational attainment: Follow-up
of a controlled trial. PLoS clinical trials, 1, e19. doi: 10.1371/journal.pctr.0010019
Kagitcibasi, C., Sunar, D., & Bekman, S. (2001). Long-term effects of early intervention:
Turkish low-income mothers and children. Applied Developmental Psychology, 22, 333361. doi: 10.1016/s0193-3973(01)00071-5
Kane, T. J., & Staiger, D. O. (2001). Improving school accountability measures. (NBER
Working Paper No. 8156). National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER). Cambridge,
MA.
---. (2002). The promise and pitfalls of using imprecise school accountability measures. The
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 16, 91-114. doi: 10.1257/089533002320950993

74

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
Karlan, D., & Linden, L. L. (2013). Loose knots: Strong versus weak commitments to save for
education in Uganda. (NBER Working Paper No. 19863). National Bureau of Economic
Research (NBER). Cambridge, MA.
Kazianga, H., De Walque, D., & Alderman, H. (2012). Educational and child labour impacts of
two food-for-education schemes: Evidence from a randomised trial in rural Burkina Faso.
Journal of African Economies, 21, 723-760. doi: 10.1093/jae/ejs010
Kazianga, H., Levy, D., Linden, L. L., & Sloan, M. (2013). The effects of "girl-friendly" schools:
Evidence from the BRIGHT school construction program in Burkina Faso. American
Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 5, 41-62. doi: 10.1257/app.5.3.41
Kemple, J. J., & Willner, C. J. (2008). Career academies: Long-term impacts on labor market
outcomes, educational attainment, and transitions to adulthood. MDRC. New York, NY.
Kleiman-Weiner, M., Luo, R., Zhang, L., Shi, Y., Medina, A., & Rozelle, S. (2013). Eggs versus
chewable vitamins: Which intervention can increase nutrition and test scores in rural
China? China Economic Review, 24, 165-176. doi: 10.1016/j.chieco.2012.12.005
Kremer, M., Brannen, C., & Glennerster, R. (2013). The challenge of education and learning in
the developing world. Science, 340, 297-300. doi: 10.1126/science.1235350
Kremer, M., Miguel, E., & Thornton, R. (2009). Incentives to learn. The Review of Economics
and Statistics, 91, 437-456. doi: 10.1162/rest.91.3.437
Kremer, M., Moulin, S., & Namunyu, R. (2003). Decentralization: A cautionary tale.
Unpublished manuscript. Abdul Latif Jameel Poverty Action Lab (J-PAL). Cambridge,
MA.

75

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
Krishnaratne, S., White, H., & Carpenter, E. (2013). Quality education for all children? What
works in education in developing countries. (Working Paper No. 20). International
Initiative for Impact Evaluation (3ie). New Delhi, India.
Lai, F., Luo, R., Zhang, L., Huang, X., & Rozelle, S. (forthcoming). Does computer-assisted
learning improve learning outcomes? Evidence from a randomized experiment in migrant
schools in Beijing. Economics of Education Review. doi:
10.1016/j.econedurev.2015.03.005
Lai, F., Zhang, L., Hu, X., Qu, Q., Shi, Y., Qiao, Y., Boswell, M., & Rozelle, S. (2013).
Computer assisted learning as extracurricular tutor? Evidence from a randomised
experiment in rural boarding schools in Shaanxi. Journal of development effectiveness, 5,
208-231. doi: 10.1080/19439342.2013.780089
Lai, F., Zhang, L., Qu, Q., Hu, X., Shi, Y., Boswell, M., & Rozelle, S. (2012). Does computerassisted learning improve learning outcomes? Evidence from a randomized experiment in
public schools in rural minority areas in Qinghai, China. (REAP working paper No.
237). Rural Education Action Program (REAP). Stanford, CA.
Lassibille, G., Tan, J.-P., Jesse, C., & Nguyen, T. V. (2010). Managing for results in primary
education in Madagascar: Evaluating the impact of selected workflow interventions. The
World Bank Economic Review, 1-27. doi: 10.1093/wber/lhq009
Lavy, V. (2009). Performance pay and teachers' effort, productivity, and grading ethics. The
American Economic Review, 99, 1979-2011. doi: 10.2307/25592544
---. (2010). Effects of free choice among public schools. The Review of Economic Studies, 77,
1164-1191. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-937X.2009.00588.x

76

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
---. (2012). Expanding school resources and increasing time on task: Effects of a policy
experiment in Israel on student academic achievement and behavior. (NBER Working
Paper No. 18369). National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER). Cambridge, MA.
---. (2013). Gender differences in market competitiveness in a real workplace: Evidence from
performance‐based pay tournaments among teachers. The Economic Journal, 123, 540573. doi: 10.3386/w14338
Lavy, V., & Schlosser, A. (2005). Targeted remedial education for underperforming teenagers:
Costs and benefits. Journal of Labor Economics, 23, 839-874. doi: 10.1086/491609
Levy, D., & Ohls, J. (2007). Evaluation of Jamaica’s PATH program: Final report. Washington,
DC: Mathematica Policy Research.
Li, T., Han, L., Zhang, L., & Rozelle, S. (2014). Encouraging classroom peer interactions:
Evidence from Chinese migrant schools. Journal of Public Economics, 111, 29-45. doi:
10.1016/j.jpubeco.2013.12.014
Linden, L. L. (2008). Complement or substitute? The effect of technology on student achievement
in India. Unpublished manuscript. Abdul Latif Jameel Poverty Action Lab (J-PAL).
Cambridge, MA.
Liu, C., Yi, H., Luo, R., Bai, Y., Zhang, L., Shi, Y., . . . Rozelle, S. (2013). The effect of early
commitment of financial aid on matriculation to senior high school among poor junior
high students in rural China. (REAP Working Paper No. 254). Rural Education Action
Program (REAP). Stanford, CA.
Liu, C., Zhang, L., Luo, R., Rozelle, S., & Loyalka, P. (2010). The effect of primary school
mergers on academic performance of students in rural China. International Journal of
Educational Development, 30, 570-585. doi: 10.1016/j.ijedudev.2010.05.003

77

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
Loyalka, P., Liu, C., Song, Y., Yi, H., Huang, X., Wei, J., Zhang, L., Shi, Y., Chu, J., & Rozelle,
S. (2013). Can information and counseling help students from poor rural areas go to high
school? Evidence from China. Journal of Comparative Economics, 41, 1012–1025. doi:
10.1016/j.jpubeco.2013.12.014
Loyalka, P., Wei, J., & Zhong, W. (2015). The impacts of building elite high schools for students
from disadvantaged areas. Economic Development and Cultural Change, 63, 393-422.
doi: 10.1086/678992
Lucas, A. M., & Mbiti, I. M. (2012). Access, sorting, and achievement: The short-run effects of
free primary education in Kenya. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 4,
226-253. doi: 10.1257/app.4.4.226
Lucas, A. M., McEwan, P. J., Ngware, M., & Oketch, M. (2014). Improving early-grade literacy
in East Africa: Experimental evidence from Kenya and Uganda. Journal of Policy
Analysis and Management, 33, 950-976. doi: 10.1002/pam.21782
Ludwig, J., & Miller, D. L. (2007). Does Head Start improve children's life chances? Evidence
from a regression discontinuity design. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122, 159-208.
doi: 10.1162/qjec.122.1.159
Luo, R., Shi, Y., Zhang, L., Liu, C., Rozelle, S., Sharbono, B., Yue, A., Zhao, Q., & Martorell,
R. (2012). Nutrition and educational performance in rural China's elementary schools:
Results of a randomized control trial in Shaanxi Province. Economic Development and
Cultural Change, 60. doi: 10.1086/665606
Ma, X., Zhou, Z., Yi, H., Pang, X., Shi, Y., Chen, Q., Meltzer, M. E., le Cessie, S., He, M.,
Rozelle, S., Liu, Y., & Congdon, N. (2014). Effect of providing free glasses on children's
educational outcomes in China: The Seeing is Learning cluster-randomized controlled

78

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
trial. Unpublished manuscript. Stanford University Rural Education Action Program
(REAP). Stanford, CA.
Macours, K., Schady, N., & Vakis, R. (2012). Cash transfers, behavioral changes, and cognitive
development in early childhood: Evidence from a randomized experiment. American
Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 4, 247-273. doi: 10.1257/app.4.2.247
Mahawithanage, S. T. C., Kannangara, K. K. N. P., Wickremasinghe, R., Chandrika, U. G.,
Jansz, E. R., Karunaweera, N. D., & Wickremasinghe, A. R. (2007). Impact of vitamin A
supplementation on health status and absenteeism of school children in Sri Lanka. Asia
Pacific Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 16, 94-102.
Malamud, O., & Pop-Eleches, C. (2011). Home computer use and the development of human
capital. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126, 987-1027. doi: 10.1093/qje/qjr008
Maluccio, J., Hoddinott, J., Behrman, J. R., Martorell, R., Quisumbing, A., & Stein, A. D.
(2009). The impact of nutrition during early childhood on education among Guatemalan
adults. (PIER Working Paper No. 06).
Maluccio, J. A., & Flores, R. (2005). Impact evaluation of a conditional cash transfer program:
The Nicaraguan Red de Protección Social Unpublished manuscript: International Food
Policy Research Institute.
Maluccio, J. A., Murphy, A., & Regalia, F. (2010). Does supply matter? Initial schooling
conditions and the effectiveness of conditional cash transfers for grade progression in
Nicaragua. Journal of development effectiveness, 2, 87-116. doi:
10.1080/19439340903584085
Manger, M. S., McKenzie, J. E., Winichagoon, P., Gray, A., Chavasit, V., Pongcharoen, T.,
Gowachirapant, S., Ryan, B., Wasantwisut, E., & Gibson, R. S. (2008). A micronutrient-

79

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
fortified seasoning powder reduces morbidity and improves short-term cognitive
function, but has no effect on anthropometric measures in primary school children in
northeast Thailand: A randomized controlled trial. The American Journal of Clinical
Nutrition, 87, 1715-1722.
Manley, J., Fernald, L., & Gertler, P. (2015). Wealthy, healthy and wise: Does money
compensate for being born into difficult conditions? Applied Economics Letters, 22, 121126. doi: 10.1080/13504851.2014.929618
Martinez, S., Naudeau, S., & Pereira, V. (2013). The promise of preschool in Africa: A
randomized impact evaluation of early childhood development in rural Mozambique.
Unpublished manuscript. International Initiative for Impact Evaluation (3ie). . New
Delhi, India.
Masino, S., & Niño-Zarazúa, M. (2015). What works to improve the quality of student learning
in developing countries? (WIDER Working Paper No. 2015/033). World Institute for
Development Economics Research. Helsinki, Finland.
McEwan, P. (2013). The impact of Chile’s school feeding program on education outcomes.
Economics of Education Review, 32, 122-139. doi: 10.1016/j.econedurev.2012.08.006
---. (2014). Improving learning in primary schools of developing countries: A meta-analysis of
randomized experiments. Review of Educational Research, XX, 1-42. doi:
10.3102/0034654314553127
McEwan, P., & Santibáñez, L. (2005). Teacher and principal incentives in Mexico. In E. Vegas
(Ed.), Incentives to improve teaching. Washington, DC: The World Bank.

80

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
Menezes-Filho, N., & Pazello, E. (2007). Do teachers’ wages matter for proficiency? Evidence
from a funding reform in Brazil. Economics of Education Review, 26, 660-672. doi:
10.1016/j.econedurev.2007.08.003
Miguel, E., & Kremer, M. (2004). Worms: Identifying impacts on education and health in the
presence of treatment externalities. Econometrica, 72, 159-217. doi: 10.1111/j.14680262.2004.00481.x
Mizala, A., & Urquiola, M. (2013). School markets: The impact of information approximating
schools’ effectiveness. Journal of Development Economics, 103, 313-335. doi:
10.3386/w13676
Mo, D., Luo, R., Liu, C., Zhang, H., Zhang, L., Medina, A., & Rozelle, S. (2014). Text
messaging and its impacts on the health and education of the poor: Evidence from a field
experiment in rural China. World Development, 64, 766-780. doi:
10.1016/j.worlddev.2014.07.015
Mo, D., Swinnen, J., Zhang, L., Yi, H., Qu, Q., Boswell, M., & Rozelle, S. (2013). Can one-toone computing narrow the digital divide and the educational gap in China? The case of
Beijing migrant schools. World Development, 46, 14-29. doi:
10.1016/j.worlddev.2012.12.019
Mo, D., Zhang, L., Luo, R., Qu, Q., Huang, W., Wang, J., Qiao, Y., Boswell, M., & Rozelle, S.
(2014). Integrating computer-assisted learning into a regular curriculum: Evidence from a
randomised experiment in rural schools in Shaanxi. Journal of development effectiveness,
6, 300-323. doi: 10.1080/19439342.2014.911770
Mo, D., Zhang, L., Wang, J., Huang, W., Shi, Y., Boswell, M., & Rozelle, S. (2014). The
persistence of gains in learning from computer assisted learning (CAL): Evidence from a

81

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
randomized experiment in rural schools in Shaanxi province in China. (REAP Working
Paper No. 268). Rural Education Action Program (REAP). Stanford, CA.
Mo, D., Zhang, L., Yi, H., Luo, R., Rozelle, S., & Brinton, C. (2013). School dropouts and
conditional cash transfers: Evidence from a randomised controlled trial in rural China's
junior high schools. The Journal of Development Studies, 49, 190-207. doi:
10.2139/ssrn.1859283
Mocan, N. H., & Cannonier, C. (2012). Empowering women through education: Evidence from
Sierra Leone. (NBER Working Paper No. 18016). National Bureau of Economic
Research (NBER). Cambridge, MA.
Muralidharan, K., & Prakash, N. (2013). Cycling to school: Increasing secondary school
enrollment for girls in India. (Working Paper No. 19305). National Bureau of Economic
Research (NBER). Cambridge, MA.
Muralidharan, K., & Sundararaman, V. (2010). The impact of diagnostic feedback to teachers on
student learning: Experimental evidence from India. The Economic Journal, 120, F187F203. doi: 10.1111/j.1468-0297.2010.02373.x
---. (2011). Teacher performance pay: Experimental evidence from India. The Journal of
Political Economy, 119, 39-77. doi: 10.1086/659655
---. (2013). Contract teachers: Experimental evidence from India. (Working Paper No. 19440).
National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER). Cambridge, MA.
---. (2015). The aggregate effect of school choice: Evidence from a two-stage experiment in
India. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 130, 1011-1066. doi: 10.1093/qje/qjv013

82

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
Naslund-Hadley, E., Parker, S. W., & Hernandez-Agramonte, J. M. (2014). Fostering early math
comprehension: Experimental evidence from Paraguay. Global Education Review, 1,
135-154. doi: 10.1080/13600818.2014.887061
Nguyen, T. (2009). Information, role models and perceived returns to education: Experimental
evidence from Madagascar. Unpublished manuscript. Massachusetts Institute of
Technology. Cambridge, MA.
Oosterbeek, H., Ponce, J., & Schady, N. (2008). The impact of cash transfers on school
enrollment: Evidence from Ecuador (Policy Research Working Paper No. TI 2008037/4). Washington, DC: The World Bank.
Orkin, K. (2013). The effect of lengthening the school day on children’s achievement in Ethiopia.
(Working Paper No. 119). Young Lives. London, UK.
Osendarp, S. J., Baghurst, K. I., Bryan, J., Calvaresi, E., Hughes, D., Hussaini, M., Karyadi, E.,
van Klinken, B. J.-W., van der Knaap, H. C., Lukito, W., Mikarsa, H., Transler, C., &
Wilson, C. (2007). Effect of a 12-mo micronutrient intervention on learning and memory
in well-nourished and marginally nourished school-aged children: 2 parallel, randomized,
placebo-controlled studies in Australia and Indonesia. The American Journal of Clinical
Nutrition, 86, 1082-1093.
Oster, E., & Thornton, R. (2011). Menstruation, sanitary products, and school attendance:
Evidence from a randomized evaluation. American Economic Journal: Applied
Economics, 3, 91-100. doi: 10.1257/app.3.1.91
Pandey, P., Goyal, S., & Sundararaman, V. (2009). Community participation in public schools:
Impact of information campaigns in three Indian states. Education Economics, 17, 355375. doi: 10.1080/09645290903157484

83

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
Perova, E., & Vakis, R. (2012). 5 years in Juntos: New evidence on the program’s short and
long-Term Impacts. Economía, 35, 53-82.
Piper, B. (2009). Integrated education program: Impact study of SMRS using early grade reading
assessment in three provinces in South Africa. Research Triangle Park, NC: RTI
International.
Piper, B., & Korda, M. (2011). EGRA plus: Liberia. Program evaluation report. Research
Triangle Park, NC: RTI International.
Pop-Eleches, C., & Urquiola, M. (2013). Going to a better school: Effects and behavioral
responses. American Economic Review, 103, 1289-1324. doi: 10.1257/aer.103.4.1289
Pradhan, M., Suryadarma, D., Beatty, A., Wong, M., Gaduh, A., Alisjahbana, A., & Artha, R. P.
(2014). Improving educational quality through enhancing community participation:
Results from a randomized field experiment in Indonesia. American Economic Journal:
Applied Economics, 6, 105-126. doi: /10.2139/ssrn.1862143
Pritchett, L., & Sandefur, J. (2013). Context matters for size: Why external validity claims and
development practice don’t mix. (Working Paper No. 336). Center for Global
Development (CGD). Washington, DC.
Ravallion, M., & Wodon, Q. (2000). Does child labour displace schooling? Evidence on
behavioural responses to an enrollment subsidy. The Economic Journal, 110, 158-175.
doi: 10.1111/1468-0297.00527
Reinikka, R., & Svensson, J. (2011). The power of information in public services: Evidence from
education in Uganda. Journal of Public Economics, 95, 956-966. doi:
10.1016/j.jpubeco.2011.02.006

84

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
Rico, J. A., Kordas, K., López, P., Rosado, J. L., Vargas, G. G., Ronquillo, D., & Stoltzfus, R. J.
(2006). Efficacy of Iron and/or Zinc Supplementation on Cognitive Performance of LeadExposed Mexican Schoolchildren: A Randomized, Placebo-Controlled Trial. Pediatrics,
117, e518-e527.
Rocha, R., & Soares, R. R. (2010). Evaluating the impact of community-based health
interventions: Evidence from Brazil's Family Health program. Health Economics, 19,
126-158. doi: 10.1002/hec.1607
Rogers, J., Chanturidze, T., & MacAuslan, I. (2013). Kazakhstan: External evaluation, BOTA
programs Unpublished manuscript. Oxford, United Kingdom: Oxford Policy
Management Limited.
Rosero, J., & Oosterbeek, H. (2011). Trade-offs between different early childhood interventions:
Evidence from Ecuador. Tinbergen Institute Discussion Paper, No. 11-102/3. Tinbergen
Institute. Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
Sabarwal, S., Evans, D., & Marshak, A. (2013). The permanent textbook hypothesis: School
inputs and student outcomes in Sierra Leone. (Policy Research Working Paper No.
7021). The World Bank. Washington, DC.
Schady, N., & Araujo, M. C. (2008). Cash transfers, conditions, and school enrollment in
Ecuador. Economía, 8, 43-70. doi: 10.1353/eco.0.0004
Schultz, P. T. (2004). School subsidies for the poor: Evaluating the Mexican Progresa poverty
program. Journal of Development Economics, 74, 199-250. doi:
10.1016/j.jdeveco.2003.12.009
Sharma, D. (2010). The Impact of financial incentives on academic achievement and household
behavior: Evidence from a randomized trial in Nepal. Unpublished manuscript.

85

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
Department of Agricultural, Environmental, and Development Economics. The Ohio
State University. Columbus, OH.
Skoufias, E. (2001). PROGRESA and its impacts on the human capital and welfare of
households in rural Mexico: A synthesis of the results of an evaluation by IFPRI
Unpublished manuscript. Washington, DC: International Food Policy Research Institute.
Skoufias, E., Parker, S. W., Behrman, J. R., & Pessino, C. (2001). Conditional cash transfers and
their impact on child work and schooling: Evidence from the Progresa program in
Mexico. Economía, 45-96. doi: 10.1353/eco.2001.0016
Solon, F. S., Sarol, J. N., Bernardo, A. B., Solon, J. A. A., Mehansho, H., Sanchez-Fermin, L. E.,
Wambangco, L. S., & Juhlin, K. D. (2003). Effect of a multiple-micronutrient-fortified
fruit powder beverage on the nutrition status, physical fitness, and cognitive performance
of schoolchildren in the Philippines. Food & Nutrition Bulletin, 24, S129-S140.
Sparrow, R. (2007). Protecting education for the poor in times of crisis: An evaluation of a
scholarship programme in Indonesia. Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, 69, 99122. doi: 10.1111/j.1468-0084.2006.00438.x
Spohr, C. A. (2003). Formal schooling and workforce participation in a rapidly developing
economy: Evidence from “compulsory” junior high school in Taiwan. Journal of
Development Economics, 70, 291-327. doi: 10.1016/s0304-3878(02)00099-8
Spratt, J., King, S., & Bulat, J. (2013). Independent evaluation of the effectiveness of Institut
pour l’Education Populaire’s “Read-Learn-Lead”(RLL) program in Mali. Unpublished
manuscript. RTI International. Research Triangle Park, NC.
Sylvia, S., Luo, R., Zhang, L., Shi, Y., Medina, A., & Rozelle, S. (2013). Do you get what you
pay for with school-based health programs? Evidence from a child nutrition experiment

86

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
in rural China. Economics of Education Review, 37, 1-12. doi:
10.1016/j.econedurev.2013.07.003
Tieffenberg, J. A., Wood, E. I., Alonso, A., Tossutti, M. S., & Vicente, M. F. (2000). A
randomized field trial of Acindes: A child-centered training model for children with
chronic illness (asthma and epilepsy). Journal of Urban Health, 77, 280-297. doi:
10.1007/bf02390539
Todd, P., & Wolpin, K. I. (2003). Assessing the impact of a school subsidy program in Mexico:
Using a social experiment to validate a dynamic behavioral model of child schooling and
fertility. American Economic Review, 96, 1384-1417. doi: 10.1257/aer.96.5.1384
Urquiola, M. (2006). Identifying class size effects in developing countries: Evidence from rural
Bolivia. Review of Economics and Statistics, 88, 171-177. doi: 10.1596/1813-9450-2711
Urquiola, M., & Verhoogen, E. (2009). Class-size caps, sorting, and the regression-discontinuity
design. American Economic Review, 99, 179-215. doi: 10.1257/aer.99.1.179
Van Staden, A. (2011). Put reading first: Positive effects of direct instruction and scaffolding for
ESL learners struggling with reading. Perspectives in Education, 29, 10-21.
Vermeersch, C., & Kremer, M. (2004). School meals, educational achievement, and school
competition: Evidence from a randomized evaluation. Unpublished manuscript. The
World Bank. Washington, DC.
Vivalt, E. (2015). How much can we generalize from impact evaluations? Unpublished
manuscript. New York University. New York, NY.
Wachanga, S. W., & Mwangi, J. G. (2004). Effects of the cooperative class experiment teaching
method on secondary school students' chemistry achievement in Kenya's Nakuru district.
International Education Journal, 5, 26-36.

87

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
Walker, S. P., Chang, S. M., Powell, C. A., & Grantham-McGregor, S. M. (2005). Effects of
early childhood psychosocial stimulation and nutritional supplementation on cognition
and education in growth-stunted Jamaican children: Prospective cohort study. The
Lancet, 366, 1804-1807. doi: 10.1016/s0140-6736(05)67574-5
Whaley, S. E., Sigman, M., Neumann, C., Bwibo, N., Guthrie, D., Weiss, R. E., Alber, S., &
Murphy, S. P. (2003). The impact of dietary intervention on the cognitive development of
Kenyan school children. Journal of Nutrition, 133, 3965S-3971S.
Wong, H. L., Luo, R., Zhang, L., & Rozelle, S. (2013). The impact of vouchers on preschool
attendance and elementary school readiness: A randomized controlled trial In rural China.
Economics of Education Review, 35, 53-65. doi: 10.1016/j.econedurev.2013.03.004
Yang, Y., Zhang, L., Zeng, J., Pang, X., Lai, F., & Rozelle, S. (2013). Computers and the
academic performance of elementary school-aged girls in China's poor communities.
Computers & Education, 60, 335-346. doi: 10.1016/j.compedu.2012.08.011
Yi, H., Song, Y., Liu, C., Huang, X., Zhang, L., Bai, Y., Shi, Y., Yang, C., Wang, H., Loyalka,
P., Chu, J., & Rozelle, S. (2012). Giving Kids a Head Start: The Impact of Early
Commitment of Financial Aid on Poor Seventh Grade Students in Rural China. Stanford,
CA: Stanford University Rural Education Action Program (REAP).
Yoshikawa, H., Leyva, D., Snow, C. E., Treviño, E., Arbour, M. C., Barata, M. C., Weiland, C.,
Gómez, C., Moreno, L., Rolla, A., & D'Sa, N. (2015). Experimental impacts of a teacher
professional development program in Chile on preschool classroom quality and child
outcomes. Journal of Developmental Psychology, 51, 309-322. doi:
10.1037/a0038785.supp

88

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
Yue, A., Shi, Y., Chang, F., Yang, C., Wang, H., Yi, H., Luo, R., Liu, C., Zhang, L., & Chu, J.
(2012). Dormitory management and boarding students in China’s rural elementary
schools. (REAP Working Paper No. 242). Rural Education Action Program (REAP).
Stanford, CA.
Zhang, L., Lai, F., Pang, X., Yi, H., & Rozelle, S. (2013). The impact of teacher training on
teacher and student outcomes: Evidence from a randomised experiment in Beijing
migrant schools. Journal of development effectiveness, 5, 339-358. doi:
10.1080/19439342.2013.807862

89

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
Figure 1. Search and review process.

Source: Authors’ construction.

90

IMPROVING EDUCATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES

Figure 2. Classification criteria.

Source: Authors’ construction.

91

