                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      BANKS AS PATIENT FIXED-INCOME INVESTORS

                                           Samuel G. Hanson
                                            Andrei Shleifer
                                            Jeremy C. Stein
                                           Robert W. Vishny

                                         Working Paper 20288
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w20288


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2014




We are grateful to seminar participants at the 2014 NBER Corporate Finance Meeting and Harvard
University for helpful comments, as well as to Malcolm Baker, John Campbell, Eduardo Dávila, Harry
DeAngelo, Doug Diamond, Mihir Desai, Gary Gorton, Robin Greenwood, Arvind Krishnamurthy,
David Scharfstein, René Stulz, Adi Sunderam, Paul Tucker, Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, and Yao Zeng
for valuable suggestions. We also thank Yueran Ma for excellent research assistance. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w20288.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Samuel G. Hanson, Andrei Shleifer, Jeremy C. Stein, and Robert W. Vishny. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Banks as Patient Fixed-Income Investors
Samuel G. Hanson, Andrei Shleifer, Jeremy C. Stein, and Robert W. Vishny
NBER Working Paper No. 20288
July 2014
JEL No. G2,G21,G23

                                              ABSTRACT

We examine the business model of traditional commercial banks in the context of their co-existence
with shadow banks. While both types of intermediaries create safe “money-like” claims, they go about
this in different ways. Traditional banks create safe claims by relying on deposit insurance, supported
by costly equity capital. This structure allows bank depositors to remain “sleepy”: they do not have
to pay attention to transient fluctuations in the mark-to-market value of bank assets. In contrast, shadow
banks create safe claims by giving their investors an early exit option that allows them to seize collateral
and liquidate it at the first sign of trouble. Thus traditional banks have a stable source of funding, while
shadow banks are subject to runs and fire-sale losses. These different funding models in turn influence
the kinds of assets that traditional banks and shadow banks hold in equilibrium: traditional banks have
a comparative advantage at holding fixed-income assets that have only modest fundamental risk, but
are relatively illiquid and have substantial transitory price volatility.


Samuel G. Hanson                                     Jeremy C. Stein
Harvard Business School                              Department of Economics
Baker Library 361                                    Harvard University
Soldiers Field                                       Littauer 209
Boston, MA 02163                                     Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER                                             jeremy_stein@harvard.edu
shanson@hbs.edu
                                                     Robert W. Vishny
Andrei Shleifer                                      Booth School of Business
Department of Economics                              The University of Chicago
Harvard University                                   5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Littauer Center M-9                                  Chicago, IL 60637
Cambridge, MA 02138                                  and NBER
and NBER                                             Rvishny@gmail.com
ashleifer@harvard.edu
I.     Introduction
       What is the business of banking? Do banks primarily create value on the liability side of the
balance sheet as in theories of banking emphasizing liquidity creation? Does the essence of banking
reside on the asset side as in theories emphasizing banks’ ability to monitor borrowers? Or does the
special nature of banks derive from some synergy between their assets and liabilities? And what
defines the role played by traditional banks in a modern financial system where they compete with
market-based intermediaries such as “shadow banks”?
       To address these questions, we present a model in which traditional and shadow banks co-
exist in the marketplace. We begin with the premise that a primary function of both types of
intermediaries is to create safe, “money-like” claims that are of value to households because they
are useful for transactions purposes. However, traditional banks and shadow banks go about this
task in different ways. Traditional banks create safe claims by relying on deposit insurance and
other aspects of the government safety net, including the lender-of-last resort function. This
government insurance comes at a cost, since, e.g., it requires banks to comply with capital
requirements and other forms of regulation as well as incur bricks and mortar costs associated with
attracting retail depositors. But it also allows their depositors to remain “sleepy”: depositors do not
have to pay attention to transient fluctuations in the mark-to-market value of bank assets. In
contrast, when shadow banks—including broker-dealers and hedge funds—create money-like
claims such as repurchase agreements, they rely less on the government safety net, and hence can
economize on costly equity capital. However, manufacturing safety instead means that shadow
banks have to hold assets that can be easily liquidated at the first sign of trouble by investors who
must remain vigilant.
       A central feature of our model is that such liquidations by shadow banks create fire-sale
effects, in that they temporarily push asset prices below fundamental value. So, on the one hand,
traditional banks’ more stable deposit funding structure has an advantage, in that it gives them the
ability to hold investments to maturity, riding out transitory valuation shocks until prices revert to
fundamental values. On the other hand, this stability comes at a cost. Because the endogenous fire-
sale discount is greater when shadow banks hold more of an asset, this tradeoff pins down the
equilibrium holdings of any given asset category across intermediary types. In particular, in an
interior equilibrium, the relative holdings of banks and shadow banks must be such that the
expected loss to a shadow bank from liquidating an asset at a temporary discount to fundamental
value is just balanced by the added cost that a traditional bank pays to obtain more stable funding.

                                                  1
Alternatively, for some types of assets we can have corner solutions, in which case the model
speaks to the specialization of traditional and shadow banks in asset holdings.
           This logic leads to our main finding: for traditional banks there is a critical synergy between
the asset and liability sides of the balance sheet. Issuing stable money-like claims is complementary
with investing in fixed-income assets that have only modest fundamental risk, but that are relatively
illiquid and may have substantial exposure to interim fire-sale risk and the accompanying transitory
price volatility. In our view, this synergy between funding structure and asset choice is at the heart
of the business of commercial banking, and is what fundamentally distinguishes traditional banks
from shadow banks: traditional banks are patient investors that can invest in illiquid fixed-income
assets with little risk of being interrupted before maturity.
           While our formal model emphasizes fire sales (Shleifer and Vishny 1992), our message
would also emerge in other models in which early liquidation can occur at prices below
fundamental value. For example, early liquidation can be costly in models that combine noise trader
shocks with limited arbitrageur risk-bearing capacity (DeLong et al 1990, Shleifer and Vishny
1997).1 The general point is that we view transitory non-fundamental movements in asset prices as
central to understanding financial intermediation, and especially the connection between the asset
and liability sides of intermediary balance sheets. A stable funding structure is an important source
of comparative advantage for holding assets that are vulnerable to transitory price movements.
           After developing the model, we use the Financial Accounts of the United States (formerly
the Flow of Funds) to provide some simple aggregate evidence consistent with the model’s key
predictions. Specifically, looking across fixed income asset classes, traditional banks have a larger
market share in more illiquid assets, be they loans or securities. Similarly, looking across financial
intermediary types, intermediaries with more stable funding such as traditional banks have asset
portfolios that are more illiquid. In this way, our model yields a novel synthesis of several aggregate
facts about the structure of financial intermediation.
           There is a vast literature on the economic role of banks. Our work connects most closely to
two strands of this literature. One strand, formalized first by Gorton and Pennacchi (1990), focuses
on the deposit-taking function of banks, and stresses their role in the creation of liabilities which,
precisely because of their safety and immunity from adverse-selection problems, are useful as a



1
    Alternatively, the mechanism could be liquidation costs that stem from asset specificity or adverse selection.

                                                              2
transactions medium. Banks are special in this view because they are the institutions that create
private, or “inside,” money.2
        This liability-centric view of banks surely captures an important element of reality. In
particular, it helps make sense of the fact that, in contrast to nonfinancial firms, banks have capital
structures that are highly homogenous in both the cross section and the time series—banks are
almost always heavily deposit-financed. At the same time, this liability-centric view alone cannot be
a complete theory of banking, because it does not speak to the asset side of bank balance sheets.3
For example, although it does not necessarily follow as a logical matter, the liability-centric view
has led some observers to advocate narrow banking proposals, whereby bank-created money is
backed entirely by safe liquid assets, such as Treasury bills.4 And yet as a positive description of
commercial banking, narrow banking is very far from what we observe in the world. Indeed, we
show that money creation through deposit-taking is too expensive for narrow banking to be a viable
business strategy for commercial banks.
        A second group of theories explicitly addresses the question of what ties together the asset
and liability sides of bank balance sheets—i.e., why is it that the same institutions that create private
money choose to back their safe claims not by investing in T-bills, but rather by investing in loans
and other relatively illiquid assets? What is the nature of the synergy between the two activities? In
a classic contribution, Diamond and Dybvig (1983) argue that banks allow households who are
unsure of the timing of their consumption needs to more efficiently invest in long-lived projects
which are costly to interrupt early.5 Diamond and Dybvig emphasize deposit insurance as the source
of stability that keeps depositors sleepy and prevents runs. We build on this observation, and use it
to address a question that is not taken up by Diamond and Dybvig, namely: what types of assets is it
optimal for deposit-insured banks to hold?


2
  Recent papers in this vein include Dang, Gorton and Holmstrom (2013), DeAngelo and Stulz (2013), Gennaioli et al
(2013), Gorton and Ordonez (2014), Stein (2012), and Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2013).
3
  A similar observation can be made about asset-centric theories that focus solely on banks’ role as delegated monitors
(Diamond (1984)). Here banks are seen as a mechanism for dealing with the information and incentive problems that
would otherwise make it difficult for credit to be extended to opaque borrowers. Because this work is silent on the
structure of bank liabilities, it does not draw a distinction between banks and other non-bank lenders.
4
  See Pennacchi (2012) for a detailed discussion of narrow banking proposals.
5
  Several other studies have focused on potential complementarities between banks’ assets and liabilities. Diamond and
Rajan (2001) suggest that the fragility of runnable bank deposits disciplines bank management, enhancing the value of
illiquid bank loans. Kashyap, Rajan, and Stein (2002) highlight the similarities between demand deposits and loan
commitments, and the ability of an institution that offer both products to economize on costly liquidity buffers.
Gennaioli, Shleifer, and Vishny (2013) argue that a central function of banks is to provide safe claims, but emphasize
asset-side diversification and tranching as technologies for backing such safe liabilities.

                                                          3
         To motivate this asset-side question, note that commercial banks hold not only loans, but
also marketable securities, often in very substantial amounts. Moreover, these securities holdings
have a particular pattern. Banks tend to stay away from the most liquid securities, such as
Treasuries, and concentrate their holdings in securities that are less liquid and whose market prices
are more volatile. These include mortgage-backed securities, asset-backed securities, and corporate
bonds. At the same time, banks do not hold equities, whose cash flows are too risky. These patterns
provide an important clue as to the business of traditional banking more generally, and to the
complementarity between asset and liability structures, which our model seeks to explain.6
         Our work is also related to several other familiar themes. First, a number of papers have
explored the joint roles of banks and securities markets in allocating credit and satisfying the
demand for liquidity (Holmstrom and Tirole 1997, 2011; Diamond 1997). Second, a recent body of
work has studied the shadow banking system and its role in the financial crisis (Brunnermeier and
Pedersen 2009; Coval, Jurek, and Stafford 2009a and 2009b; Shleifer and Vishny 2010; Gorton and
Metrick 2010 and 2011; Shin 2009; Stein 2012; Gennaioli et al 2013; Kacperzcyk and Schnabl
2013; Krishnamurthy, Nagel, and Orlov 2013; Chernenko and Sunderam 2013; Sunderam 2013;
Weymuller 2013, Moreira and Savov 2014). Finally, the evidence we develop using the Financial
Accounts draws on research which seeks to measure the mismatch between the liquidity of
intermediary assets and liabilities (Brunnermeier, Gorton, and Krishnamurthy 2011 and 2013 and
Bai, Krishnamurthy, and Weymuller 2013).
         The plan for the paper is as follows. In the next section, we present some motivating
evidence on the nature of the assets and liabilities of traditional banks, with particular emphasis on
banks’ securities holdings. In Section III, we present our model, in which traditional banks and
shadow banks compete as potential buyers of assets with varying degrees of fundamental and
liquidity risk. The model yields predictions that we then examine empirically in Section IV. Section
V discusses some additional features of modern banking that appear to be consistent with the
model. Section VI briefly discusses policy implications of the model and Section VII concludes.




6
 Taken literally, the Diamond-Dybvig (1983) model does not admit a rationale for banks to hold marketable securities;
see Jacklin (1987). And even if taken less literally, it does not make any predictions about the kinds of securities that
banks are expected to hold.

                                                           4
II.       Motivating Evidence

              A. Fact 1: Bank liabilities are highly homogeneous
              Banks’ liability structures are highly homogeneous: banks are almost always financed
      largely with deposits. This finding holds both in the cross-section and over time. In the cross-
      section, Table I shows various balance sheet items as a share of total assets at the end of 2012 for
      US commercial banks. To assess the cross-sectional heterogeneity in balance sheets, we show the
      value-weighted average share, the 90th percentile, and the 10th percentile for each item. To avoid the
      idiosyncrasies associated with the smallest banks, we focus on banks with assets greater than $1
      billion. Table I reveals a high degree of homogeneity in the amount of deposit funding. The average
      bank finances 76% of its assets with deposits. A bank at the 90th percentile in terms of the
      distribution is 89% deposit-financed, only a bit more than a bank at the 10th percentile which is 74%
      deposit-financed. A similar pattern holds in the time series for the banking industry as a whole.
      Figure 1 shows the evolution of the aggregate balance sheets of US banks from 1896 to 2012. As
      shown in Panel A, banks’ liability structures have been very stable over the past 115 years. Deposits
      have financed 80% of bank assets on average with an annual standard deviation of just 8%.
              These patterns are in sharp contrast to those for non-financial firms, where capital structure
      tends to be far less determinate, both within industries and over time. This suggests that for banks—
      unlike non-financials, and counter to the spirit of Modigliani and Miller (1958)—an important part
      of their economic value creation takes place on the liability side of the balance sheet, via deposit-
      taking. This is broadly consistent with the literature that has followed Gorton and Pennacchi (1990).

              B. Fact 2: Bank assets are more heterogeneous
              There is considerably more heterogeneity on the asset side of bank balance sheets, and in
      particular in their mix of loans and securities. In the 2012 cross-section, a bank at the 10th percentile
      of the distribution had a ratio of securities to assets of 6.9%, while for a bank at the 90th percentile
      the ratio was almost six times higher, at 40.7%.7 One interpretation of this heterogeneity is as
      follows: while lending is obviously very important for a majority of banks, a bank’s scale need not
      be pinned down by the nature of its lending opportunities. Rather, in some cases, it seems that a
      bank’s size is determined by its deposit franchise, and that taking deposits as given, its problem


      7
       These figures on securities holdings do not include banks’ holdings of cash and reverse repo, which averaged 10.2%
      and 4.1% of assets on a value-weighted basis in 2012.

                                                              5
becomes one of how to best invest them. Again, this liability-centric perspective is very different
from how we are used to thinking about non-financial firms, whose scale is almost always
presumed to be driven by their opportunities on the asset side of the balance sheet.

       C. Fact 3: Bank securities portfolios do not seem to be precautionary liquidity buffers
       While banks are quite heterogeneous in their loan and securities mix, within the category of
securities banks appear to have relatively well-defined preferences. As can be seen in Table I and
Panel A of Figure 2, banks hold very little in the way of Treasury and agency securities: these two
categories accounted for just 7.7% and 5.8% of total securities holdings on a value-weighted basis
in 2012. The bulk of their holdings are in agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS) and other types
of mortgage-linked securities such as collateralized mortgage obligations (CMOs) and commercial
mortgage-backed securities (CMBS): these collectively accounted for 57.7% of securities holdings
in 2012. Also important is the “other” category, which includes corporate and municipal bonds, as
well as asset-backed securities, and which accounted for 29.3% of holdings in 2012.
       This composition of banks’ securities portfolios is not what one would expect if banks were
simply holding securities as a highly liquid buffer stock against unexpected deposit outflows or loan
commitment drawdowns. It also appears—superficially, at least—at odds with the narrow-banking
premise that one can profitably exploit a deposit franchise simply by taking deposits and parking
them in T-bills. Rather, it looks as if banks are purposefully taking on some mix of duration, credit
and prepayment exposure in order to earn a spread relative to T-bills. And indeed, over the period
1984 to 2012, the average spread on banks’ securities portfolio relative to bills is 1.73%.
       In this vein, it is interesting to ask how profitable banks would be in a counterfactual world
in which their deposit-taking behavior was exactly the same, but instead of allocating their
securities holdings as they actually do, they followed a narrow-banking strategy of investing only in
T-bills. The profitability of a narrow bank that takes deposits DEP at a rate          and invests them
in T-bills paying RF, while incurring deposit-related noninterest expenses of NONINTEXP (e.g.,
employee salaries, bricks-and-mortar expenses associated with bank branches, and other operating
expenses), and earning deposit-related noninterest income of NONINTINC (e.g., services charges on
deposit accounts) is given by
                              NONINTINC NONINTEXP
           RF  RDEP                        .                                             (1)
                                DEP        DEP
       We carry out this calculation for the aggregate commercial banking industry from 1984-
2012. To compute the gross deposit spread, RF – RDEP, we use the rate on 3-month Treasury bills as

                                                   6
our proxy for RF and compute RDEP from Call Reports as the interest paid on deposits divided by
deposits. Deposit rates appear to embed a significant convenience premium relative to short-term
market rates, as the gross deposit spread averages 0.87% over our 29 year sample. We next add the
noninterest income that banks earn from service charges on deposit accounts from Call Reports.
This averages 0.49% of deposits over our sample. Finally, we subtract the non-interest expense
associated with deposit-taking. This is not directly available from Call Reports: banks report their
total noninterest expense, but we are only interested in that portion attributable to deposit-taking.8
As detailed in the Appendix, we use a hedonic-regression approach to infer the expenses associated
with deposit-taking. Although these expenses have trended down due to advances in information
technology, they remain substantial, averaging 1.30% of deposits over the past 29 years.
         Combining these pieces as in equation (1), we estimate the average profitability of narrow
banking between 1984 and 2012 to be 0.06% of deposits (0.06% = 0.87% + 0.49% – 1.30%).9 In
other words, the interest rate differential between deposits and short-term marketable rates and the
associated fee income is largely offset by the direct costs of operating a deposit-taking franchise.
Given these numbers, it is perhaps not surprising that banks choose to invest in riskier securities that
earn a spread relative to T-bills. Of course, the large costs of deposit-taking that we document
ultimately represent an endogenous choice for traditional banks, and so must be explained as an
equilibrium outcome in any fully satisfactory model. For example, banks could always choose to
hold down costs by offering fewer physical branch services to their customers, similarly to money-
market mutual funds. We return to the endogeneity of deposit-taking expenses below.

         D. Discussion
         Our synthesis of these stylized facts is that traditional banks are in the business of taking
deposits and investing these deposits in fixed-income assets that have certain well-defined risk and
liquidity attributes, but which can be either loans or securities. The information-intensive nature of
traditional lending—in the Diamond (1984) delegated monitoring sense—while clearly important in
many cases, may not be the defining feature of banking. Rather, the defining feature may be that,
whether they are information-intensive loans, or relatively transparent securities, banks seek to


8
  In 2012, banks had non-interest operating expenses equal to 2.96% of total assets. These can be decomposed into wage
and salary expenses of 1.32%, building occupancy expenses of 0.32%, and other expenses of 1.32%.
9
  This 0.06% figure is probably an upper bound on the profitability of narrow banking. As explained in the Appendix,
our methodology for attributing bank expenses to different activities leaves an unallocated cost, which can be thought of
as fixed overhead. This overhead cost averages 0.63% of deposits from 1984-2012. If 50% of this amount is allocated
back to deposit-taking, the estimated profitability of narrow banking drops to -0.25%.

                                                           7
invest in fixed-income assets that have some degree of price volatility and illiquidity, and so offer a
higher return than very liquid and safe Treasury securities. In this sense, small business loans, asset-
backed securities, and CMOs are on one side of the fence, and Treasuries on the other.
       Before proceeding, we should address a natural first reaction to this interpretation. Perhaps
banks’ propensity to invest in risky securities merely reflects the fact that they are taking advantage
of the put option created by deposit insurance. The evidence we have assembled on the patterns of
banks’ securities holdings may just reflect a moral hazard problem, and nothing more.
       One way to address this hypothesis is to redo the analysis in Panel A of Figure 2, restricting
the sample to those banks with the highest levels of capital at any point in time—those above the
median of the distribution by the ratio of equity to assets. This is done in Panel B of Figure 2. The
basic patterns for highly capitalized banks in Panel B are very similar to those in Panel A for all
banks. Given that these highly capitalized banks are less likely to impose losses on the deposit-
insurance fund, we suspect that there is something deeper here than can be explained by a simple
appeal to deposit-insurance-induced moral hazard.


III.   Model
       We develop a simple model in which banks and shadow banks compete as buyers of a
collection of assets with different degrees of fundamental and liquidity risk. The essence of the
tradeoff is that banks pay more—by raising more equity capital—to gain access to government-
provided deposit insurance and hence to create money-like claims that are not only safe for
investors in the short run, but also stable, and unlikely to run when there is bad news. This stability
allows banks to avoid inefficient fire sales of their assets.

       A. Setting
       The basic structure of the model is similar to Stein (2012). The model has three dates, t = 0,
1 and 2. There are N long-lived risky assets indexed by i = 1, 2, …, N. Asset i is available in a fixed
supply of Qi. For simplicity, we assume that the payoffs on these assets are perfectly correlated, and
assets only differ in the magnitudes of these payoffs in the bad state of the world. The individual
assets in our model might correspond to corporate loans, mortgages, mortgage-backed securities
(MBS), US Treasuries, or even equities.
       The model features three types of actors: households, traditional banks, and shadow banks.
Households do not directly own any of the risky assets. Instead, households invest in safe and risky
                                                    8
claims issued by traditional and shadow banks, which in turn back these claims by holding the
underlying risky assets. Intermediation is efficient here because households are willing to pay a
premium for completely safe claims, and some form of intermediation is required to create safety—
none of the primitive assets are themselves safe.
       Outside of this demand for safe money-like claims, households are assumed to be risk
neutral. In other words, once a claim has any risk at all, the discount rate applied by households is
fixed at a discretely higher level. This corresponds to the following household utility function, taken
from Stein (2012)
        U  C0   E[C2 ]   M ,                                                               (2)

where the notational convention is that a household has M dollars of money-like claims if it has
claims that are guaranteed to pay off an amount M at t = 2. The discount factor applied to all risky
claims is thus  ≤ 1 while the discount factor applied to safe, money-like claims is +  where  ≥
0. The former follows from the observation that a household is indifferent between having  units of
time-0 consumption and a risky claim that delivers one unit of time-2 consumption in expectation.
The latter follows from the fact that a household is indifferent between having  +  units of time-0
consumption and a riskless claim that always delivers one unit of time-2 consumption. Such a claim
delivers  units of utility from expected future consumption, along with additional  units of utility
in current monetary services.
       When  > 0, the discount rate applied to safe, money-like claims, 1/(+ ), is less than the
discount rate applied to risky claims, 1/. As in Stein (2012), Gennaioli et al. (2013), and DeAngelo
and Stulz (2013), the assumptions of the Modigliani-Miller (1958) theorem no longer hold and the
value of a risky asset may depend on the way it is financed using safe and risky claims.
       The timing of the model is as follows. Each asset i pays R at t = 2 if the aggregate economic
state of the world is good, but a lower amount zi < R if the aggregate economic state at t = 2 is bad.
At time 1, there is an interim news event about the future economic state. With probability p, the
interim news is good, which means that the aggregate state will be good at time 2 and all assets will
definitely pay R. With probability (1–p), the news is bad, which means that there is a subsequent
probability of (1–q) of the bad state and low payoff on all assets at time 2. Thus, in the bad-news
state at time 1, the fundamental value of asset i is Fi = qR + (1-q)zi.


                                                    9
                         Time t = 0                        Time t = 1                     Time t = 2

                 Intermediaries purchase the      Bad state news arrives with   Payoff on risky asset revealed.
                risky asset and issue safe and   probability 1-p. Shadow banks    Payoff on claims issued to
                  risky claims to households       must sell at a discount, ki.   households also revealed.
                                                  Traditional banks are able to
                                                        hold to maturity.



                                           p                                                      R


                                                                               q                 R
                                        1-p


                                                    Fundamental value         1-q
                                                  after bad news at t=1 is
                                                      Fi = qR + (1-q)zi.
                                                                                                  zi
                                                    However, the market
                                                   price is only kiFi ≤ Fi.



       Our central assumption deals with the difference between the fundamental value of asset i at
time 1, and its market value. We assume that, if there is bad news at time 1, the market value of
asset i is kiFi ≤ Fi. When ki < 1, this market price reflects a fire-sale discount to fundamental value.
The value of ki is endogenous and asset-specific and depends on the equilibrium quantity of asset i
that is liquidated at time 1. We return to this feature momentarily.

       B. Intermediation structures
       To examine the different ways the risky assets can be held and used as backing to create safe
claims, we consider two intermediation structures: traditional banking and shadow banking. At t =
0, households can invest in either traditional bank deposits or shadow bank deposits, both of which
are completely safe and are valued at +  per dollar paid at t = 2. Alternatively, households can
buy bank equity or shadow bank equity, both of which are risky and are valued at  per dollar paid
in expectation at t = 2. In equilibrium, fraction i of risky asset i is purchased by shadow banks at
t = 0 and fraction 1–i is purchased by traditional banks. We examine how the equilibrium market
shares of traditional and shadow banks vary as we change the properties of the asset in question.




                                                         10
       B.1.     Traditional banks
       A traditional bank uses deposit insurance and a stable, hold-to-maturity strategy to create
safe short-term claims. We assume that, in order to protect taxpayers, the government imposes a
particular form of actuarially fair risk-based capital regulation: the bank is required to hold enough
capital against any asset i such that the deposit insurer never suffers losses in equilibrium. Since the
bank plans to always hold the risky asset to maturity, the maximum amount of safe money-like
claims that can be created against asset i in this regulatory regime is zi, which is the worst-case
payoff at time 2. To satisfy the risk-based capital rule, the remainder of the asset purchase must be
financed by raising risky equity capital which is more expensive.
       In the literal context of the model, this capital regulation is the only cost to being a deposit-
insured bank with stable funding, as opposed to a shadow bank with unstable funding. More
broadly, however, one might interpret what we are calling the cost of equity capital as
encompassing a variety of other costs that go along with being a traditional bank. These include the
costs of other types of regulation, as well as the bricks-and-mortar costs of setting up the sort of
branch network that attracts retail depositors.
       The total value of claims the bank can issue at time 0 using the risky asset i as backing is
                     
              Value of bank deposits
                                               
                                               Value of bank equity
                                                                    
       Vi 
          B
                 (    ) zi            ( p  (1  p )q )( R  zi )
                                                                                                 (3)
                        
                    Money premium
                                                  
                                              Expected cash flows

                        zi             [ pR  (1  p ) Fi ],

where, again, Fi = qR + (1 – q)zi is the fundamental value of asset i in the bad state at t = 1. In any
equilibrium where banks hold security i, banks’ zero profit condition ensures that the market value

of security i equals Vi B . Because households are willing to pay a premium for absolutely safe

claims, equation (3) shows that the total value of claims issued by banks exceeds the expected cash
flows on the risky asset discounted at the risky rate: banks capture a money premium of zi because
they can use the risky asset to back zi units of safe money-like claims.

       B.2.     Shadow banks
       An alternative intermediation structure is a shadow bank, which is a composite structure
consisting of a highly-leveraged intermediary (HL) such as a broker-dealer or a hedge fund, along



                                                                    11
with a money market fund (MMF). The HL buys the risky asset, and issues short-term repo against
it, which is then held by the MMF. MMF deposits and HL equity are owned by households.
         The MMF has no capital, so for its deposits to be riskless investments for households the
repo that the MMF holds must also be made riskless. The way these repo claims are kept safe is that
if there is bad news at time 1, the MMF seizes the collateral and sells it at the fire-sale price of k iFi.
The maximum amount of safe money that can be created by a shadow bank is therefore kiFi. Unlike
traditional bank depositors protected by deposit insurance and bank equity capital, an MMF that
invests in repo cannot afford to sleep through time 1; the MMF’s ability to pull the plug at this
interim date is essential to keeping its claim safe. Shadow banking deposits are thus an endogenous
form of “hot” money: they are unstable rather than stable short-term funding.
         The total value of claims the shadow banking system can create using the risky asset i as a
backing is then given by
                                 
                    Value of MMF deposits
                                                  
                                       Value of HL equity

         Vi ( ki )  (   ) ki Fi   p ( R  ki Fi )
           S

                                                                                                                (4)
                           
                         Money premium
                                             
                                                Expected cash flows

                           ki Fi         [ pR  (1  p ) ki Fi ].

In any equilibrium where shadow banks hold security i, their zero profit condition ensures that the

market value of security i must equal Vi S (ki ) .

         C. Equilibrium
         We assume that shadow banks face a downward-sloping demand curve at time 1, so the fire-
sale price is a decreasing function of the amount of the asset that is liquidated. Formally, let 0   i

be an exogenous parameter that indexes the illiquidity in the secondary market. We assume that

k ( i , i ) / i  0 , so demand is downward sloping, and  2 k ( i , i ) / i i  0 , so more illiquid

assets have steeper demand curves. Finally, as a normalization, we assume that k (i ,0)  1 for all

i : when i  0 the asset is perfectly liquid and there is never any fire-sale discount. As shown in
the Appendix, a fire-sale discount of this form can be micro-founded as in Stein (2012).10


10
   Specifically, we assume that the risky asset is sold to a third type of intermediary (also owned by households) who
has fixed resources and access to outside investment opportunities at t = 1. Since these opportunities are characterized
by diminishing returns to scale, shadow banks must offer larger discounts relative to fundamental value to induce these
intermediaries to purchase more assets, thereby foregoing increasingly productive outside opportunities. In this context,

                                                                  12
        Since intermediaries are risk-neutral and there are no benefits of diversification built into our
model, intermediaries’ willingness to hold asset i is not impacted by their holdings of asset j ≠ i. As
a consequence, market equilibrium in any asset i naturally decouples from that in asset j ≠ i. An
equilibrium for asset i is a  i* such that

        Vi B  Vi S (k ( i* , i )) for i*  (0,1)
        Vi B  Vi S (k (0, i ))           i*  0                                                           (5)
        Vi B  Vi S (k (1, i ))          i*  1.

The model admits either interior outcomes or corner solutions, depending on the asset-specific
values of zi and φi. It is consistent with the possibility that some assets (e.g., highly illiquid loans)
are held only by banks, some (e.g., Treasuries) are held predominantly by shadow banks, and some
(e.g.,MBS) are held in significant amounts by both intermediary types.

        Formally, since Vi S (k ( i , i )) / i  (Vi S / k )  (k / i )  0, security i is held entirely by

traditional banks when Vi B  Vi S (k (0, i )) and entirely by shadow banks when Vi B  Vi S (k (1, i )) .11

Since shadow banks dominate traditional banks when there is no fire-sale discount (i.e., we always

have Vi B  Vi S (1) ), we only have a corner equilibrium where the assets is held entirely by traditional

banks when k (0, i )  1 . By contrast, if k (0, i )  1 , then shadow banks must always hold some of

the asset in equilibrium.
        At an interior equilibrium where both traditional and shadow banks hold the security, the
fire-sale discount ki is such that both traditional and shadow banks earn zero profits by buying the
asset and issuing claims backed by it. Thus, at an interior equilibrium, we have
          Marginal benefit of stable funding:          Marginal cost of stable funding:
           avoiding fire-sale liquidations               reduced money creation
                                                               
         (1  p )   1  k (  i* ,  i )   Fi     k (  i* ,  i )  Fi  zi  .                 (6)

Equation (6) is the central equation of the model. It says that the mix between shadow banks and
traditional banks must be such that marginal benefit of stable bank funding equals the marginal cost




differences across assets in i reflect differences in the number of potential second-best holders of each asset—i.e.,
differences in asset specificity.
11
   Implicitly, by requiring ∈ 0,1 , we are imposing a short-sale constraint for both traditional and shadow banks.

                                                                       13
of stable funding.12 Stable funding allows traditional banks to avoid the fire-sale liquidation
discount if the bad state occurs at time 1. This benefit of traditional banks relative to shadow banks
is captured by the left-hand-side of (6). However, precisely because investors can get out early, the
market can generate a larger amount of unstable short-term funding than of stable funding using a
given asset as backing. This cost of traditional banking relative to shadow banks is captured by the
right-hand-side of (6). In summary, although traditional banks have more stable funding than
shadow banks, this stability comes at a price: traditional banks create fewer money-like claims than
shadow banks.
         Solving equation (6), the equilibrium fire-sale discount is
                                   zi   (1  p) Fi
         ki*  k ( i* , i )                        .                                                         (7)
                                   Fi   (1  p) Fi

Finally, inverting the k ( i , i ) function, the equilibrium fraction of asset i held by shadow banks is13

                       zi   (1  p ) Fi    
         i*  ki 1                          .                                                               (8)
                       Fi   (1  p ) Fi    

To take a simple parametric example, assume k ( i , i )  1  i  i . In this case, we have i*  1 if

i  0 —i.e., the asset is held exclusively by shadow banks if there is no fire-sale discount—and

                      1  ki*         1       ( Fi  zi )     
         i*  min           ,1  min                        ,1 ,
                       i             i  Fi   (1  p ) Fi 

if i  0 , so that i*  0 as i  .

         The equilibrium in our model is in the spirit of Miller (1977). While the aggregate mix of
unstable (i) versus stable funding (1–i) for each asset i is pinned down, so long as we are in an
interior equilibrium, any small intermediary is indifferent between setting up shop as a bank or as a
shadow bank. Relatedly, the model is silent about the boundaries of financial firms—e.g., whether a
holding company winds up housing both traditional and shadow banking operations.




12
   The left-hand side of equation (6) is the private benefit of avoiding fire-sales that is internalized by an individual
intermediary choosing between the traditional and shadow banking forms. As Stein (2012) shows, this differs from the
total social benefits of avoiding fire-sales because binding, price-dependent collateral constraints open the door to
pecuniary externalities. We return to this point in Section VI where we explore the policy implications of the model.
13
   Formally, the function        is implicitly defined by               ,   .

                                                          14
        Equation (6) says that the equilibrium fire-sale discount is locally independent of asset
illiquidity i at an interior equilibrium where both traditional and shadow banks hold the asset. In
this region, a change in asset illiquidity impacts the mix of asset holders—an increase in illiquidity
raises the market share of banks—but leaves the fire-sale discount unchanged. However, if the
assets are sufficiently liquid (i is very low), the market share of traditional banks is eventually
driven to zero, so the fire-sale discount is increasing in asset illiquidity for very low levels of i.

        D. Comparative statics
        The model can be used to characterize the kinds of assets for which the traditional banking
model dominates. To do so, we must examine the roles of the two factors that drive the tradeoff
between traditional banks and shadow banks: the money premium for safe claims which is
controlled by  and the strength of the fire-sale effect which is controlled by i.

        First, if  = 0 and k ( i , i ) / i  0 , we have i*  0 —the risky asset is held entirely by

traditional banks. If there is no premium for safe claims, shadow banking is dominated by
traditional banking: unstable short-term debt forces inefficient liquidations and has no offsetting
monetary benefits relative to stable deposit funding.

        Conversely, if  > 0 and i = 0 so that k ( i , 0)  1 for all i, then i*  1 —the asset is held

entirely by shadow banks. The entire advantage of traditional banks’ stable funding is that it enables
them to ride out temporary departures of price from fundamental value without liquidating assets. If
there is no fire-sale risk and the price at time 1 always equals fundamental value, then stable
funding has no value; however, when  > 0, raising stable funding is always more costly than
raising unstable funding.
        The ideal asset for a traditional bank is one that has very little fundamental cash-flow risk
(i.e., zi is high so risk-based capital rules allow a bank to use it to back a lot of money-like deposits),
but that is exposed to meaningful interim price re-pricing risk (i.e., i is high so fire-sale risk looms
large for its shadow-bank counterparts). In general, when both  > 0 and i > 0, there is a
meaningful trade-off between the two intermediation structures and we will have an interior
equilibrium.
        In the case of an interior equilibrium, we can ask how the equilibrium market shares of

shadow banks ( i* ) and traditional banks ( 1   i* ) vary with the exogenous model parameters.
                                                    15
Specifically, differentiating equation (8), we immediately obtain the following comparative statics
for the fraction of an asset held by traditional banks:

   1.  (1  i* ) / i  0 : An increase in asset illiquidity increases the equilibrium share held by

         traditional banks. By assumption, an increase in asset illiquidity makes the demand curve
         for fire-sale liquidations at time 1 steeper. Although a change in asset illiquidity i has no
         effect on the equilibrium level of the fire-sale discount in (7), this change alters the mapping
         between the ownership mix and the fire-sale discount in (8). When i is high, the fire-sale
         discount is highly sensitive to the volume of forced sales by shadow banks, so traditional
         banks end up holding more of the asset in equilibrium.

   2.  (1  i* ) / zi  0 : An increase in the worst-case cash flow zi increases the share of the

         risky asset i held by traditional banks in equilibrium. An increase in zi reduces the money-
         creation advantage of shadow banks relative to traditional banks, and therefore needs to be

         compensated by a rise in ki* which implies a rise in 1   i* to restore equilibrium

         indifference between traditional and shadow banks. We think of a higher zi as being
         associated with less fundamental cash-flow risk. Thus, all else equal, traditional banks have
         a comparative advantage at holding assets with little fundamental cash-flow risk.

         Taken together, these two results suggest that traditional banks have a comparative
advantage at holding illiquid fixed income assets—i.e., assets that can experience significant
temporary price dislocations, but at the same time, have only modest fundamental risk. Agency
MBS might be a leading example of such an asset, since they are insured against default risk, but
are considerably less liquid than Treasury securities, and for a given duration, have more price
volatility, since there is significant variability in the MBS-Treasury spread.
         The model also explains why banks are not well-suited to investing in equities—equities
simply have too much fundamental downside risk. Because their value can fall very far over an
extended period of time—i.e., because their zi is close to zero—equities cannot be efficiently used
as backing to create safe two-period claims. As such, they are not good collateral for bank money.
By contrast, to the extent that they are highly liquid, they do make suitable collateral for very short-
term repo financing. In other words, equities can be used to back some amount of shadow-bank
money.

                                                   16
         In addition, we have the following comparative statics which impact all assets:

      3.  (1  i* ) /   0 : An increase in the money premium on safe claims lowers traditional
         banks’ equilibrium market share of all risky assets. When the premium associated with
         safe money-like claims is higher, the fire-sale discount must rise to maintain equilibrium
         (i.e., ki* must fall), so the fraction of risky assets held by shadow banks, i* , must rise.

      4.  (1   i* ) / p  0 : An increase in the probability of good news at time 1 lowers the share
         of all risky assets held by traditional banks. When the interim good state is more likely, a
         larger fire-sale discount (lower ki* ) is needed to restore indifference and the market share of

         shadow banks,  i* , must rise in equilibrium. Intuitively, bank’s stable funding structure
         functions as a costly form of insurance against fire-sale risk; this insurance naturally
         becomes less valuable when a fire sale is less likely (i.e., when p rises).

         Comparative static #3 suggests that an increase in the demand for safe, money-like assets
should trigger a migration of intermediation from traditional to shadow banking. Indeed, some
observers have argued that such an increase in money demand played a role in fueling the rapid
growth of shadow banking prior to the recent financial crisis.14 Comparative static #4 suggests that
intermediation activity tends to migrate away from traditional banks and towards shadow banks
during economic expansions when p is high. In summary, our model provides a way of
understanding why traditional banks lost significant market share to shadow banks during the run-
up to the recent financial crisis.


IV.      Further Evidence
         In this section, we provide some simple aggregate evidence bearing on the model’s
predictions. We think of this analysis more as a synthesis of known high-level facts about the
structure of financial intermediation than as a true test of the model. We first describe how we take
the model to the data, then our measurement approach, and finally the results of some simple cross-
sectional regressions suggested by the model.




14
  See for instance Bernanke (2005), Gennaioli et al (2013), Gourinchas and Jeanne (2012), Krishnamurthy and Vissing-
Jorgensen (2013), and Caballero and Farhi (2013).

                                                        17
        A.         Taking the model to the data
        A.1.       The cross-section of asset classes
        A key testable implication of our model is that, all else equal, traditional banks should hold a
higher market share in more illiquid assets:  (1  i* ) /  i  0 .

       Prediction 1: Looking across assets and holding constant fundamental asset risk, banks
should have a larger market share in asset classes that are more illiquid.

        Our model features just two intermediary types: traditional banks with stable funding and
shadow banks with unstable funding. In reality, there are many intermediary types with a range of
funding stability. Generalizing our theory, we would expect intermediaries with more stable funding
to hold more illiquid assets with high fire-sale risk.
        Prediction 2: Looking across assets and holding constant fundamental asset risk, more
illiquid asset classes should be held by intermediary types with greater funding stability.

        A.2.       The cross-section of intermediary types
        Since our theory has predictions for the cross-section of asset types, it naturally generates
related predictions for the cross-section of intermediary types. Specifically, the portfolio share of
shadow banks in asset i is

                    i*Qi
        wiS *               ,                                                                    (9)
                   k 1 k k
                        
                    N     *
                           Q

and the portfolio share of traditional banks in asset i is

                     (1  i* )Qi
        wiB*                           .                                                         (10)
                   k 1 (1  k* )Qk
                     N




It follows trivially from the comparative statics derived above that wiS * / i  0 , wiS * / zi  0,

wiB* / i  0 , and wiB* / zi  0. In other words, shadow bank portfolios are tilted towards assets

that are more liquid or have more fundamental downside-risk, whereas traditional bank portfolios
are tilted towards assets that are more illiquid and have less fundamental downside-risk.
        The average illiquidity of assets held by shadow banks is

         S *   i 1 wiS *i ,
                     N
                                                                                                  (11)

and the average illiquidity of asset held by commercial banks is

         B*  i 1 wiB*i .
                     N
                                                                                                  (12)
                                                        18
If all assets have the same zi, in equilibrium we have

          B*  S* ,                                                                            (13)

—i.e., the asset portfolios of traditional banks would be more illiquid than those of shadow banks.
        Prediction 3: The asset portfolios of commercial banks are more illiquid than the asset
portfolios of shadow banks, controlling for fundamental risk.

         As above, we can generalize this to obtain a prediction that we can apply to the broader
cross-section of intermediary types, including insurers and finance companies.
       Prediction 4: Comparing across intermediaries, those with more stable funding should
have asset portfolios that are more illiquid, controlling for fundamental risk.

         B. Measurement
         Let j index intermediary types and let i index instrument types—i.e., different types of assets
or liabilities. Let ILLIQUIDi  [0,1] measure the illiquidity of asset type i. For instance, US

Treasuries should have ILLIQUIDi = 0 and small business loans might have ILLIQUIDi = 1.
Similarly, let MATURITYi  [0,1] measure the contractual maturity length of liability type i and

STICKYi  [0,1] measure the stickiness of liability type i. Stickiness is opposite of runniness, which

is the tendency for liability holders to withdraw funds following an adverse shock. For instance,
short-term commercial paper might have STICKYi = 0, while long-term (non-redeemable) equity
would have STICKYi = 1.
         Let Aji and Lji denote intermediary j’s assets and liabilities of instrument type i and let

Aj  i Aji  i L ji . denote the total assets of intermediary type j. Then the Asset Illiquidity Index

for intermediary type j is defined as the weighted average illiquidity of its asset holdings

         A _ ILLIQUID j 
                            Ai       ji     ILLIQUIDi
                                                          .                                      (14)
                                             Aj

The Liability Maturity Index for intermediary type j is the weighted average contractual maturity of
its liabilities

         L _ MATURITY j 
                            L    i    ij    MATURITYi
                                                              .                                  (15)
                                              Aj

Finally, the Liability Stickiness Index for intermediary type j is the weighted average stickiness of
its liabilities

                                                                  19
         L _ STICKY j 
                           L i   ji    STICKYi
                                                   .                                                         (16)
                                       Aj

        Our measurement approach is in the spirit of Brunnermeier, Gorton, and Krishnamurthy
(2011, 2013), who suggest constructing a liquidity mismatch index—the difference between asset
illiquidity and funding liquidity—for different financial intermediaries. This approach is
implemented in Bai, Krishnamurthy, and Weymuller (2013) for bank holding companies.
        We assemble data on the assets and liabilities of various types of financial intermediaries
using the Federal Reserve’s Financial Accounts of the United States (formerly the Flow of Funds
Accounts). We examine data on commercial banks, property and casualty (P&C) insurers, life
insurers, money market funds (MMFs), government sponsored enterprises (GSEs), finance
companies, real estate investment trusts (REITs), and security broker-dealers. We use data on
intermediary balance sheets as of 2012Q4. However, the findings of our analysis do not depend
significantly on when we look at the data.
        In an effort to avoid subjective judgments, wherever possible we assign numerical values for
ILLIQUIDj, MATURITYj, and STICKYj based on the bank liquidity requirements put forth under
Basel III. Specifically, for each instrument type, we attempt to choose values of these parameters
based on the proposed calibration of Basel III’s Net Stable Funding Requirement (NSFR) in Basel
Committee on Banking Supervision (2010) and the final calibration of the Liquidity Coverage Ratio
(LCR) in Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2013), hereafter BCBS (2010 and 2013).
However, we do need to apply some judgment in mapping the instrument types considered by Basel
III to our aggregated Financial Accounts data. We also need to assign values for liability types
issued by non-banks that are not considered by BCBS. As we detail in Appendix B, we have made
every attempt to do so in the spirit of BCBS (2010 and 2013) and consistent with empirical
evidence. The most important auxiliary assumption we make is that the policy-related liabilities of
life insurers are quite sticky whereas those of P&C insurers are somewhat less sticky.15
        Consider first our ILLIQUID index for assets. We associate ILLIQUID with the parameter i
in the model. We assign ILLIQUID = 0 for US Treasuries, ILLIQUID = 0.15 for GSE-backed MBS,


15
   See Bai, Krishnamurthy, and Weymuller (2013) for a similar, albeit more sophisticated, approach that requires more
granular balance sheet data than is available in the Financial Accounts. Specifically, they use measures of asset
illiquidity based on repo haircuts.

                                                         20
ILLIQUID = 0.5 for corporate equities, ILLIQUID = 0.75 for consumer debt and home mortgages,
and ILLIQUID = 1 for unsecured (C&I) and secured commercial real estate (CRE) loans.
         Next, consider our STICKY and MATURITY indices for liabilities. Starting with bank
deposits, we assign STICKY = 0.7 and MATURITY = 0.1 for wholesale bank deposits, STICKY = 0.8
and MATURITY = 0 for retail time and savings deposits, and STICKY = 0.9 and MATURITY = 0 for
transactions deposits. Turning to non-deposit liabilities, we assign STICKY = 0.6 and MATURITY =
0.6 for corporate bonds and STICKY = 0 and MATURITY = 0 for non-deposit, short-term funding.
For insurance policy liabilities, we assume STICKY = MATURITY = 0.9 for life policies and
STICKY = MATURITY = 0.6 for P&C policies.

         C. Empirical tests
         C.1      The cross-section of asset classes
         Prediction 1 says that traditional banks should hold a higher market share in more illiquid
assets. A simple way to assess this prediction is to compute banks’ market share for each asset type
         BANK _ SHRi  Abank ,i /  j A ji .                                                                      (17)

In other words, for each asset type, we compute banks’ share of the total amount of assets held by
financial intermediaries.16 Since BANK_SHRi corresponds precisely to (1–i) in the model and
ILLIQUIDi corresponds to i, we should see a strong positive relationship between BANK_SHRi on
ILLIQUIDi in the cross-section of asset types.
         Panel A of Figure 3 shows the result. The estimated regression is

         BANK _ SHRi  0.04  0.57  ILLIQUIDi , R 2  0.47.                                                      (18)
                                     (t 3.47)

As predicted, there is a strong positive relationship between asset illiquidity and banks’ market
share. Of course, this is just a descriptive cross-sectional regression with 12 observations. It is also a
univariate regression, whereas our theory suggests a bivariate relationship: banks’ market share of a
given asset should depend on both the asset’s illiquidity and its fundamental safety. If the two
characteristics are correlated—as they likely are—then (18) suffers from an omitted variable bias.
To address this concern, we run a multivariate regression of banks’ market share on asset illiquidity
and fundamental safety, expecting positive coefficients on both. To run this multivariate regression,

16
  Specifically, we compute the share of assets held by the Financial Business sector in table L.107 that is attributable to
U.S.-Chartered Depository Institutions in table L.110.

                                                           21
we create a new variable called FUNDSAFE, which we set equal to 0.5 for equity-like exposures,
0.8 for risky debt exposures, and 1 for super-safe debt exposures. While this is solely meant to be
illustrative, this approach yields

        BANK _ SHRi  0.96  0.78  ILLIQUIDi  1.11  FUNDSAFEi , R 2  0.78.                (19)
                                     (t 5.80)                  (t 7.40)

The coefficient on ILLIQUIDi is larger in the multivariate regression and the R2 rises considerably.
Alternatively, we can go back to running a univariate regression of banks’ market share on
illiquidity alone, simply dropping those asset classes with significantly greater fundamental
cashflow risk. For instance, if we drop equity-like instruments (corporate equities and mutual fund
shares), the R2 in the univariate regression rises from 0.47 to 0.59.
       Turning to Prediction 2, other intermediaries besides traditional banks may also have stable
funding and thus may also have a comparative advantage at holding illiquid assets. To capture this
we compute the average funding stability of holders of a given asset as

        AV _ STICKYi 
                             j
                                  Aji  L _ STICKY j
                                                       .                                       (20)
                                         j
                                            Aji

Since AV_STICKYi is a generalized version of (1–i) in the model and ILLIQUIDi corresponds to i,
Prediction 2 suggests that we should observe a strong positive relationship between the two in the
cross-section. This is shown in Panel B of Figure 3 where we plot AV_STICKYi versus ILLIQUIDi .
The estimated regression is given by

        AV _ STICKYi  0.59  0.23  ILLIQUIDi , R2  0.41.                                    (21)
                                    (t 3.40)

Again, we see a strong positive relationship. The R2 of this regression rises from 0.41 to 0.64 if we
exclude corporate equities and mutual fund shares.
       Figure 3 confirms the core message of our model. Banks hold virtually no Treasuries despite
their extreme safety. Treasuries are not exposed to interim fire-sale risk, so they are not profitable
enough for banks. By contrast, banks are significant holders of GSE-backed MBS. These securities
have limited downside risk, so banks can use them to back nearly as much safe short-term debt as a
shadow bank. At the same time, GSE-backed MBS are more exposed to fire-sale risk than
Treasuries, which makes them more attractive to traditional banks.
       Figure 3 also shows that banks have a dominant market share in illiquid home mortgage
loans, holding approximately 76% of unsecuritized whole loans. Banks are also the largest holders
                                                           22
of illiquid commercial and multi-family home mortgages. Going beyond Figure 3, even within the
category of home mortgages, banks tend to hold less “plain-vanilla” products, for which liquidation
costs are likely higher. Specifically, banks are the dominant holders of second-lien home equity
loans and other mortgage products falling outside of the conventional mortgage markets supported
by the GSEs.17
        Finally, Figure 3 shows that banks remain significant holders of unsecured loans to firms,
holding 48% of all C&I loans. As with home mortgages, when one looks within the category of
C&I loans, banks seem to specialize in those that are the most illiquid. For instance, banks have
been steadily losing market share in the market for C&I loans to large firms, which has become
increasingly liquid in recent decades. At the same time, banks remain the near exclusive providers
of C&I loans to small- and medium-sized firms, which continue to be highly illiquid. According to
the 2012Q4 Financial Accounts, banks hold 37% of C&I loans to non-financial corporations, but
86% of C&I loans to non-financial non-corporate businesses, which tend to be much smaller.

        C.2      The cross-section of intermediary types
        Prediction 4 suggests that in the cross-section of intermediary types we should see a strong
positive relationship between A_ILLIQUIDj and L_STICKYj. Since the stickiness of liabilities as
opposed to their contractual maturity is the key to avoiding costly liquidations, we expect to see
weaker relationship between A_ILLIQUIDj and L_MATURITYj. In particular, we expect traditional
banks to look like an extreme outlier in this regard because their assets are highly illiquid given the
short contractual maturity of their liabilities.
        Panel A of Figure 4 plots A_ILLIQUIDj versus L_STICKYj. As predicted by the theory, we
see a strong positive relationship and the estimated regression is

         A _ ILLIQUID j  0.13  0.55  L _ STICKYj , R2  0.64.                                         (22)
                                    (t 5.02)

Panel B of Figure 4 plots A_ILLIQUIDj versus L_MATURITYj. The estimated regression is

         A _ ILLIQUID j  0.27  0.36  L _ MATURITY j , R 2  0.29,                                     (23)
                                    (t 1.59)

So, as expected, the regression fit deteriorates significantly from Panel A to Panel B. Although there
is a general tendency for intermediaries with longer maturity liabilities hold more illiquid assets,
17
  For instance, according to the Financial Accounts, commercial banks held 85% of the $750 billion in second-lien
home mortgages loans as of 2012Q4.

                                                       23
banks are a significant outlier. Relative to other patient investors, who obtain stable funding by
issuing liabilities with long contractual maturities, banks issue short-term liabilities but organize
themselves in such a way that their contractually short-term deposits are de facto extremely stable.

        D. Related micro evidence
        While we have focused on the aggregate structure of financial intermediation, the banking
literature contains some complementary micro evidence also consistent with our theory. Using the
Survey of Terms of Business Lending, Berlin and Mester (1999) find that, in the cross-section of
banks, those with greater access to sticky “core” deposits (i.e., transaction and saving deposits) are
more likely to form stable lending relationships with firms, thereby providing borrowers with
insurance against transitory market shocks. Black, Hancock, and Passmore (2007 and 2010) find
that banks with a large supply of core deposits tend to specialize in more illiquid information-
intensive loans, whereas banks which are more reliant on wholesale funding tend to specialize in
easy-to-value loans.18


 V.     Discussion
          The model may help shed some light on the accounting practices of traditional banks and
market-based intermediaries. Broker-dealers, bank trading departments, mutual funds, and hedge
funds, all of which typically lack access to stable short-term funding, operate on a mark-to-market
accounting basis. This means that, even if a decline in security prices is temporary and driven by
non-fundamental factors, it impacts their accounting earnings. In contrast, accounting conventions
for banks shield their earnings from transitory changes in the unrealized market value of loans or
securities. These “temporary impairments” flow through another liability account called
“accumulated other comprehensive income” and only impact reported earnings if the gains or losses
are realized by selling the security.
        If one adopts the traditional view that movements in asset prices are driven entirely by
fundamental news about future cash flows, then banks’ accounting practices seem perplexing.
However, to the extent that asset price movements are driven by non-fundamental shocks and

18
  Black, Hancock, and Passmore (2007) show that there is strong positive association between core deposit taking and
small business lending, while Black, Hancock, and Passmore (2010) find an similar connection between core deposits
and information-intensive (i.e., subprime) mortgage lending.

                                                        24
banks’ stable funding structures enable them to ride out such transient shocks, then there may be
some logic to these accounting practices.19
           The model may also have something to say about the bricks-and-mortar costs associated
with bank deposit-taking. We have estimated these costs to be quite high, averaging on the order of
1.30 percent of deposits over the period from 1984 to 2012. These costs ultimately represent a
choice—banks could always choose to offer their customers fewer and less attractive branch
locations, fewer opportunities for interacting with a human teller, and so forth. One view is that
these amenities are simply a separable flow of services to depositors, conceptually analogous to
paying more interest. However, an interesting alternative is that they represent a deliberate effort to
build loyalty by creating a form of switching costs. By contrast, a money market fund complex—
which also takes deposits, but which invests exclusively in short-term assets—has less reason to
spend as heavily on a branch network.


VI.        Normative Implications
           A central set of issues in current discussions of financial regulation concerns the migration
of intermediation activity from the traditional banking sector to the shadow banking sector. While
our model has some interesting normative implications, it is not well-suited for performing a
complete and balanced policy analysis. Given the nature of the cash-flow uncertainty that we have
assumed, the deck is stacked, from a normative perspective, against the shadow banking sector.
This is so because the worst-case scenario outcome of zi is not so bad for the kinds of assets that
traditional banks hold, which means that they can create completely safe claims without ever
exposing a government deposit insurer to any risk of loss. In a more realistic model, with an
extremely adverse state of the world that would more than wipe out all bank capital, creating safe
traditional bank claims would inevitably expose taxpayers to some tail risk. This could be socially
costly to the extent that deposit insurance creates moral hazard problems, government fiscal
capacity is limited, or traditional banks do not fully understand tail risks (see Gennaioli et al 2012
and 2013).
           In contrast to traditional banking, shadow banking does create negative externalities in our
model, as the social costs of fire sales exceed the private costs (Stein 2012). This is because the
ability of shadow banks to create money-like claims is constrained by the time-1 liquidation value

19
     See Cochrane (2011) for a related discussion.

                                                     25
of their collateral. An intermediary that switches from traditional to shadow banking fails to
internalize how this switch reduces liquidation prices and, thus, the feasible amount of money
creation by other shadow banks—i.e., there is a pecuniary externality. As a consequence, in the
private-market equilibrium the shadow banking sector is too large and the traditional banking sector
is too small, compared to the social optimum. A regulator wishing to restore the social optimum can
do so by imposing a set of minimum required haircuts on shadow banks, in an effort push money
creation back to traditional banks. These regulatory haircuts are effectively an extra capital
requirement that the shadow banking sector must set aside when raising short-term funding against
risky assets, above and beyond what the private sector demands simply to make the short-term
claims safe. Specifically, a regulator imposing an additional haircut of hi only allows shadow banks
to create (ki  hi ) Fi  ki Fi of safe claims using the risky asset i as collateral. These haircuts function
as a Pigouvian tax on the fire-sale externality associated with the shadow-banking sector.
        In the Appendix, we show that these optimal shadow-banking haircuts, denoted by hi** , have
a simple and intuitive form:
                       (i ) zi
         hi**                    .                                                                          (24)
                    1   (i ) Fi

Here  (i ) denotes the elasticity of the fire-sale discount with respect to liquidation volume and

 (i ) is an increasing function of asset illiquidity i. Thus optimal haircut requirements depend on

three factors. First, the required haircut is larger for more illiquid assets. This is natural since  (i )

captures the severity of the pecuniary externality created by fire-sale liquidations—i.e., the strength
of the over-migration tendency. Second, the optimal haircut is higher for assets with high values of
zi —i.e., for assets with little fundamental risk. These are the assets where traditional banks’ stable,
hold-to-maturity strategy can create the most monetary services. And, by assumption in our model,
traditional banking is a socially costless technology for creating private money. So one wants to
lean most aggressively against shadow banking in the cases where traditional banks provide an
efficient alternative.20 Finally, the required haircut on all assets needs to be larger when the demand



20
   For example, our model implies that ∗∗ 0 for equity-like assets where zi = 0—in other words, there is no need for
regulation in this case. This is because when zi = 0, shadow banking is the only technology for creating money-like
claims, so there is no scope for over-migration. However, when zi > 0, there is also a stable banking technology (which
is socially costless by assumption) to migrate away from.

                                                          26
for monetary services, , is larger. The intuition is that the private temptation to create money-like
claims using the unstable shadow banking technology is greater when money demand is high.
       Again, however, we reiterate the caveat: while the formula for the optimal haircut hi**

captures some interesting and economically relevant effects, it represents only one side of what in
the real world is a more complex tradeoff. A more complete normative analysis would introduce
costs of over-relying on a government-backstopped traditional banking sector. The effects that we
have identified would continue to show up in such a richer model, and would still have something
useful to say about cross-sectional differences in optimal shadow-banking haircuts across assets.


VII.   Conclusion
       We have argued that the specialness of traditional banks comes from combining stable
money creation on the liability side with assets that have relatively safe long-run cash flows but
possibly volatile market values and limited liquidity. To make this business model work, banks rely
on deposit insurance, and bear the associated costs of capital regulation.
       Some preliminary evidence is consistent with the predictions of our model. In the cross-
section of fixed income assets, the most illiquid assets have the highest share held by commercial
banks. As the model predicts, banks specialize in holding relatively safe fixed income assets but are
not afraid of illiquidity. In a cross-section of types of financial intermediaries, intermediaries with
stickier liabilities hold less liquid assets. Banks, in particular, appear as having extremely sticky
liabilities, as well as very illiquid assets. More casual evidence, such as the near absence of both
Treasuries and equities in bank asset portfolios, also supports our view.
       One key message of the paper is that the structure of financial intermediation may be shaped
in important ways by the sorts of non-fundamental movements in asset prices—due to fire sales,
noise trading, slow-moving capital, and other frictions—that have been so extensively documented
in the asset-pricing literature. Specifically, one central role of intermediaries—and of banks in
particular—is to act as a bridge between households who want to put their money in a safe place
they do not need to watch, and securities markets where even assets with relatively low fundamental
risk can have volatile market prices.




                                                  27
                                          References

Bai, Jennie, Arvind Krishnamurthy, and Charles-HenriWeymuller (2013), “Measuring Liquidity
       Mismatch in the Banking Sector,” Northwestern University working paper.
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2010) http://www.bis.org/publ/bcbs188.pdf.
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2013) http://www.bis.org/publ/bcbs238.pdf.
Berlin, Mitchell and Loretta J. Mester (1999) “Deposits and Relationship Lending” Review of
        Financial Studies 12(3): 579-607.
Bernanke, Ben S. (2005) “The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deficit,”
      http://www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/speeches/2005/200503102/.
Black, Lamont K., Diana Hancock, and Wayne Passmore (2007) “Bank Core Deposits and the
       Mitigation of Monetary Policy,” Federal Reserve Board of Governors, FEDS working paper
       2007-65.
Black, Lamont K., Diana Hancock, and Wayne Passmore (2010) “The Bank Lending Channel of
       Monetary Policy and Its Effect on Mortgage Lending,” Federal Reserve Board of
       Governors, FEDS working paper 2010-39.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (1943) Banking and Monetary Statistics, 1919–
       1941. Washington: Publications Services of the Board of Governors. Washington, DC.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (1959) All Bank Statistics, United States, 1896–
       1955. Washington: Publications Services of the Board of Governors. Washington, DC.
Brunnermeier, Markus K., Gary Gorton, Arvind Krishnamurthy (2011) “Risk Topography,” NBER
      Macroeconomics Annual 2011, Volume 26, pages 149-176.
Brunnermeier, Markus K., Gorton Gary, and Krishnamurthy Arvind (2013) “Liquidity Mismatch,”
      in Risk Topography, Chicago, (In Press)
Brunnermeier, Markus K., and Lasse Pedersen (2009) “Market Liquidity and Funding Liquidity,”
      Review of Financial Studies 22(6): 2201-2238.
Caballero, Ricardo J. and Emmanuel Farhi (2013). “A Model of the Safe Asset Mechanism (SAM):
       Safety Traps and Economic Policy,” NBER Working Paper 18737.
Chernenko, Sergey, and Adi Sunderam (2013) “Frictions in Shadow Banking: Evidence from the
      Lending Behavior of Money Market Funds,” forthcoming Review of Financial Studies.
Cochrane, John H. (2011) “Discount Rates” Journal of Finance 66(4): 1047–1108.
Coval, Joshua, Jakub Jurek, and Erik Stafford (2009a) “Economic Catastrophe Bonds,” American
       Economic Review 99(3): 628-666.
Coval, Joshua, Jakub Jurek, and Erik Stafford (2009b) “The Economics of Structured Finance,”
       Journal of Economic Perspectives 23(1): 3-25
Dang, Tri Vi, Gary Gorton, and Bengt Holmström (2013) “Ignorance, Debt and Financial Crises,”
      Columbia University working paper.
DeAngelo, Harry and Rene M. Stulz (2013) “Why High Leverage is Optimal for Banks,” Fisher
     College of Business Working Paper No. 2013-03-08.
DeLong, J. Bradford, Andrei Shleifer, Lawrence H. Summers, and Robert J. Waldmann. 1990.
                                            28
       “Noise Trader Risk in Financial Markets,” Journal of Political Economy, 98(4): 703–38.
Diamond, Douglas W. (1984) “Financial Intermediation and Delegated Monitoring,” Review of
      Economic Studies, 51(3): 393-414.
Diamond, Douglas W. (1997), “Liquidity, Banks, and Markets,” Journal of Political Economy
      105(5): 928-956.
Diamond, Douglas W. and Philip Dybvig (1983) “Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance, and Liquidity,”
      Journal of Political Economy. 91(3): 401–419.
Diamond Douglas W. and Raghuram G. Rajan (2001) “Liquidity Risk, Liquidity Creation and
      Financial Fragility: A Theory of Banking,” Journal of Political Economy, 109(2): 287-327.
English , William B., Skander J. Van den Heuvel, and Egon Zakrajsek (2012) “Interest Rate Risk
       and Bank Equity Valuations,” Federal Reserve Board of Governors, FEDS working paper
       2012-26.
Gennaioli, Nicola, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny (2012) “Neglected Risks, Financial
      Innovation, and Financial Fragility,” Journal of Financial Economics 104(3): 452-468.
Gennaioli, Nicola, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny (2013). “A Model of Shadow Banking,”
      Journal of Finance 68(4): 1331-1363.
Gorton, Gary, and Andrew Metrick (2010) “Regulating the Shadow Banking System,” Brookings
       Papers on Economic Activity 41: 261-312.
Gorton, Gary, and Andrew Metrick (2011) “Securitized Banking and the Run on Repo,” Journal of
       Financial Economics 104(3): 425-451.
Gorton, Gary, and Guillermo Ordoñez (2014) “Collateral Crises,” American Economic Review,
       104(2): 343-78.
Gorton, Gary and George Pennacchi (1990), “Financial Intermediaries and Liquidity Creation,”
       Journal of Finance 45(1): 49–71.
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier and Olivier Jeanne (2012) “Global Safe Assets,” BIS Working Paper
      399.
Holmström, Bengt and Jean Tirole (1997) “Financial Intermediation, Loanable Funds, and the Real
      Sector,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 112 (3): 663-691.
Holmström, Bengt and Jean Tirole (2011) Inside and Outside Liquidity, Cambridge: MIT Press.
Hughes, Joseph P. and Loretta J. Mester (2010) “Efficiency in Banking: Theory, Practice and
      Evidence,” in The Oxford Handbook of Banking, Oxford University Press: Oxford, UK,
      edited by Allen Berger, Philip Molyneux, and John Wilson, 463-485.
Jacklin, Charles J. (1987) “Demand Deposits, Trading Restrictions, and Risk Sharing,” In
        Contractual Arrangements for Intertemporal Trade, edited by Edward C. Prescott and Neil
        Wallace. Minneapolis: Univ. Minnesota Press, 1987.
Kacperczyk, Marcin and Philipp Schnabl (2013), “How Safe are Money Market Funds?,” Quarterly
      Journal of Economics 128(3), 1073-1122.
Kashyap Anil K., Raghuram G. Rajan, and Jeremy C. Stein (2002), “Banks as Liquidity Providers:
      an Explanation for the Co-existence of Lending and Deposit-Taking,” Journal of Finance
      57(1): 33–73.

                                               29
Krishnamurthy, Arvind, Stefan Nagel, and Dmitry Orlov (2013) “Sizing up Repo,” forthcoming
       Journal of Finance.
Krishnamurthy, Arvind and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen (2013) “Short-term Debt and Financial
       Crises: What We Can Learn From U.S. Treasury Supply,” Northwestern working paper.
Miller, Merton H. (1977) “Debt and Taxes,” Journal of Finance 32(2): 261-275.
Modigliani, Franco, and Merton H. Miller (1958) “The Cost of Capital, Corporation Finance and
      the Theory of Investmen,t” American Economic Review, 48(3): 261–97.
Moreira, Alan and Alexi Savov (2014) “The Macroeconomics of Shadow Banking,” New York
      University working paper.
Neumark, David and Steven A. Sharpe (1992) “Market Structure and the Nature of Price Rigidity:
Evidence from the Market for Consumer Deposits,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 107(2): 657-
680.
Pennacchi, George (2012) “Narrow Banking,” Annual Review of Financial Economics Vol. 4: 141-
      159.
Shin, Hyun Song (2009) “Reflections on Northern Rock: The Bank Run that Heralded the Global
       Financial Crisis,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 23(1): 101–120.
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W Vishny (1992) “Liquidation Values and Debt Capacity: A Market
       Equilibrium Approach,” Journal of Finance 47(4): 1343-1366.
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishny (1997) “The Limits of Arbitrage,” Journal of Finance 52,
       no. 1: 35-55
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishny (2010) “Unstable Banking,” Journal of Financial
       Economics 97(3): 306-318.
Stein, Jeremy C. (2012) “Monetary Policy as Financial-Stability Regulation” Quarterly Journal of
        Economics 127(1): 57-95.
Sunderam, Adi (2013) “Money Creation and the Shadow Banking System,” Harvard University
      working paper.
Weymuller, Charles-Henri (2013) “Banks as Safety Multipliers: A Theory of Safe Assets Creation,”
     Harvard University working paper.




                                              30
Figure 1: Data on US Commercial Bank Balance Sheets, 1896-2012. This figure shows the
evolution of the aggregate balance sheet of US commercial banks from 1896-2012. All figures are
in book terms and are scaled by total assets. The series for 1896-1918 are based on data for “all
banks” from All Bank Statistics, United States, 1896-1955. The series for 1919-1933 are based on
Federal Reserve member banks from Banking and Monetary Statistics, 1919-1941. The series for
1934-2012 are based on all insured commercial banks from the FDIC’s Historical Statistics on
Banking available at http://www2.fdic.gov/hsob/.

Panel A: Bank liability composition
       100%
        90%
        80%
        70%
        60%
        50%
        40%
        30%
        20%
        10%
         0%
              1890

                       1900

                              1910

                                     1920

                                            1930

                                                      1940

                                                                  1950

                                                                         1960

                                                                                 1970

                                                                                        1980

                                                                                               1990

                                                                                                      2000

                                                                                                             2010
                     Equity/Assets          Deposits/Assets                     Other Liabilities/Assets


Panel B: Bank asset composition

       100%
        90%
        80%
        70%
        60%
        50%
        40%
        30%
        20%
        10%
         0%
              1890

                       1900

                              1910

                                     1920

                                            1930

                                                      1940

                                                                  1950

                                                                         1960

                                                                                 1970

                                                                                        1980

                                                                                               1990

                                                                                                      2000

                                                                                                             2010




                      Loans/Assets                 Liquid/Assets                 Other Assets/Assets


                                                             31
Figure 2: Composition of Bank Securities Portfolios, 1994-2012. This figure shows the
composition of bank securities portfolios based on data from the Call Reports. We report bank
holdings of various security types as a fraction of total bank investment securities (this excludes
trading account assets). We restrict attention to banks with assets greater than $1 billion. Panel A
shows the value-weighted average securities portfolio for all banks. Panel B shows the securities
portfolio of banks whose equity-to-assets ratio exceeds the industry median.

Panel A: Value-weighted averages for all banks
      100%
       90%
       80%
       70%
       60%
       50%
       40%
       30%
       20%
       10%
        0%
             1994

                    1995

                           1996

                                  1997

                                         1998

                                                1999

                                                       2000

                                                               2001

                                                                      2002

                                                                             2003

                                                                                    2004

                                                                                           2005

                                                                                                  2006

                                                                                                         2007

                                                                                                                2008

                                                                                                                       2009

                                                                                                                                2010

                                                                                                                                       2011

                                                                                                                                              2012
                    Treasuries           Agencies             MBS Passthroughs             CMOs and CMBS                      Other


Panel B: Value-weighted averages for highly capitalized banks
      100%
       90%
       80%
       70%
       60%
       50%
       40%
       30%
       20%
       10%
        0%
             1994

                    1995

                           1996

                                  1997

                                         1998

                                                1999

                                                       2000

                                                               2001

                                                                      2002

                                                                             2003

                                                                                    2004

                                                                                           2005

                                                                                                  2006

                                                                                                         2007

                                                                                                                2008

                                                                                                                       2009

                                                                                                                                2010

                                                                                                                                       2011

                                                                                                                                              2012




                    Treasuries           Agencies             MBS Passthroughs             CMOs and CMBS                      Other




                                                                        32
Figure 3: The Cross-Section of Asset Classes. Panel A plots BANK_SHRi versus ILLIQUIDi for
major financial asset classes. Panel B plots AV_STICKYi verus ILLIQUIDi. The figures are based on
data from the Financial Accounts of the United States as of 2012Q4 and information contained in
BCBS (2010 and 2013). See the Appendix for further details.

Panel A: The Market Share of Commercial Banks versus Asset Illiquidity

                                                                                                                           Mult_Mort
                              .8



                                                                                                                           Comm_Morts
                                                                                                          Home_Mort
                              .6




                                                                                                          Cons_Loans
            Bank Share




                                                                                                                           C&I_Loans
               .4




                                                     Sec_Credit
                                                                  GSE-backed
                              .2




                                                                                         Muni_Bonds


                                                                                         Corp_Bonds
                                                     UST
                                                                                         MF_Shares
                                                                                         Equities
                              0




                                                 0                 .2          .4              .6           .8         1               1.2
                                                                                    Asset Illiquidity Index

Panel B: The Average Liability Stickiness of Asset Holders versus Asset Illiquidity
                              .9




                                                                                         MF_Shares
                                                                                         Equities

                                                                                         Corp_Bonds
                                                                                                                           Comm_Morts
                                            .8
               Average Liability Sticky Index




                                                                                                                           C&I_Loans
                                                                                                          Home_Mort        Mult_Mort
                                                                                                          Cons_Loans
                                  .7




                                                                  GSE-backed
                      .6




                                                     Sec_Credit
                                                                                         Muni_Bonds
             .5




                                                     UST
                              .4




                                                 0                 .2          .4              .6           .8         1               1.2
                                                                                    Asset Illiquidity Index


                                                                                          33
Figure 4: The Cross-Section of Intermediary Types. Panel A plots A_ILLIQUIDj versus
L_STICKYj for different intermediary types. Panel B plots A_ILLIQUIDj versus L_MATURITYj. The
figures are based on data from the Financial Accounts of the United States of as 2012Q4 and
information contained BCBS (2010 and 2013). See the Appendix for further details.

Panel A: Intermediary Asset Illiquidity versus Liability Stickiness
                           .8

                                                                                           FINCO



                                                                                                     BANKS
                                     .6
             Asset Illiquidity Index




                                                                                                             LIFE INS

                                                                                      GSEs         P&C INS
                        .4




                                                             REIT



                                                                     DEALERS
                           .2




                                              MMF
                           0




                                          0         .2            .4               .6               .8           1
                                                              Liability Stickiness Index

Panel B: Intermediary Asset Illiquidity versus Liability Contractual Maturity
                           .8




                                                                                           FINCO



                                                     BANKS
                                     .6
             Asset Illiquidity Index




                                                                                                             LIFE INS

                                                                                      GSEs         P&C INS
                        .4




                                                             REIT



                                                                DEALERS
                           .2




                                              MMF
                           0




                                          0         .2             .4             .6                .8           1
                                                         Liability Contractual Maturity Index


                                                                      34
Table I: US Commercial Bank Balance Sheet Composition, 2012. This table illustrates the
balance sheet composition of US commercial banks as of December 31, 2012 using Call Report
data. We restrict attention to commercial banks with assets greater than $1 billion. Collapsing all
commercial banks owned by a single bank holding company into a single banking firm, our $1
billion size cutoff leaves us with 501 banking firms as of year-end 2012. The table shows the value-
weighted average balance sheet shares and (the equal weighted) 90th and 10th percentiles of bank
balance sheet shares. Panel A shows results for all banks. Panel B shows results for highly
capitalized banks whose equity-to-assets ratio exceeds the industry median.

                                            Panel A:                              Panel B:
                                            All Banks                     Highly Capitalized Banks
                                  VW           90th       10th        VW            90th          10th
                                 Average     %-tile      %-tile      Average       %-tile       %-tile
 Loans (gross)                     52.9%        78.1%      42.2%        58.1%        78.1%         43.0%
  Real Estate                       25.2%        62.0%     19.7%        27.4%         62.2%        17.6%
   Residential                      16.2%        26.1%       3.6%       18.1%         25.1%          2.9%
   Commercial                        9.0%        43.1%       9.7%         9.3%        43.8%          6.4%
  C&I                                9.7%        20.7%       3.0%       11.1%         23.4%          3.1%
  Consumer                           9.3%         9.2%       0.2%       10.4%         11.0%          0.1%
  Other                              8.7%         8.8%       0.1%         9.2%         8.5%          0.1%
  Less Reserves                     -1.2%        -0.6%      -1.9%        -1.3%        -0.5%         -2.0%
 Loans (net)                       51.7%        75.9%      41.7%        56.8%        76.0%         42.4%
 Liquid Assets                     35.2%        50.9%      16.4%        30.6%        49.1%         15.6%
  Cash                              10.2%        16.8%       2.2%         9.0%        14.1%          2.2%
  Reverse Repos                      4.1%         1.4%       0.0%         2.2%         1.8%          0.0%
  Securities                       20.8%        40.7%       6.9%        19.3%        36.9%          6.5%
    Treasuries                       1.6%         1.4%       0.0%         1.9%         1.2%          0.0%
    Agencies                         1.2%        10.2%       0.0%         0.9%         7.7%          0.0%
    MBS Passthroughs                 6.8%        14.5%       0.2%         7.3%        14.5%          0.3%
    CMOs and CMBS                    5.2%        14.9%       0.0%         4.6%        13.3%          0.0%
    Other Securities                 6.1%        13.4%       0.3%         4.6%        12.6%          0.2%
 Trading Assets (net)                3.8%         0.1%      0.0%         2.9%          0.1%         0.0%
 Other Assets                        9.3%       11.6%       3.5%         9.7%        12.4%          3.9%
 TOTAL ASSETS                     100.0%                               100.0%

 Deposits                          75.6%       88.9%       73.6%        76.0%        86.0%        70.3%
  Transaction                      10.2%       22.6%        4.0%         9.5%        19.7%         2.0%
  Savings                          44.5%       63.0%       23.7%        48.3%        60.5%        23.6%
  Time                              9.4%       38.3%        8.6%         9.2%        39.1%         8.6%
  Foreign                          11.5%        0.0%        0.0%         9.1%         0.4%         0.0%
 Repos                              3.4%        6.2%        0.0%         2.6%         5.4%         0.0%
 Subordinated Debt                  1.0%        0.5%        0.0%         0.9%         0.7%         0.0%
 Other borrowed money               5.7%        9.4%        0.0%         5.4%         9.7%         0.0%
 Other liabilities                  2.9%        2.2%        0.3%         2.6%         2.8%         0.4%
 Equity                            11.4%       14.9%        8.2%        12.5%        16.2%        10.6%
 TOTAL LIABILITIES & EQUITY       100.0%                               100.0%




                                                  35
                                                        Appendix
A. Estimating the Profitability of Narrow Banking
         We estimate the profitability of narrowing bank using
                                 NONINTINC NONINTEXP
            RF  RDEP                          .                                                             (A1)
                                   DEP        DEP
The text describes the computation of all the components of (A1) for the US commercial banking
industry, except for the non-interest expense associated with deposit-taking NONINTEXP/DEP.
This term is not directly available from Call Reports: banks report their total noninterest expense,
but we are only interested in those expenses attributable to deposit-taking.
         To get an estimate of the expenses associated with deposit taking, we adopt a simple
hedonic      approach.      Specifically,       each     year     we     run    a    cross-sectional       regression   of
NONINTEXPit/ASSETit on asset shares, liability shares, and other controls:

          NONINTEXPit                          ASSETit( k )                     DEPOSITit( j )
                        t   k 1 t( k )                 j 1  t( j )                 θxit   it .
                                K                              J
                                                                                                                   (A2)
            ASSETit                             ASSETit                          ASSETit

We choose the independent variables so that the intercept term for year t, t, can be interpreted as
the operating expenses associated with a “mutual-fund-like” bank that owns a portfolio of long-term
marketable securities and finances these assets using only wholesale funding and equity. The slope
coefficients in (A2) are interpretable as unit noninterest expenses associated with various activities.
         We use cross-sectional variation in banks’ asset mix to identify the t( k ) . We control for real

estate     loans     (RELOANit/ASSETit),            C&I       loans      (CILOANit/ASSETit),           consumer     loans
(CONLOANit/ASSETit), other loans (OTHLOANit/ASSETit), and trading assets (TRADINGit/ASSETit).
Liquid assets (cash, interbank loans, and securities) and other assets are the omitted categories
absorbed in t. To identify the  t( j ) , we control for transaction deposits (TRANSDEPOSITit/ASSETit),

savings deposits (SAVEDEPOSITit/ASSETit), and foreign deposits (FORDEPOSITit/ASSETit). Time
deposits and other borrowed money are the omitted liability categories that are absorbed in t.
Finally, we control for bank size (ln(ASSETit)) and noninterest income not associated with deposit-
taking or credit intermediation (OTHNONINTICit/ASSETit).21



21
  This exercise can be seen as a simple way of estimating bank cost functions. There is a vast technical literature on this
subject. See, for instance, Hughes and Mester (2010) for a recent review.

                                                             36
          The coefficients for transaction deposits and saving deposits are of primary interest for our
cost attribution analysis and are shown in Figure A1. These coefficients are interpretable as the unit
noninterest expenses associated with various types of deposit-taking. For instance, the coefficient of
3.4% for transaction deposits in 1984 means that a bank which was 100% funded with transaction
deposits had an expense ratio 3.4 percentage points higher than the baseline wholesale-funded
bank.22
          Figure A1 shows that estimated unit cost of transaction deposits has fallen steadily over
time, from 3.4% to 1984 to only 0.5% in 2012. This downward trend makes sense in light of the
numerous technological developments, primarily information technology, that have reduced the
costs of deposit-taking. In contrast, Figure A1 shows that the unit cost of savings deposits hovered
around 2% from the late 1980s to 2008. However, the costs of savings deposits has fallen sharply in
the past 4 years, arguably because banks have benefited from large deposit inflows due to the low-
interest rate environment and expanded FDIC guarantee programs.
          Using these cross-sectional regression coefficients as our proxies for the relevant unit costs,
we estimate the aggregate noninterest expense associated with deposit-taking activities as

                                            (TRANS ) TRANSDEPOSITt             
                                           t                                  
                                                          ASSETt                
          NONINTEXPt DEP         ASSETt    ( SAVE ) SAVEDEPOSITt                
                                          t                               .                           (A3)
            DEPOSITt            DEPOSITt                  ASSETt                
                                           ( FOR ) FORDEPOSIT                   
                                            t               t
                                                                                 
                                                         ASSETt                  
In other words, to come up with an estimate of deposit-related operating costs, we apply our
estimated unit costs to the deposit mix of the aggregate banking industry.
          Figure A2 shows the time series of estimated profits from deposit taking from 1984 to 2012.
We first show the gross deposit spread, RF – RDEP, which is the net interest income associated with
narrow banking. The interest rates paid on transactional and savings deposit accounts embed a
significant convenience premium relative to short-term market rates. As a result, the gross deposit




22
   The dashed lines are standard error bands and indicate that the parameters are precisely estimated which is natural
since there are thousands of banks in each cross-section

                                                         37
spread averages 0.87% of deposits over our 29 year sample.23 We next add noninterest income
associated with deposit taking, NONINTINC/DEP, which has averaged 0.49% of deposits.
         Finally, we subtract our estimate of the noninterest expense associated with deposit-taking.
While estimated deposit-taking expenses have trended down steadily over time, these expenses are
substantial, averaging 1.30% of deposits. Combining these pieces as in equation (A1), we arrive at
our estimates of the profits generated by narrow banking. Between 1984 and 2012, these profits
average 0.06% of deposits.
         This 0.06% figure is an upper bound on the profitability of narrow banking. Specifically, as
noted above, our attribution of non-interest expenses includes an unallocated fixed overhead cost
which is not attributed to deposit-taking or lending at the margin. These overhead costs are
significant, and average 0.63% of deposits from 1984-2012. Thus, one needs to ask how much of
these fixed overhead costs should be allocated to deposit-taking. If 50% of these fixed costs are
allocated to deposit-taking, the estimated profitability of narrow banking falls to -0.25% on average.


B. Cross-section of Intermediary Types and Cross-section of Assets
         We assemble data on the financial assets and liabilities of various intermediary types from
the Federal Reserve’s Financial Accounts of the United States (formerly the Flow of Funds
Accounts). We examine data on commercial banks, property and casualty (P&C) insurers, life
insurers, money market funds (MMFs), government sponsored enterprises (GSEs), finance
companies, real estate investment trusts (REITs), and security broker-dealers.
         We exclude a handful of financial sectors included in the Financial Accounts. First, we
exclude the Federal Reserve (L.108), taking the view that it should be consolidated with the Federal
Government from the standpoint of financial intermediation. Second, we exclude pension funds
(L.116), mutual funds (L.121), and closed-end funds and ETFs (L.122) on the theory that these
“real money” intermediaries are essentially just veils for the household sector. Third, to avoid
double-counting issues we do not treat MBS and ABS issuers as separate sectors. Finally, we
exclude Holding Companies (L.129) and Funding Corporations (L.130).


23
   As shown in Figure A2, the net interest income generated by deposit-taking is positively related to the level of short-
term interest rates. This is because the rates on transaction and savings deposits adjust very sluggishly to movement in
short-term market rates. See Neumark and Sharpe (1992) and English, Van den Heuvel, and Zakrajsek (2012).

                                                           38
       For each financial intermediary type, we construct an aggregate balance sheet using data in
the Financial Accounts. This requires some straightforward manipulation of the Financial Accounts
Data. There are three minor subtleties. First, we do not count GSE‐backed MBS—which were
consolidated onto their balance sheets following the implementation of FASB 140 in
December 2010—as GSE assets. Second, to operationalize equation (17) for banks’ market
share in each asset class, we compute banks’ holdings as a share of all assets held by the
domestic Financial Business sector in Table L.107. In other words, we compute banks’ share
of intermediated assets holdings. Third, for each category of loans (home mortgages,
commercial mortgages, multifamily mortgages, consumer loans, and C& loans) we adjust the
amount of outstanding loans to net out securitized loans. Thus, holdings of these assets
represent intermediaries’ holdings of (whole) loans, whereas holdings of securitizations are
accounted for separately as either holdings of GSE‐backed MBS or as corporate bonds for
private securitizations.
       Next we need to choose values for ILLIQUIDj, MATURITYj, and STICKYj. Our approach is
to choose values based on the liquidity risk measurement proposal set forth under Basel III. We use
parameter values associated with the BCBS (2010) proposal for the Net Stable Funding
Requirement (NSFR) and the final BCBS (2013) Liquidity Coverage Requirement (LCR). First,
using BCBS (2010), we use the NSFR’s Required Stable Funding factor as a first guide for
assigning ILLIQUIDj and the Available Stable Funding factor as guide for STICKYj. Second, using
BCBS (2013), we used the LCR’s haircut factor for the computation of High Quality Liquid Assets
as a second guide for ILLIQUIDj and the assumed percentage outflow factor as second guide for
STICKYj. The inputs from the NSFR and LCR are summarized in Table AI.
       Our approach is to use these BCBS factors whenever possible. In general, the NFSR and
LCR factors paint a similar picture of asset illiquidity and liability maturity and stickiness.
However, when the two are in conflict we lean towards the LCR weights, reasoning that the
represent the most up-to-date consensus among policy-makers and market participants.
       There are some categories such as GSE-debentures and corporate bonds where it does not
make sense to assume STICKY = 1 and MATURITY = 1: some of these bond are short-term and are
prone to run. Therefore, we assume STICKY = MATURITY = 0.4 in both cases.



                                                39
        We also need to assign values for liability types issued by non-banks that are not considered
by BCBS (2010, 2013). We are forced to fill in these assumptions. However, we have made every
attempt to do so in a way that is consistent with the spirit of Basel III and is motivated by existing
empirical evidence wherever possible. The main question here concerns the length and stickiness of
the policy-related operating liabilities of life and P&C insurers. We assume that both life and P&C
policies are fairly illiquid assets with ILLIQUID = 0.4. In the case of life policy liabilities, we
assume STICKY = MATURITY = 0.9 so the liabilities of life insurers are comparable to retail bank
deposits. For P&C insurers, we assume that STICKY = MATURITY = 0.6, so the liabilities of P&C
insurers are equivalent to corporate bonds. Our final parameter choices are shown in Table AII.


C. Policy Analysis

        C.1.    Determination of the Fire-Sale Discount
        Before getting into the policy analysis, we need to be a bit more explicit about the origins of
the fire-sale discount in our model. Recall the key reduced-form properties we have assumed about
this discount, namely that k ( i , i ) / i  0 , so demand is downward sloping, and that

 2 k ( i , i ) / i i  0 , so more illiquid assets have steeper demand curves.

        These properties can be micro-founded in an elaborated version of Stein (2012). For each
asset i, we assume that there is a separate group of ni specialist buyers, who can step in and buy the
asset if it is liquidated at time 1. As will become clear momentarily, assets with low values of ni
correspond to those with high values of In other words, asset illiquidity ultimately derives from
the fact that there are relatively few specialist buyers available to absorb a given asset.
        Specialist buyers are also owned by households: all their profits accrue to households at time
2. Each individual specialist buyer has war chest of 0 < W ≤ 1 available at time 1, which can be used
either to buy up fire-sold assets at a discount, or to invest in new real projects. Each specialist
buyer’s investment of Ki in a new project yields a gross return of g(Ki) = log(Ki). Recall that
liquidated assets sell at a discount ki to their fundamental value of Fi=qR+(1–q)zi and thus yield a
gross expected return of 1/ki to a specialist buyer who purchases them at time 1. Since the total
volume of liquidations in asset i is ikiFi, and since these liquidations must be absorbed by ni
specialist buyers, each buyer must absorb ikiFi/ni of the liquidation, investing Ki = WikiFi/ni in

                                                      40
new projects. At an interior optimum, the expected return to buying fire-sold assets must be equal to
the expected return to investment in the new project, which implies:
         1 / ki  g (W  i ki Fi / ni ).                                                                          (C1)

Given our functional form assumption that g(Ki) = log(Ki), this expression boils down to:
                      W
          ki                   .                                                                                   (C2)
                 1  i Fi / ni

         Since ni is nothing more than an inverse measure of asset illiquidity i, we now have a
micro-founded expression for the fire-sale discount ki with the desired properties that

k ( i , i ) / i  0 and  2 k ( i , i ) / i i  0 . (The former always holds and the latter holds so

long as ni  i Fi which we henceforth assume). While this micro-founding exercise is extremely

simple, it is necessary for the normative analysis that follows. This is because in order to model the
social costs of fire sales, we need to relate the costs to the foregone real investment by the specialist
buyers that is an inevitable consequence of these fire sales. With this bit of machinery in place, we
can now examine the policy implications of the model.

         C.2.       Policy Analysis
         Since households own shadow banks, traditional banks, and specialist buyers, the household
utility associated with asset i equals the value of all shadow banking and traditional banking claims
backed by asset i plus the expected profits earned by associated specialist buyers

         Ui  iVi S ( i )  (1  i )Vi B   ni  E[ g ( Ki )  Ki ]  (1  p)( i ki Fi / ni )(1/ ki  1)  .   (C3)

As shown in (C3), the expected profits earned by each specialist buyer are the sum of their expected
net return on new real investment, E[ g ( K i )  K i ] , plus their expected net return on asset purchases

in the bad state, (1  p )( i ki Fi / ni )(1/ ki  1) .

         However, since the fire-sale losses incurred by shadow banks represent a gain for specialist
buyers, the terms of trade between these intermediaries cancel out from the standpoint of household
welfare. As a result, the relative size of the traditional banking and shadow banking sectors only
impacts household welfare in two ways: the initial amount of monetary services enjoyed by
households and the magnitude of the fire-sale problem as captured by the amount of specialist buyer
output following the bad state at time 1. One can think of the latter as a stand-in for the severity of


                                                                41
the collapse in real output if bad news arrives at time 1, triggering a financial crisis. Specifically,
ignoring irrelevant constants, initial household utility is given by
         U i   M i   (1  p)ni [ g ( Ki )  Ki ]
                                                                                                                               (C4)
               [ i ki Fi  (1  i ) zi ]   (1  p)ni [ g (W  i ki Fi / ni )  (W  i ki Fi / ni )].

The second line of equation (C4) follows from the fact that the total amount of money created by
shadow banks and traditional banks using asset i as backing is M i  i ki Fi  (1  i ) zi plus the fact

that each specialists’ investment in new real projects in the bad state is K i  W  i ki Fi / ni .

         Since intermediaries pick μi taking ki as given, a private market equilibrium corresponds to

       max i [0,1]  [  i k i* Fi  (1   i ) zi ]   (1  p ) ni [ g (W   i k i* Fi / ni ))  (W   i ki* Fi / ni )] , (C5)

where we use one star to denote the private market solution. Recalling that 1  ki g (W  i ki Fi / ni ),

the first order condition for (C5) implies that an interior private market equilibrium satisfies
                   Net private benefit          Net private benefit
                
                  shadow banking
                                     traditional
                                                 banking

         [ ki  (1  p)  (1  ki )]Fi  [ zi ] ,
             *                   *
                                                                                                                               (C6)

which is equivalent to equation (6) in the main text.
         Relative to the private market equilibrium, the social planner’s solution also takes into
account the fact that ki( i )  0 . Specifically, a social optimum corresponds to

                                       [ i ki ( i ) Fi  (1  i ) zi ]                     
    max i [0,1]                                                                              .                             (C7)
                    (1  p)ni [ g (W  i ki ( i ) Fi / ni ))  (W  i ki ( i ) Fi / ni )]
Recalling that 1  ki ( i ) g (W  i ki ( i ) Fi / ni ) , an interior social optimum must satisfy

                      i      Elasticity of                          Net private benefit             Net private benefit
                 fire-sale price
                                                          
                                                              shadow banking
                                                                                      traditional
                                                                                               banking
         (1  [ ki( i ) i / ki ( i )])  [ ki ( i )   (1  p)(1  ki ( i ))]Fi 
                       **     **          **           **                        **
                                                                                               zi      ,                      (C8)

where we use two stars to denote the social planner’s solution. Relative to (C6), the net private
benefit of shadow banking is reduced by a factor that depends on the elasticity of the first-sale price
with respect to i,  i  ki( i ) i / ki . As a result, when  zi  0 , a social planner would like to lower

the amount of shadow banking intermediation relative to the private market.
         A planner can implement the social optimum in our model by imposing a minimum haircut
requirement on the amount of repo that shadow banks can issue to MMFs. Although the private
market imposes a haircut, the planner needs to require even larger haircuts so shadow banks can

                                                                        42
only create (ki**  hi** ) Fi  ki** Fi of safe repo using asset i as collateral. Specifically, (C8) implies

that the social optimum can be implemented by imposing an additional haircut of
                 Elasticity of                  Net private benefit

                      
                 fire-sale price         shadow banking
                                                                                          z
        hi**         i            [ ki ( i** )   (1  p)(1  ki ( i** ))]  i  i  0.   (C9)
                                                                                   1   i Fi

Finally, given our assumption that g(Ki) = log(Ki), we have
                ki( i ) i      i Fi
        i                               ,                                                     (C10)
                 ki (  i )     i Fi  ni

so, all else equal, the elasticity of the fire-sale price with respect to i is greatest for assets with few
specialist buyers ni (i.e., for illiquid assets with large values of i).




                                                                      43
Figure A1: Noninterest Expense Attribution Regressions. Estimates of unit costs for transaction
and saving deposits from 1984-2012.

                        Increment Nonint. Expense/Asset for 1% increase in:
               .06


               .04
           %




               .02


                 0


               -.02
                      1984

                             1986

                                    1988

                                           1990

                                                  1992

                                                         1994

                                                                1996

                                                                       1998

                                                                              2000

                                                                                     2002

                                                                                             2004

                                                                                                    2006

                                                                                                           2008

                                                                                                                  2010

                                                                                                                         2012
                                                                       Year

                                             Transaction Deposits                            Saving Deposits




Figure A2: Estimating the Profitability of Narrow Banking. This figure shows our
decomposition of the aggregate profitability of commercial bank deposit taking from 1984-2012.

                                                         Deposit Spreads
               .03


               .02


               .01
           %




                 0


               -.01
                      1984

                             1986

                                    1988

                                           1990

                                                  1992

                                                         1994

                                                                1996

                                                                       1998

                                                                              2000

                                                                                     2002

                                                                                             2004

                                                                                                    2006

                                                                                                           2008

                                                                                                                  2010

                                                                                                                         2012




                                                                       Year

                                      Gross Deposit Spread                                  Add Related Nonint Inc
                                      Less Related Nonint Exp




                                                                 44
Table AI: Parameters Drawn from the Basel III NFSR and LCR Liquidity Requirements: The Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR)
factors are based on BCBS (2010). The Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR) factors are based on BCBS (2013). Long-term means having a
contractual maturity greater than 1 year.

                                                                                            Net Stable Funding Ratio factors            Liquidity Coverage Ratio factors
Instrument                                                                              ILLIQUID           STICKY          LENGTH   ILLIQUID           STICKY          LENGTH
Common Equity                                                                                               100%            100%                        100%            100%
Preferred Stock                                                                                             100%            100%                        100%            100%
Long-term debt and all long-term time deposits                                                              100%            100%                        100%            100%
Insured retail demand deposits and short-term (< 1 yr) retail time deposits                                  90%              0%                         97%              0%
Uninsured retail demand deposits and short-term (< 1 yr) retail time deposits                                80%              0%                         90%              0%
Short-term wholesale funding, including wholesale deposits.                                                  50%              0%
Other Liabilities                                                                                             0%              0%
  Short-term unsecured whole-sale funding from small business cutomers                                                                                   90%              0%
  Short-term unsecured whole-sale funding from clearing, custody, and cash-management                                                                    75%              0%
  Short-term unsecured whole-sale funding from large business customers (insured)                                                                        80%              0%
  Short-term unsecured whole-sale funding from large business customers (uninsured)                                                                      60%              0%
  Short-term secured whole-sale funding (depends on collateral)
Money market instruments (short-term low default risk debt)                                    0%                                         0%
Long-term Treasuries                                                                           5%                                         0%
GSE-backed MBS and debt                                                                       20%                                        15%
Corporate bonds rated AA- or higher                                                           20%                                        15%
RMBS                                                                                                                                     25%
Equity: must be large-cap index and listed on a public exchange                              50%                                         50%
Corporate bonds rated A- or higher for NFSR (BBB- or higher for LCR)                         50%                                         50%
Commercial and industrial loans                                                             100%                                        100%
Residential mortgage loans                                                                   65%                                        100%
Other loans                                                                                  65%                                        100%
Consumer loans                                                                               85%                                        100%
Other assets                                                                                100%                                        100%




                                                                                         45
Table AII: Instrument Parameters Values Used in Our Exercise: This table lists the instrument
names found in the Financial Accounts and the values of ILLIQUID, LENGTH, and STICKY
assigned to those instruments.

Instrument Name in the Financial Accounts              ILLIQUID (assets)   LENGTH (liabilities)   STICKY (liabilities)
Agency- and GSE-backed securities                                  15%                    60%                    60%
Bank loans not elsewhere classified                               100%                  100%                   100%
Bankers' Acceptances                                                0%                     0%                     0%
Checkable deposits                                                  0%                     0%                    90%
Checkable deposits and currency                                     0%                     0%                    90%
Commercial mortgages                                              100%                  100%                   100%
Consumer credit                                                    75%                  100%                   100%
Consumer leases                                                    75%                  100%                   100%
Corporate and foreign bonds                                        50%                    60%                    60%
Corporate equities                                                 50%                  100%                   100%
Currency                                                            0%                     0%                     0%
Customers' liability on acceptances outstanding                     0%                     0%                     0%
Depository institution reserves                                     0%                     0%                    80%
Deposits at Federal Home Loan Banks                                 0%                     0%                    80%
Direct investment                                                 100%                  100%                     60%
Equity in government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs)                 100%                  100%                   100%
Farm mortgages                                                    100%                  100%                   100%
Federal funds and security repurchase agreements                    0%                     0%                     0%
Government-sponsored enterprise (GSE) loans                        15%                    60%                    60%
Holding companies net transactions with subsidiaries              100%                  100%                   100%
Home mortgages                                                     75%                  100%                   100%
Large time deposits                                                 0%                    10%                    70%
Life insurance reserves                                            80%                    90%                    90%
P&C insurance reserves                                             80%                    60%                    60%
Money market mutual fund shares                                     0%                     0%                     0%
Multifamily residential mortgages                                 100%                  100%                   100%
Municipal securities and loans                                     50%                  100%                   100%
Mutual fund shares                                                 50%                  100%                   100%
Net interbank transactions                                         20%                     0%                     0%
Nonfinancial business loans                                       100%                  100%                   100%
Open market paper                                                   0%                     0%                     0%
Other loans and advances                                          100%                  100%                   100%
Pension entitlements                                               80%                    90%                    90%
Private foreign deposits                                            0%                    10%                    20%
Securities borrowed (net)                                           0%                    10%                    20%
Security credit                                                     0%                    10%                    20%
Small time and savings deposits                                     0%                     0%                    80%
Syndicated loans to nonfinancial corporate business               100%                  100%                   100%
Taxes payables                                                      0%                     0%                     0%
Total miscellaneous assets                                        100%                  100%                   100%
Total miscellaneous liabilities                                   100%                  100%                   100%
Total time and savings deposits                                     0%                     0%                    80%
Trade payables                                                     60%                     0%                     0%
Trade receivables                                                  60%                     0%                     0%
Treasury securities                                                 0%                     0%                     0%
U.S. government loans                                               0%                     0%                     0%
Unidentified miscellaneous assets                                 100%                  100%                   100%
Unidentified miscellaneous liabilities                            100%                  100%                   100%




                                                           46
