                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     THE LONG-RUN EFFECTS OF A PUBLIC POLICY ON ALCOHOL TASTES AND
                               MORTALITY

                                         Lorenz Kueng
                                        Evgeny Yakovlev

                                      Working Paper 20298
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w20298


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                           July 2014, Revised February 2020




We thank Lucas Davis (the editor), two anonymous referees, Orley Ashenfelter, David Atkin,
David Card, David Cutler, Irina Denisova, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, Sergey Guriev, Lee Lockwood,
David Matsa, Brian Melzer, Michael Moore, Denis Nekipelov, Jonathan Parker, Paola Sapienza,
Katya Zhuravskaya, and seminar participants at the NBER Summer Institute, Berkeley,
Northwestern, Warwick, Pompeu Fabra, NES, CEFIR, HSE, and the EEA meetings for helpful
discussions and comments. Evgeny Yakovlev gratefully acknowledges financial support from the
Russian Science Foundation for the research project No. 18-18-00466. Two previous versions of
this paper were titled "USSR babies: Who drinks vodka in Russia?" and "How Persistent Are
Consumption Habits? Micro-Evidence from Russia's Alcohol Market." The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2014 by Lorenz Kueng and Evgeny Yakovlev. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Long-Run Effects of a Public Policy on Alcohol Tastes and Mortality
Lorenz Kueng and Evgeny Yakovlev
NBER Working Paper No. 20298
July 2014, Revised February 2020
JEL No. D12,E21,G02,I10

                                          ABSTRACT

We study the long-run effects of Russia's anti-alcohol campaign, which dramatically altered the
relative supply of hard and light alcohol in the late 1980s. We find that this policy shifted young
men's long-run preferences from hard to light alcohol decades later and we estimate the age at
which consumers form their tastes. We show that the large beer market expansion in the late
1990s had similar effects on young consumers' tastes, while older consumers' tastes remained
largely unchanged. We then link these long-run changes in alcohol consumption patterns to
changes in male mortality. The shift from hard to light alcohol reduced incidences of binge
drinking substantially, leading to fewer alcohol- related deaths. We conclude that the resulting
large cohort differences in current alcohol consumption shares explain a significant part of the
recent decrease in male mortality. Simulations suggest that mortality will continue to decrease by
another 23% over the next twenty years due to persistent changes in consumer tastes. Program
impact evaluations that focus only on contemporaneous effects can therefore severely
underestimate the total effect of such public policies that change preferences for goods.


Lorenz Kueng
Northwestern University
Kellogg School of Management
Suite 4394
2211 Campus Drive
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
l-kueng@kellogg.northwestern.edu

Evgeny Yakovlev
100A Novaya str, Skolkovo,
Moscow, Russia
evgeny.yakovlev@gmail.com
1 Introduction
    Most economic analysis assumes tastes are fixed, and many economists are understandably
wary of allowing preferences to change. For instance, allowing tastes to change makes it more
difficult to derive testable predictions and to identify causal links (Stigler and Becker 1977).1
Nevertheless, a rapidly growing literature is accumulating evidence of taste changes using two
main research designs to overcome this identification challenge: comparing behavior of migrants
and natives, and of children and their parents (Carroll, Rhee, and Rhee 1994, Alesina and Fuchs-
Schündeln 2007, Bronnenberg, Dubé, and Gentzkow 2012, Atkin 2016).
    An important open question is whether public policies can affect tastes (in addition to the
documented effects of migration and parenting), and in particular whether even temporary
policies can change important long-run outcomes through this mechanism (Bernheim, Ray, and
Yeltekin 2015).
    To answer this question, we study the long-run effects on taste formation for different al-
coholic beverages of two large changes to Russia’s alcohol markets. We first document that
the brief anti-alcohol campaign in the late 1980s still affects alcohol consumption choices today,
decades after the policy ended. While the intervention sharply reduced the availability of all
types of alcohol in urban areas, there was a significant increase in homemade vodka (moonshin-
ing), which was much more concentrated in rural areas. At the same time, homemade light
alcohol did not significantly increase such that hard alcohol was relatively less rationed in rural
areas during the campaign.
    Because the policy affected the relative supply of particular types of alcohol differently in
rural and urban areas, we can estimate its long-run effects on taste formation by comparing
the alcohol consumption behavior of rural and urban consumer who started drinking during the
campaign with consumers who started drinking before or after the campaign (i.e., a difference-
in-differences research design).
    Under the null hypothesis of exogenous tastes there should be no difference in consumption
behavior between rural and urban consumers across cohorts more than twenty years after the
campaign ended. We test this hypothesis against the alternative hypothesis that consumers
form tastes when they start consuming a certain good regularly. In the case of alcohol, this
happens during adolescence for most consumers.
    We strongly reject the null hypothesis of exogenous tastes. Instead, we find that consumers
who became adolescent in a rural area during the campaign consume today a much larger share of
their alcohol in the form of vodka compared to both their urban counterparts and to other rural
consumers who became adolescent shortly before or after the campaign. These consumption
differences persist twenty years after the policy ended, even though the treated consumers, who
are now in their late 30s, have access to the same product selection as the untreated consumers,
   1
    Taste changes also complicate welfare comparisons; see e.g., Harsanyi (1953) for an early analysis and the
survey by Bowles (1998). Dhami (2016, Ch. 22) reviews related topics in behavioral welfare economics.


                                                      1
and even after we control for relative prices, income, age, and other individual characteristics.
    Our methodology also allows us to estimate the sensitive ages at which policies affect in-
dividuals’ tastes, exploiting the fact that the anti-alcohol campaign only lasted for a couple
of years. We non-parametrically estimate that the typical consumer forms tastes over distinct
types of alcoholic drinks between ages 14 and 18, and most consumers reach their steady-state
tastes by age 22. These tastes do not change much afterward even in response to large shocks.
To the best of our knowledge, this is one of the first studies that causally identifies the age at
which tastes form.
    We then show that these taste changes have important consequences for one of the most
pressing public policy concerns in Russia: the high mortality of working-age adults and the
large gender gap in life expectancy.2 Because estimating the link between alcohol tastes and
mortality is challenging given the large number of potential confounds inherent with natural
experiments, we establish this relationship in three steps.
    First, we show that there is a quantitatively important association between alcohol sales
and male mortality in Russia using national-level data going back to the 1970s. Changes in the
market share of vodka are strongly positively correlated with changes in male mortality, even
when we control for the level of alcohol sales. Surprisingly, as far as we know, this is the first
study which shows that the effect of alcohol on mortality strongly depends on the type of drink
consumed, in addition to the amount of total alcohol intake, which has been the focus of most
previous work in epidemiology and health economics. While both channels affect mortality,
we find that the type of drink consumed is quantitatively at least as important as the amount
of alcohol consumed. This is because most alcohol-related deaths of working-age adults—fatal
traffic accidents, homicides, suicides, and fatal alcohol poisoning—are a consequence of binge
drinking.
    Second, we leverage the anti-alcohol campaign as an instrument to estimate the causal
long-run effect of changes in alcohol tastes on male mortality using detailed regional-level data
on causes of death and alcohol sales by type of alcohol. We further highlight the underlying
mechanism by focusing on the narrow subset of deaths due to alcohol poisoning. The strong
effect of long-run taste changes on the rate of alcohol poising establishes a direct link between
contemporaneous changes in the market share of hard alcohol and mortality resulting from binge
drinking. We then show that these effects extend to external causes of death that are indirectly
related to alcohol consumption (such as fatal traffic accidents, homicides, suicides, etc.) and
hence generate externalities on third parties, but they do not extend to other causes of death
that should not be closely related to contemporaneous alcohol consumption patterns (such as
cancer, excluding liver cancer).
    Third, we link alcohol consumption directly to mortality using individual-level data from
   2
     Average male life expectancy in Russia from 2000 to 2009 was only 60 years, which is 15 years lower than in
the U.S. and even 3 years lower than in North Korea. Moreover, the gap between female and male life expectancy
is 13 years while only 5 years in the U.S. Both facts are widely attributed to alcohol consumption.


                                                       2
a nationally representative consumption survey. We find that the share of vodka consumed is
an economically and statistically significant predictor of the mortality rate of individuals in the
survey even after controlling for the amount of alcohol consumed and other observables.3
    Having established the causal long-run effect of relative supply shocks on alcohol tastes and
mortality using the anti-alcohol campaign allows us to study the second large change to Russia’s
alcohol market: the large expansion of the beer market in the late 1990s. Many goods that were
not readily available during the Soviet Union—including high-quality beer—became suddenly
accessible to the broader public after Russia opened its borders to trade and foreign investments.
    While studying these changes is empirically more challenging because many other things
also changed after the collapse of the Soviet Union, these shocks were even larger than the
anti-alcohol campaign and were also permanent as seen in Panel (a) of Figure 1. Within only
one decade, the share of beer sales increased from less than 10% to over 25%.

                                          [Figure 1 about here]

    Panel (b) shows that the alcohol tastes of different cohorts were affected very differently
depending on whether they became adolescent before, during or after this expansion. The figure
shows that most of the increase in beer consumption is driven by cohort effects—especially for
the young post-Soviet cohorts—and changes in alcohol consumption patterns within cohorts
over time are much smaller.4
    We use our analysis to simulate two policy-relevant counterfactuals. First, we find that a
significant part of the recent decline in male mortality since 2003 can be attributed to the long-
run effect of the large beer market expansion that occurred a decade earlier. Second, we estimate
a hazard model with individual-level micro data and use it to predict that going forward, male
mortality will further decrease by a quarter over the next twenty years as a long-run consequence
of these taste changes. This decrease will occur even under the current set of policies, current
levels of relative prices, and current socio-demographic characteristics of the population, except
for individuals’ tastes. Mortality will decrease simply because new generations of consumers are
more accustomed to light alcohol and will replace older generations who have stronger tastes
for hard alcohol as seen in Figure 1.
    The results of this paper have therefore important implications for public policies and eco-
nomic research. For instance, they suggest that targeted interventions focused on young con-
sumers might be more effective than broad-based policies such as excise taxes. Since many con-
sequences of alcohol consumption such as traffic accidents or homicides generate externalities,
government interventions in the alcohol market could improve welfare. Moreover, if consumers
are not fully rational (for example because they are uninformed or have time-inconsistent pref-
erences), then government intervention that address such “internalities” can further improve
   3
      We leverage additional survey questions to document that binge drinking is more likely to occur when
consuming a given amount of alcohol in the form of hard rather than light alcohol.
    4
      Online Appendix B formally decomposes these consumption patterns into age (within) and cohort (between)
effects and Section 6 estimates the effect of the beer market expansion on tastes.

                                                     3
welfare even for cases that do not affect third parties, such as alcohol poisoning (Gruber and
Köszegi 2001).
    Finally, our findings suggest that impact evaluations that focus only on the contemporaneous
effects yield a severely biased estimate of the policy’s full impact if the policy changes tastes.
These long-run consequences can persist for decades after the intervention has ended and are
often unintended when the policy is drafted.
    The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses the literature related to this paper.
Section 3 describes the data. Section 4 estimates the causal effect of the anti-alcohol campaign
on long-run alcohol tastes. Section 5 identifies the age at which tastes form. Section 6 studies the
effects of the beer market expansion on taste formation. Section 7 estimates the causal effect of
changes in alcohol tastes on mortality. Section 8 simulates two policy-relevant counterfactuals.
Section 9 discusses alternative interpretations of our findings and Section 10 concludes.


2 Related Literature
   In this section we briefly discuss related literature and how our research contributes to it.
Our review is necessarily limited and does not include many important studies of taste changes
and of the effects of alcohol consumption on health.

2.1 Taste Changes
    Our paper is closely related to recent studies of long-run effects of temporary interven-
tions.5 Our study focuses on tastes that can change over an individual’s lifetime including
state-dependent preferences and social interactions (e.g., internal and external habits, peer ef-
fects, etc.).6 One could also include culture and social norms if one was willing to assume that
culture and norms can change quickly in response to a policy, and that these effects can be
very local (e.g., only in rural areas). Most research on this topic however assumes that culture
and norms change slowly. For instance, in their survey of this literature, Guiso, Sapienza, and
Zingales (2006) state that to “claim a causal link from culture to economics, we restrict our
attention to those cultural aspects that can largely be treated as invariant over an individual’s
lifetime.”7
    While different models of taste changes specify different primitives, they often have similar
effects on outcomes policymakers care about, such as mortality. What matters for many policy-
relevant questions is whether public policies can change tastes, and whether these changes then
    5
      E.g. long-run effects on smoking cessation, Giné, Karlan, and Zinman (2010); on electricity consumption
preferences, Costa and Gerard (2018); on physical exercise habits, Charness and Gneezy (2009); on commuting
behavior, Larcom, Rauch, and Willems (2017); or on political participation, Fujiwara, Meng, and Vogl (2016).
    6
      Note that if peer effects are uniform and spread across birth cohorts as much as within birth cohorts, the
analysis of taste changes would not be able to identify any differences. Hence, social interactions such as peer
effects outside one’s birth cohort cannot be too strong.
    7
      Recent research extends this analysis beyond tastes (e.g., endogenous risk preferences, Malmendier and
Nagel 2011) and analyzes the transmission of preferences, with a focus on intergenerational transmission (Bisin
and Verdier 2001, Doepke and Zilibotti 2017).

                                                       4
lead to persistent differences in behavior.8
    We make three contributions to the growing empirical literature that studies taste changes.
First, as discussed in the introduction, our approach uses variation from a public policy and
from a large trade shock, while the previous literature mostly uses a migrants research design.
Second, we estimate the typical ages at which such tastes form. Third, we show that the results
from this literature apply much more broadly. For instance, the brand preferences identified
by Bronnenberg et al. (2012) (e.g., Budweiser vs. Miller Light) extend to tastes over broader
categories of goods, e.g., beer vs. vodka (or chicken vs. beef as in Online Appendix E). More-
over, we show that endogenizing these broader tastes has additional important consequences
for individual welfare by affecting mortality and other health outcomes, in addition to the nu-
tritional consequences highlighted by Atkin (2016). Hence, changing tastes are also relevant for
other fields in economics such as health and public economics and are not limited to industrial
organization, marketing, or trade.

2.2 Alcohol and Mortality
    The second strand of related literature are studies of the health effects of alcohol consump-
tion. Previous research has documented significant contemporaneous and medium-run effects
of changes in alcohol supply on mortality rates in Russia. Brainerd and Cutler (2005) and
Nemtsov (2011) provide comprehensive surveys of the evidence.
    Yakovlev (2018) studies more recent changes in the Russian alcohol market and alcohol-
related mortality. He analyzes the determinants of heavy drinking, focusing on peer effects
and habit formation in addition to relative price effects. Our study differs in several important
ways. First, we use a different research design and a different policy, focusing on the anti-alcohol
campaign and the liberalization of the alcohol markets after the end of the Soviet Union. He uses
a regression kink design resulting from the kink in the policy regime of the excise tax to identify
price elasticities and he uses the clustered sampling structure of the survey data to identify peer
effects. His analysis therefore focuses on different and more recent changes to Russia’s alcohol
markets. Second, he focuses on short-run habit formation while we document long-term effects
on consumer tastes that last for decades. Third, our study documents persistent effects of policy
changes not just on the level of total alcohol intake but also on the relative tastes for specific
alcoholic beverages (e.g., beer vs. vodka). Our analysis therefore provides additional insights
   8
     This point is related to the sufficient statistics approach to welfare analysis, which emphasizes the fact that
several structural models can lead to the same set of reduced-form parameters necessary to conduct welfare
analysis (Chetty 2009). In our context, several structural models of taste changes can lead to the same effect on
observed consumption choices, which in our case explain differences in mortality over time and across regions. In
Online Appendix F we provide an alternative model with multiple equilibria based on an extension of the Becker
and Murphy (1988) model of rational habit formation, allowing for two habit-forming goods. In that model,
persistent habits are formed when individuals start to consume a certain good regularly for the first time in their
life. Individuals are born with the same initial tastes but are exposed to different initial market conditions and
can therefore form long-run habits toward different goods. This model can rationalize our reduced-form results
and generate multiple equilibria even without any heterogeneity in unobserved preferences.


                                                         5
for both academics and for policymakers. In particular, we show that even without a reduction
in the level of alcohol consumption, changing the form in which alcohol is consumed can result
in significant health benefits.
    Bhattacharya, Gathmann, and Miller (2013) is another important recent analysis of the
short- and medium-run effect of the anti-alcohol campaign on mortality rates during that pe-
riod. The authors show that the anti-alcohol campaign significantly reduced contemporaneous
alcohol-related deaths among working-age men between 1985 and 1990, either directly in the
form of fatalities from alcohol poisoning and violent deaths or indirectly via heart attacks and
strokes. They also document that mortality caught up after the campaign ended with above
average mortality rates between 1991 and 1994 (i.e., “catch-up” mortality). Finally, they show
that the anti-alcohol campaign had only small effects on deaths that are less related to alcohol
consumption, such as respiratory and digestive diseases and cancer, consistent with a causal
effect of alcohol consumption on mortality rates.
    Our study extends this literature in three important ways. First, we document that these
supply shocks also have large long-run effects by affecting tastes of young consumers that, to
the best of our knowledge, have not been studied before. For instance, we find that individuals
who became adolescent in a rural area during the anti-alcohol campaign formed tastes for hard
alcoholic drinks, which increased their likelihood of dying due to binge drinking in later years
relative to their urban counterparts. This negative long-run effect contrasts with the lower
mortality during the campaign due to the successful short-run reduction in the total amount of
alcohol consumed (see Panel B of Table A.5 in the Online Appendix).
    Second, we show that the rapid expansion of the beer market in the second half of the 1990s
had an even larger effect on male mortality than the anti-alcohol campaign. In contrast to
the effect of the anti-alcohol campaign, this import shock had both a positive short-run and
an unambiguously positive long-run effect on male life expectancy, both because it reduced
contemporaneous instances of binge drinking and because it also changed younger consumers’
tastes from hard to light alcoholic beverages and hence also reduced future instances of binge
drinking.
    Third, we show that the type of drink consumed has an important effect on mortality
that so far has been overlooked by studies that focus only on the total amount of alcohol
consumed. Consequently, policies and events that change relative tastes from hard to light
alcohol substantially reduce the mortality of working-age men, even when holding fixed the
total amount of alcohol consumed.


3 Data
    We use data at the national, regional, and individual level and we provide a more detailed
description in Online Appendix A. In this section, we instead focus on the most critical issues
for our analysis.

                                               6
    We use national-level data of alcohol sales going back to the 1970s and estimates of home-
made vodka (samogon) to show the aggregate effects of the supply shocks on the alcohol mar-
ket.9 We then use national-level male mortality rates to decompose the total effect of the supply
shocks into (a) the effect of changes in the amount of alcohol consumed and (b) the effect of
changes in the type of alcohol consumed, holding fixed the amount of alcohol consumed.
    We use three sources of regional-level data. First, we use historical data provided by Bhat-
tacharya et al. (2013) on the share of samogon in total alcohol consumed across Russian regions
before and during the anti-alcohol campaign. We use these regional shares to show the differen-
tial effect of the policy on the supply of illegal vodka in rural and urban areas. Second, we use
more recent regional-level data from the Russian Statistical Office (Rosstat) on alcohol sales by
type of alcohol. Third, we use new epidemiological data from the Russian Fertility and Mortal-
ity Database (RusFMD) on mortality rates by year, gender, age, region and type of settlement
(rural/urban), which allows us to estimate the differential impact of the anti-alcohol campaign
on long-run male mortality rates and to identify the underlying mechanism that relates alcohol
tastes to mortality. We explore both case-specific mortality data, which is available for 5-year
age groups, and data on total mortality, which is available for one-year age groups.
    Our main analysis of taste changes uses individual-level data from the Russian Longitudinal
Monitoring Survey (RLMS), which is a nationally representative annual panel survey that covers
more than 4,000 households per year corresponding to about 9,000 individual respondents. Our
baseline sample consists of rounds 5 through 20 of the RLMS, spanning the period from 1994
to 2011, but not including 1997 and 1999 when the survey was not conducted.10
    Our analysis leverages the rich individual consumption data for distinct types of alcoholic
beverages. This data comes from the survey’s health module and is completed separately by
each adult. Hence, our data has the individual consumer as the unit of analysis compared to
previous research, which is often limited to household-level expenditure data. Furthermore,
the health module asks individuals about quantities consumed instead of expenditure outlays.
Our consumption measures therefore capture individual consumption and are not subject to
issues of timing and preference aggregation that may lead to a wedge between expenditures and
consumption.11 Since the health questions are confidential and asked of everyone separately
without having other family members present, the answers are also less likely to be influenced
by stigma.
    Our primary measures of alcohol consumption are the shares of vodka and beer consumption
in total alcohol intake, which is calculated in milliliters of pure alcohol. Specifically, we use the
   9
     Note that we do not use these national-level data for our individual-level estimates of the effect of these
shocks on taste formation. Hence, concerns about data quality of aggregate samogon consumption—which we
discuss in Online Appendix A—do not affect our main results.
  10
     We do not use data from rounds 1 to 4 because another institution conducted them using a different
methodology. These rounds are of much lower quality according to the survey’s website. We discuss the
household-level expenditure data of non-alcoholic goods in more detail in Online Appendix E.
  11
     In Online Appendix A we document that the quality of household-level alcohol expenditure data in the
RLMS is lower than the individual-level data based on its health module.

                                                       7
individual’s quantity consumed in a typical day during the last 30 days, which we express in
grams of pure alcohol (ethanol).12
    We restrict the sample to individuals age 18 and older, with 18 being the minimum le-
gal drinking age in Russia, because one might be concerned with underreporting of underage
drinking. Fortunately, we do not depend on survey responses from minors to identify taste for-
mation because we study the long-run effects of policies that happened in the distant past. This
contrasts with studies that estimate the contemporaneous impact of such policies.13 Similarly,
restricting the sample to consumers age 18 and above does not affect our estimates of the age at
which consumers form alcohol tastes, because we measure consumption behavior decades after
the shocks occurred using individuals who were adolescent during the policy intervention, but
are now in their late 30s.

                                           [Table 1 about here]

3.1 Descriptive Statistics
    Table 1 summarizes various measures of alcohol consumption and individual characteristics.
Our analysis focuses on men for two main reasons and we leave a detailed analysis of the effect
on females for future research. First, the effect of alcohol consumption on mortality is much
or pronounced for men than for women as mentioned in the introduction. Second, men mostly
consume only two types of alcohol, vodka (62% of total alcohol) and beer (29%), which makes
the substitution pattern much easier to study than for women, who also consume a significant
share of wine (36%). Therefore, conditional on not becoming an abstainer, any behavioral
response to a supply shock in the beer or vodka market implies a substitution to the other
product for men.
    To focus on the effect of relative tastes (i.e., taste for a specific type of alcoholic drink
holding fixed the amount of alcohol consumed), we include the amount of alcohol consumed in
most specifications and we analyze the effect of the shocks on the amount of alcohol consumed
separately. We use the amount of all alcoholic beverages consumed during the previous month
to construct these variables, using an alcohol content of 5% for beer and 40% for vodka based
on data from the National Institutes of Health (NIH).
    The average male alcohol consumer consumes almost four times more alcohol than the
average female consumer does. This fact is crucial for understanding the large effect vodka
consumption has on the gender gap in mortality in Russia, even after conditioning on the amount
of alcohol consumed. The reason is that most alcohol-related deaths of individuals below the
age of 65 are caused by occasional binge drinking, and stronger tastes for vodka makes binge
  12
     The English translation of this survey question is “Now I’m going to list various alcoholic beverages, and
you, tell me please, which of these you drank in the last 30 days and, for those you drank, how many grams you
usually consumed in a day?”
  13
     Online Appendix C shows that our findings indeed do not change if we include all individuals age 14 and
above.

                                                      8
drinking much more likely. Hence, a higher share of vodka consumption increases mortality
risk, even when comparing two individuals with the same average alcohol intake per month.
While we do not observe binge drinking directly, we use additional questions on consumption
frequency to relate the share of vodka consumed to binge drinking. Online Appendix Table A.1
shows that individuals with a higher share of vodka consume a given amount of alcohol over
fewer days per month. Hence, their propensity to binge drink is higher than if they consumed
this amount of alcohol in the form of beer.
    Table 1 also provides summary statistics for the other covariates used in the analysis, both
for the main samples of male alcohol consumers age 18 and above and for the sample of all men
above age 18, including those who report not having consumed any alcohol during the previous
month. We use the latter sample when we analyze the total effect of the shocks on changes in
alcohol tastes and on mortality, including the extensive margin (i.e., abstaining).

3.2 Data Quality
    Survey data have well-known measurement issues that can potentially bias the estimates,
and the RLMS is no exception. We therefore provide a detailed analysis of these issues in
Online Appendix A, including the effect of attrition on our results and a comparison with
registered alcohol retail sales. We summarize the main results of these robustness checks where
appropriate. For example, regarding sample attrition, the survey’s website states that “the main
effects [of attrition] are in the Moscow/St. Petersburg sample,” while interview completion rates
are above 88% in all other sampling units. We show that excluding individuals from Moscow and
St. Petersburg in fact slightly strengthens the causal effects in the main analysis in Section 4,
consistent with the hypothesis that data from these subsamples contain more measurement error
than responses from other sampling units.
    We also deal with issues related to goods that are potentially addictive. For example, our
results could be sensitive to the behavior of a few individuals because alcohol consumption is
known to be highly skewed to the right (Cook and Moore, 2000). To address this concern, we
control for the amount of alcohol intake in most specifications and we follow the recent empirical
literature by using consumption shares instead of levels to make the results robust to outliers.14
Moreover, our findings are robust to dropping the top quartile of alcohol consumers.
    Finally, we use the survey data to provide direct evidence of the link between alcohol con-
sumption shares and mortality at the micro-level. While national-level time series data and
regional-level panel data of mortality rates and alcohol sales by type of alcohol strongly suggest
such a link, only the RLMS can provide direct evidence since it is the only dataset that simulta-
neously records alcohol consumption and mortality for the same individual. Previous research
has used the RLMS to study mortality trends and we discuss the quality of the mortality data
and its limitations more extensively in Online Appendix A. Brainerd and Cutler (2005) for
  14
    Online Appendix C uses the estimator suggested by Honoré (1992) for two-sided truncated panel models
with fixed effects to show that our results are not affected by this transformation.

                                                   9
instance use the RLMS to study mortality trends in post-Soviet Russia and describe its quality
as follows:
       “For families where there is at least one member surviving, the survey asks if anyone
       died during the time period. We are thus able to identify deaths among the vast
       majority of multiple-person households (about 85 percent of the population is in
       multiple-person households). [...] Trends in mortality in the RLMS match trends
       from the aggregate data, although the level of mortality in the RLMS is 10-20 percent
       lower than the national data.” (p.113)
The 10-20 percent gap between the level of mortality measured in the RLMS and national-level
mortality is due to the sample restrictions mentioned above, in particular the need to restrict
the analysis to multi-person households.


4 Identifying Taste Changes
    We use Russia’s anti-alcohol campaign in the late 1980s that briefly but severely rationed
distinct types of alcohol to estimate its persistent causal effect on tastes. In this section, we
focus on individuals who were exposed to the policy during early adulthood and study their
tastes for different types of alcoholic drinks later in life when most of them are in their late 30s.
In the next section, we use this variation to estimate the age at which alcohol tastes typically
form.

                                           [Figure 2 about here]

4.1 Research Design and Identification
    We begin by providing institutional background of this policy. In 1985, Mikhail Gorbachev
introduced an anti-alcohol campaign that was designed to fight widespread alcoholism in the
Soviet Union. The impact of the campaign on the alcohol market is shown in Figure 2. Regulated
prices of vodka, beer and other types of alcohol were raised, sales were heavily restricted, and
many additional regulations were put in place aimed at further curbing alcohol consumption.15
The effect of the campaign on official alcohol sales (Panel a) was dramatic because the communist
government directly controlled the production of any official alcohol. Beer sales dropped by 29%
from 177 million liters of ethanol in 1984 to 125 million liters in 1987, and vodka sales dropped
by 60% from 784 to 317 million liters. Although the campaign officially ended in 1988, Figure 2
shows that its impact lasted until 1990.
    While the effect on official alcohol sales was dramatic, Panel (b) shows that the drop in vodka
sales was partially offset by a substantial increase in the consumption of samogon, a low-quality
  15
     The measures included, among other things, limiting the kinds of shops that were permitted to sell alcohol,
closing vodka distilleries and destroying vineyards in the wine-producing republics, and banning the sale of
alcohol in restaurants before 2p.m. White (1996) and Nemtsov (2011) provide a detailed account of this policy.


                                                      10
home-made vodka whose consumption remained illegal until 1997.16 Home-made beer on the
other hand was extremely rare at that time and remains rare today (Nemtsov, 2011). Table 1
for instance shows that the share of home-made beer in total alcohol is less than 0.1%. In fact,
until 2008 the survey did not even have a question about home-made beer.
    Important for our identification approach is the fact that the production of samogon was
heavily concentrated in rural areas, as we show next. This happened mostly for technical
reasons that are unrelated to changes in tastes. The production of samogon requires space,
which is limited in urban areas, especially in Russian cities, which are very densely populated
by international comparison, with most people living in large apartment buildings. Moreover,
producing samogon causes smoke and a strong smell, which is at the same time very unpleasant
and easy to detect by neighbors and law-enforcement, particularly in cities. Hence, the ban on
the illegal production of samogon was more strictly enforced in urban areas. It was therefore
much safer to produce samogon in single-unit homes, which are highly concentrated in rural
areas. As a result, samogon was more readily available in rural areas than in urban areas.17
    Next, we quantify the differential access of rural consumers to samogon before and during
the campaign. We use regional-level data on shares of samogon in total alcohol consumption
from 1980 to 1992 provided by Bhattacharya et al. (2013), since micro-level survey data is not
available before 1994. We estimate a difference-in-differences specification by regressing region
                                   samogon
r’s share of samogon in year t, Srt        , on the region’s fraction of rural population in 1991,
fully interacted with year dummies:

                                1992 h
                                X                                                               i
            samogon
           Srt        = αr +             δD,t · I(year)t + δDD,t · I(year)t × Rural Fractionr + εrt .           (1)
                               t=1981


1981 is the first year in which reliable regional-level population data is available, and αr is a full
set of region fixed effects. Observations are weighted by the region’s total population. Panel (c)
plots the difference-in-differences coefficients, δDD,t , documenting the differential impact of the
campaign on the consumption of illicit hard alcohol in rural areas. While the rural share follows
a parallel trend in the years leading up to the campaign, there is a jump in the share of samogon
consumed in rural areas during the campaign, from 1986 to 1990.

4.2 Long-run Effects of the Anti-Alcohol Campaign on Tastes
   If tastes can change and form during adolescence when an individual first consumes alcohol
regularly, we would expect the campaign to affect tastes of young rural consumers differently
  16
     Selling samogon remains illegal today even as the consumption of samogon has been legalized. We discuss
the sources and methodologies used to construct these figures and their limitations in more detail in Online
Appendix A.
  17
     These alcohol restrictions also led to other kinds of substitution such as consuming industrial alcohol or even
perfume (e.g., White 1996). However, the consumption of these goods was not as widespread as samogon (see
Nemtsov, 2011, p.136). We therefore have no reason to believe that rural and urban consumers had different
access to these substitutes.

                                                        11
both relative to rural consumers that were not adolescent during the campaign, but also relative
to their urban counterparts. We implement a difference-in-differences approach using individual-
level alcohol consumption data from the RLMS recorded decades after the end of the campaign
to test this prediction. The treatment group is rural consumers that became adolescent during
the campaign. We estimate the following regression:

         Sitvodka = βDD · I(became adolescent during campaign)i × I(rural)i                      (2)
                 +βD · I(became adolescent during campaign)i + λ · I(rural)i + γ 0 xit + it ,

where Sitvodka is individual i’s share of vodka consumed in survey year t and xit is a vector of
controls. Anticipating the findings in the next section, we define adolescence as being 17 years
old and define the campaign’s impact to last from 1986 to 1990 based on Panel (c) of Figure 2.
To focus on the long-run effects of the campaign we initially restrict our sample to survey
rounds starting in 2001 in order to have at least one decade between the end of the campaign’s
impact on the alcohol market and the point at which we measure consumer tastes. We will later
relax these assumptions, and in the next section, we estimate the age-profile of taste formation
non-parametrically.

                                        [Table 2 about here]

    Table 2 summarizes the result of this analysis. Column 1 starts with a minimal specification
including only region, age and survey year fixed effects, which flexibly control for life-cycle
patterns, macroeconomic shocks and local differences. Columns 2 to 4 then gradually add more
controls. The full set of age and year effects is identified because the policy affected rural and
urban cohorts differentially.
    Consistent with tastes forming during early adulthood, the intent-to-treat effect βDD shows
that individuals who became adolescent in a rural area during the campaign prefer vodka 5 per-
centage points (pp) more than their urban counterparts based on consumption choices recorded
more than a decade after the end of the anti-alcohol campaign. Hence, tastes of young consumers
can be persistently manipulated even by a temporary public policy. Furthermore, these treated
individuals also use a 4 pp higher share of vodka relative to other rural consumers who became
adolescent before or after the campaign (the sum of the difference and difference-in-differences
coefficients, βD +βDD ). This long-run increase is also economically significant: It corresponds to
a 10% difference relative to the sample share of vodka of 50%. In comparison, urban consumers
that turned 17 during the campaign have a 1 pp lower vodka share relative to younger and older
urban consumers (the βD coefficient), although this difference is not statistically significant.
    Controlling for the level of total alcohol consumption in Column 2 shows that the campaign
changed relative tastes, holding fixed the campaign’s effect on the amount of alcohol consumed
in the long run, which we show in Column 5. Column 3 adds changes in real income and in local
relative prices to control for contemporaneous substitution patterns and differences in income
                                                  12
elasticities. Column 4 adds a standard set of demographics such as personal health status,
weight, education, and marital status. The point estimates are stable and become slightly more
precise.
    Next, we decompose the causal long-run effect into extensive margin (abstaining) and two
components of the intensive margin: the amount of alcohol consumed and the substitution
between different types of alcohol.
    Column 5 shows that the anti-alcohol campaign significantly lowered total alcohol consump-
tion in the long-run among urban consumers that became adolescent during the campaign (by
8.4 pp), but had a much smaller impact on rural adolescents (0.8 pp) presumably because of
increased availability of samogon. The long-term effect of the anti-alcohol campaign on ab-
staining in Column 6 is imprecisely estimated and not statistically significant. Men that were
adolescents during the campaign are about 5% more likely to abstain from alcohol both in rural
and urban areas (from 28 pp to 28.4 pp).
    Column 7 shows that the campaign has the opposite effect on the share of beer consumed,
confirming that for male consumers the main substitution occurs between vodka and beer. This
result is important to keep in mind when interpreting the long-run effects of this policy on male
mortality in Section 7.
    Finally, Column 8 assesses the campaign’s total effect on tastes for hard alcoholic drinks,
including cognac, fortified wine, and samogon. Although the effect is qualitatively similar
to the main results suggesting that the campaign affected relative tastes for hard and light
alcoholic beverages, the point estimate is smaller and less precise as one would expect when
adding measurement error in reported samogon consumption (see Online Appendix A). Online
Appendix C provides extensive robustness checks of these findings.
    In summary, this section shows that the campaign significantly changed the consumption
behavior in the long run given that most subjects in our sample are observed more than two
decades after the end of the campaign. Moreover, the results highlight the differential impact
the campaign had on consumers who were adolescent in rural areas compared to their urban
counterparts. These consumers formed persistent tastes for distinct types of alcoholic beverages,
and these taste differences are easily detectable in their current consumption behavior.


5 At What Age Do Alcohol Tastes Form?
   In this section, we exploit the temporary nature of the anti-alcohol campaign to identify
the age at which the average consumer forms tastes for different alcoholic drinks. We start by
noting that the estimates in the previous section are intent-to-treat effects for three reasons:
First, the legal drinking age is not strictly enforced; second, individuals above age 18 cannot
be forced to drink alcohol; and third, tastes do not necessarily form within a single year but
might take several years. Hence, to identify the ages at which tastes form we need to estimate
how the campaign’s long-run effect depends on age, still exploiting the differential impact of the

                                               13
campaign on rural and urban consumers.

                                             [Figure 3 about here]

    Figure 3 summarizes our analysis. We follow an approach that is related to the non-
parametric estimation of an unknown density function. To obtain a “smooth” estimate of
this unknown age function, we use a 5-year triangular kernel shown in Panel (b) that reflects
the intensity of the campaign during the 5-year period from 1986-90 shown in Figure 2.18 For a
given age between 10 and 35 we then calculate each consumer’s exposure to the campaign (i.e.,
treatment intensity) using the kernel weights and under the assumption that tastes form at that
age. For example, suppose that we want to estimate the response to the campaign at age 17.
Any person born before 1969 and hence turning 17 before 1986 and any person born after 1973
who turned 17 after 1990 receives a weight of zero. People born in 1969 or 1973 receive a weight
of 1/9, people born in 1970 or 1972 a weight of 2/9, and people born in 1973 a weight of 1/3.
We then estimate equation (2) using this measure of campaign exposure instead of the 5-year
uniform indicator, I(became adolescent during campaign)i .
    Panel (a) shows the estimated age function. We see that tastes for vodka form in a short
window between ages 14 and 18, with a peak at age 17 and statistically significant differences
also at ages 15 and 16.


6 The Beer Market Expansion of the 1990s
   The anti-alcohol campaign allows us to cleanly identify the causal long-term effect of tem-
porary supply shocks on tastes because it affected urban and rural consumers differently and
because the policy was short-lived. The temporary nature of the policy also helps us identifying
the age at which consumers form tastes over distinct types of alcoholic drinks.
   In this section, we test the external validity of our findings using large import shocks that
occurred in the late 1990s. Many goods that were not readily available during the Soviet
Union, including high-quality beer, became suddenly accessible to the broader public after
Russia opened its borders to trade and foreign investments.

6.1 Background Information
    Vodka dominated the alcohol market during the Soviet Union. Starting in 1995, however,
the beer industry expanded rapidly for reasons that are largely exogenous to taste changes,
such as market liberalization, a lower regulatory burden for the beer industry—compared to all
other alcohol producers—and the entry of foreign competition and investments into this new
market. Foreign competition also brought modern technologies. For example, beer sold in cans
or in plastic bottles started to be produced only after the fall of the Soviet Union. Brewing
 18
      Online Appendix C shows that these findings are robust to choosing an empirical or a uniform kernel instead.


                                                        14
technologies also changed significantly, and the assortment of beer increased dramatically.19
Panel (b) of Figure 4 shows that beer sales increased by a factor of four between 1995 to 2011,
from 2.8 to 10.8 billion liters. In contrast, vodka sales did not change much (see Figure 5).
Total annual sales of vodka were 1.59 billion liters in 2011, which is roughly the same level as
during the Soviet era.20

                                            [Figure 4 about here]

    We use this beer market expansion for two main purposes. First, we document a similar
effect of this shock on long-run consumption tastes as in Section 4, although this time we
study a positive supply shock which affected light alcohol. Of course, identification is much
more challenging than with the anti-alcohol campaign, because many other things might have
changed during this period and these other factors are difficult to fully control for, including
social norms and culture.
    Second, as shown in Figure 4, this positive supply shock is even larger than the negative
supply shock of the anti-alcohol campaign. Section 7 below will show that changes in relative
alcohol tastes play a key role in explaining changes in mortality, especially the recent decline
in male mortality that started around 2003. Before turning to the effects of changes in alcohol
tastes on mortality, this section shows that the beer market expansion in the 1990s caused
younger cohorts to prefer beer to vodka, leading to fewer cases of binge drinking and hence
fewer alcohol-related deaths today. This channel then plays a key role in the large decline of
male mortality in recent years. Therefore, it is important to study this large positive supply
shock even if identification is more challenging.

6.2 The Effect of the Beer Market Expansion on Long-Run Tastes
    We study the long-run effects of the beer market expansion on relative alcohol tastes of
young consumers by focusing on the relatively brief period when the beer industry experienced
the most rapid growth. We implement two empirical strategies to identify the causal effect of
the import shock on consumer tastes, shown in Panels (b) and (d) of Figure 4.
    First, we estimate the differential impact of the beer market expansion on long-run alcohol
tastes by comparing the consumption patterns of individuals who turned 17 in different years
during the expansion. These consumers had different access to beer when they formed their
tastes. We estimate the effect of the import shock on alcohol tastes by running the following
  19
     For instance, in 1991 there were no foreign-owned beer breweries in Russia and no foreign brand was sold.
By 2009, the five leading foreign-owned companies produced more than 85% of the total beer sold. Similarly,
the number of beer brands increased from only 20 in 1991 to over 1,000 in 2009. The set of varieties available in
1991 was even more limited than this number suggests, since one brand—Zhigulevskoe—dominated the entire
market; see www.beerunion.ru/soc otchet/2.html.
  20
     We measure sales in terms of quantities instead of values because there were no formal market prices in the
Soviet Union. Instead, the alcohol industry was monopolized by the state, and quantities produced were heavily
regulated. As a result, it was difficult or even impossible to find many goods in stores, and prices were often not
the most significant factor as there was severe rationing.

                                                        15
regression:
                                   Sitbeer = φ · year-turned-17i + γ 0 xit + it .            (3)

Panel (b) illustrates the research design. We start by estimating equation (3) on the sample of
all men who turned 17 during the beer market expansion from 1995 to 2007. Since it is possible
that other factors also changed during this period, which might have affected men differently
depending on the year of their 17th birthday, we then let the sample window shrink on both sides
until it only includes the three years from 2000 to 2002. Hence, as we shrink the sample window
we identify the effect of the shock on alcohol tastes using consumers who grew up in a more
and more similar environment (including similar culture, norms, and information), except that
they face a different beer market when they turn 17. This is similar to shrinking the bandwidth
parameter in a regression discontinuity design.
    Panel (a) plots the estimates of φ for both beer and for vodka together with 95% confidence
intervals. The effect of the beer market expansion on the shares consumed is remarkably stable,
and it remains statistically significant despite the substantial gradual reduction in the sample
size. The point estimates are also economically significant, implying that the average consumer
who turned 17 during the expansion exhibits about a 4% higher long-run share of beer con-
sumption compared with consumers who are only one year older. We use the term “long-run
share” because we are estimating the individuals’ consumption shares using data from 2001 to
2011. Hence, most of the individuals in our sample are substantially older than 17 when we
measure their consumption choices.
    Consistent with the results from the anti-alcohol campaign, we see the opposite effect on
vodka, again confirming that for men, increases in the beer share mainly come at the expense
of the vodka share. Hence, these results paint the same picture as the anti-alcohol campaign,
providing external validity of these findings.
    Second, we run a set of placebo tests shown in Panels (c) and (d).21 We estimate equation (3)
using a 5-year rolling window starting with men who turned 17 between 1970 and 1974 and
ending with men who turned 17 between 2006 and 2010.22 We should not see any significant
effect of the year in which an individual turned 17 on the share of beer consumed for samples that
do not include the expansion of the beer market if the results from the anti-alcohol campaign
extend to this setting. As the 5-year sample window reaches the time at which the beer market
expands rapidly, the estimate of φ in equation (3) should gradually increase, because men turning
17 at the end of the 5-year sample window have much easier access to beer than men who turned
17 at the beginning of the sample window. Finally, the beer market stabilizes around 2007 at
a new long-run equilibrium shown in Figure 4. As the sample window starts to cover more and
more of this new steady state, the regression coefficient should gradually decrease. Hence, the
response should first be zero and then exhibit a hump-shaped pattern with a peak response
 21
      Online Appendix C shows similar placebo tests for the anti-alcohol campaign.
 22
      1970 is the first year for which we observe aggregate sales by type of alcohol.


                                                         16
when the sample window fully covers the beer-market expansion period.
    Panel (c) plots the estimates of φ from this research design, together with 95% confidence
intervals. We indeed see this hump-shaped pattern emerge precisely as we would expect if tastes
form in early adulthood. The coefficients are close to zero and not statistically significant for
samples that only include consumers who turned 17 before the expansion of the beer market.
The effect gradually increases when the import shock affects more and more individuals in the
5-year rolling window. The response reaches a peak for the window that ranges from 1997 to
2001, which coincides with the period that saw the most dramatic increase in the beer market
over the entire 42-year period.

Age of Taste Formation Finally, we use the beer market expansion as an alternative source
of variation to estimate the age profile of taste formation. We use a similar approach as in
Section 5, using the empirical kernel shown in Panel (f) of Figure 4, which is derived in a
straightforward way from the time-series of the market share of beer shown in Panel (d). We
then apply this kernel to calculate each individual’s exposure to the beer market expansion under
the assumption that tastes form at a specific age between 10 and 35. We use this measure of
exposure to replace the linear trend in equation (3); i.e., the kernel is a non-linear transformation
of the time trend. Panel (e) shows the corresponding estimates φ̂ as a function of the potential
age of taste formation. Consistent with the results from the anti-alcohol policy, we find that
alcohol tastes form in early adulthood. The age function has a slightly less pronounced shape
than in Figure 3 because the import shock is persistent and occurs over a span of 13 years and
because we do not have a similar control group as in the difference-in-differences research design
based on the anti-alcohol campaign.
    Online Appendix B uses the panel dimension of the RLMS to decompose the changes in
alcohol shares non-parametrically into age, cohort and time effects. We then test for stepping-
stone effects of light alcohol, i.e., the hypothesis that consuming light alcohol early in life is a
steppingstone or gateway to consuming harder alcohol later in life. We find only modest support
for the steppingstone hypothesis. While the share of beer increases from ages 18 to 22 (and
decreases for vodka), it is completely flat thereafter. This is consistent with the estimated age
profile shown in Figure 4 despite using a completely different source of variation: consumption
changes within a person.

6.3 Extensions
   Finally, we briefly mention two extensions of our analysis, which are discussed in more detail
in Online Appendix D and E.

Alternative Identification using Migrants In Online Appendix D we use a completely
different research design based on migrants. This is the main approach used in the previous
literature on taste formation (e.g., Bronnenberg et al. 2012 or Atkin 2016). Consistent with this
                                                 17
literature, we find that migrants bring their tastes with them.

Tastes Formation for Non-Alcoholic Goods Alcohol is of course special in many ways,
including that it is potentially addictive. In Online Appendix E we use similar market expansions
of non-alcoholic consumer goods during the 1990s to directly address this concern, in particular
the question whether and to what extent our results on taste formation can be applied more
broadly to other non-addictive goods. We find that the aggregate market share of these goods,
measured at the time when consumers were young, is also a strong predictor of their relative
tastes at a much later age, and holds even after controlling for relative prices, income, and
individual characteristics. These results are therefore consistent with the causal estimates of
long-run tastes from the anti-alcohol campaign and the beer market expansion.


7 Alcohol Tastes and Mortality
    This section provides evidence that these changes in alcohol tastes have important conse-
quences for one of the most pressing public policy concerns in Russia: the high mortality of
working-age adults and in particular the large gap between male and female life expectancy. We
build on previous research that establishes the role of alcohol in explaining the large changes in
male mortality since the mid-1980s (Brainerd and Cutler 2005, Nemtsov 2011, Yakovlev 2018).
    We extend this research by showing that the type of alcohol consumed has an important
effect on mortality of working-age adults in addition to the amount of alcohol consumed, that
is, even when we hold fixed the amount of alcohol consumed. We establish this link using the
steps described in the introduction.

7.1 Background Information
    Alcohol consumption has well-known long-term adverse effects on life expectancy and health
outcomes (e.g., cirrhosis). Probably less well known is the fact that approximately 40% of
all annual deaths among working-age adults in Russia are estimated to be related to alcohol
consumption. Most of them are not due to long-run consequences of heavy drinking but due to
the fact that alcohol is often consumed in large amounts over a short period of time, i.e., due to
binge drinking. While Russia certainly has one of the highest levels of alcohol consumption per
capita, other countries with elevated levels of alcohol consumption have a much lower number of
alcohol-related deaths per capita, including many western European countries. This is because
consumers in those countries tend to spread their alcohol intake more evenly over the year (Rehm
and Shield 2013). The high level of alcohol consumption among Russian men is therefore widely
believed to be a main contributing factor to the low male life expectancy and the large gender
gap (Brainerd and Cutler 2005). Hence, while a high average level of alcohol intake can certainly
be hazardous—especially for older individuals—it is mostly the occasional binge drinking that
leads to high mortality rates across all age groups, and in particular among working-age adults.

                                               18
Furthermore, since binge drinking is much less likely to occur when consuming beer rather
than vodka, a natural hypothesis is that individuals who prefer beer to vodka have a lower
alcohol-related probability of dying, even when holding fixed the amount of alcohol consumed.

                                           [Figure 5 about here]

7.2 National Alcohol Sales and Mortality Rates
    In the first step, we use data on aggregate sales by type of alcohol from 1970 to 2013 and
calculate mortality rates of working-age males using data from the Human Mortality Database.
Figure 5 shows the enormous changes in Russian male mortality over the past four decades.23
For comparison, we also graph the evolution of the corresponding male mortality rate for the
U.S. population, which declines much more gradually. For instance, the standard deviation of
the Russian mortality rate is more than twice that of the U.S.
    Figure 5 also shows that changes in mortality are closely associated with changes in alcohol
sales per capita and in particular with vodka sales. Beer sales—which are also expressed in liters
of pure alcohol and are therefore comparable with vodka sales—are much less related to male
mortality, consistent with the hypothesis that the effect of alcohol on mortality of working-age
adults mainly operates through binge drinking.

                                            [Table 3 about here]

    In Panel A of Table 3, we regress male mortality on the amount and the relative shares
of aggregate alcohol consumed to quantify the relative importance of these two channels. To
make the estimates comparable across specifications that cover periods with different baseline
mortality rates, we report elasticities by taking the log of mortality (or equivalently the log of
the number of deaths while controlling for log population).
    Column 1 shows that the share of vodka consumption is strongly associated with male
mortality. Column 2 decomposes this effect into the contribution of the amount of alcohol
consumed and the contribution of the share of vodka consumed, holding fixed the amount
consumed.24 Consistent with previous medical research that documents that alcohol-related
deaths are a major cause of the low life expectancy of Russian men, we find that total alcohol is
an important predictor of Russian male mortality. However, Column 2 shows that controlling
for total alcohol does not change the effect of the share of vodka on mortality, and both have
similar explanatory power. A one standard deviation increase in the aggregate share of vodka
(6.9 pp) increases male mortality by 10% while a one standard deviation increase in the log of
total alcohol (7.3 pp) increase it by 10.4%.
  23
     We calculate standardized mortality rates (SMR) relative to the mid-year population using the U.S. standard
population from 2000 provided by the NIH to avoid biases over time due to demographic changes.
  24
     The share uses official registered sales of vodka. Total alcohol also includes sales of beer, wine, cognac,
champagne and estimates of illicit samogon production and tax-evaded vodka. See Online Appendix A for a
description of the data sources.

                                                      19
7.3 The Causal Long-Run Effect of the Campaign on Mortality
    In Panel B of Table 3, we use regional-level data on alcohol sales by type and on cause-specific
deaths to document that the channel works mainly through binge drinking. To establish the
causal effect of the share of vodka on male mortality, we use the anti-alcohol campaign as an
instrument. These long-run effects of the campaign have not been studied before even though the
campaign’s contemporaneous and medium-run effects on mortality have been well documented.
    Mortality rates are available separately by gender, year, age, region, cause of death, and
crucially also by type of settlement, thereby allowing us to identify rural and urban areas and
apply our difference-in-differences research design from Section 4 to mortality related to binge
drinking. Our research design requires age-specific alcohol consumption, which is only available
from the RLMS. We therefore calculate average age-specific vodka shares and total alcohol
consumption across 31 regions identified in the RLMS data covering years 1994-2011. We then
merge this data with regional epidemiological data provided by the Center for Demographic
Research at the New Economic School in Moscow. The epidemiological data provides causes
of death for 5-year age groups and we compute corresponding alcohol consumption shares for
those 5-year age groups by region and type of location (rural or urban). While this approach
splits the data into many cells , the median and average number of people in each cell (i.e.,
5-year age bin by region, location type and year) is 15, thereby providing a reasonably precise
estimate of the share of alcohol consumption.
    To isolate the causal long-run effect of changes in alcohol tastes on mortality, we use the
variation generated by the anti-alcohol campaign to instrument for the current share of vodka
consumption. Our instrumental variable for the regional share of vodka consumption is the
fraction of people that turned 17 in a rural part of the region during the anti-alcohol campaign
(calculated separately for each 5-year age bin). Specifically, the 1st -stage regression is

              vodka
             Sa,r,l,t = γ · P r(became adolescent during campaign)a,t × I(rural)a,r,l,t         (4)
                      + ν 0 Xa,r,l,t + ua,r,l,t .

  vodka
Sa,r,l,t is the average share of vodka consumption within the 5-year age group a (ages 20-
24, 25-29, etc.) in region r and location type l (rural or urban) and year t. The variable
P r(became adolescent during campaign)a,t is the fraction of males in 5-year age group a who
turned 17 during the anti-alcohol campaign from 1986-90. For example, focusing on the age
group of 30 to 34 year olds, in year 1999 20% of that group turned 17 during the anti-alcohol
campaign (those age 30 who were born in 1970), and this fraction is 40% in 2000 (those age 30
or 31 who were born in 1970 or 1971), 60% in 2001, 80% in 2002, 100% in 2003, and 0% before
1999 and after 2003. The 2nd -stage regression is

                                                   vodka
                        ln(mortality)a,r,l,t = β Ŝa,r,l,t + η 0 Xa,r,l,t + εa,r,l,t .          (5)


                                                     20
  vodka
Ŝa,r,l,t is the predicted share of vodka consumption from (4). The set of exogenous control
variables Xa,r,l,t , which is common across the two stages, contains an indicator for rural localities;
P r(became adolescent during campaign)a,t ; age, year, and region fixed effects; the log of average
income; the log population of the region; and the average alcohol intake. Hence, we use the
                                                                                         vodka
exogenous variation generated by the anti-alcohol campaign as an instrument for Sa,r,l,t       in (5),
which is the interaction term P r(became adolescent during campaign)a,t × I(rural)a,r,l,t .
     Columns 3 and 4 show the causal effect of changes in the regional share of vodka consumption
on total mortality of working-age males in those regions and Column 8 shows the corresponding
1st -stage regression. Despite using only cross-sectional variation to identify the effect, we find
similar magnitudes as in Panel A.
     Columns 5-7 use additional age-specific information about the cause of death to identify
the mechanism. Column 5 shows that an increase in the share of vodka significantly increases
mortality due to alcohol poisoning among working-age men. Accidental poisoning constitutes
about 9% of all deaths among working-age men. Not surprisingly, the elasticity in Column 5 is
about three times larger than the one for all causes combined shown in Column 4.
     Since many consequences of alcohol consumption such as traffic accidents or homicides gen-
erate externalities, government interventions in the alcohol market could improve welfare. Col-
umn 6 provides evidence of such indirect negative effects of binge drinking on third parties by
studying the effect of changes in the share of vodka consumption on causes of death that are
believed to be at least indirectly related to alcohol consumption. These include traffic accidents,
homicides, suicides, deaths by accident caused by fire and electric current, accidental falls and
injuries, and deaths caused by accidentally discharged firearms. They constitute about 30%
of all deaths among working-age men. Column 6 shows that increases in the share of vodka
consumption significantly increases these negative externalities.
     Unfortunately, the estimated magnitude in Column 6 is difficult to interpret and most likely
underestimates the size of the negative externalities caused by an increase in binge drinking.
One reason is that about a quarter of all causes of death in the data are unspecified or ill-
defined and there is recent evidence suggesting that these cases are more likely to be alcohol
related, either directly or indirectly (e.g., Gavrilova, Semyonova, Dubrovina, Evdokushkina,
Ivanova, and Gavrilov (2008), Ivanova, Sabgayda, Semenova, Zaporozhchenko, Zemlyanova,
and Nikitina (2013), Danilova, Shkolnikov, Jdanov, Meslé, and Vallin (2016)). Moreover, the
estimate only captures the effect on working-age males of events that resulted in fatalities.
However, we would expect externalities such as alcohol-related traffic accidents to apply to the
general population, including women and children. The estimate also does not include negative
externalities resulting from events that are less severe, such as non-fatal injuries.
     Moreover, if consumers are not fully rational (for example because they are uninformed or
have time-inconsistent preferences), then government intervention that address such “internali-
ties” can further improve welfare (Gruber and Köszegi 2001), even for cases that do not affect
third parties, such as alcohol poisoning.
                                                  21
   Finally, Column 7 provides a placebo test, showing that the instrumented share of vodka
does not affect causes of death that we would ex-ante expect to be unrelated to short-term binge
drinking, such as cancer unrelated to alcohol (i.e., excluding liver cancer).

Robustness The p-value of the coefficient on the instrument for the share of vodka in the 1st -
stage regression in Column 8 is 0.001. However, the 1st -stage F-statistic of 10.2 raises questions
about weak instruments. We deal with this concern it two ways. First, Table 5.2 in Stock
and Yogo (2005) shows that if the observed p-value in the 2nd stage was 5%, a conservative
upper bound of the unbiased size of the test would be 15% based on a 1st -stage F-statistic of
11. While the authors do not provide a similar table for a 2nd -stage test size of 1%, it seems
reasonable to assume that 10% is a conservative upper bound for the size of the hypothesis tests
in Columns 3-7.
    Second, Panel A of Online Appendix Table A.5 uses mortality data from a different source,
which has one-year age bins instead of the 5-year age bins but does not contain information
about the cause of death. This allows us to repeat the analysis reported in Columns 3-4, but
with a 1st -stage F-statistic of 16. We obtain quantitatively similar results and we cannot reject
the hypothesis that the two coefficients are the same.
    Online Appendix Table A.5, Panel B also provides the reduced-form estimates. Because the
reduced form does not rely on survey data from the RLMS, it covers a longer period from 1989-
2014. It shows that while the campaign has an unambiguously positive long-run health effect
on urban consumers that turned 17 during the campaign (lowering their mortality rate relative
to the comparison group by 7%), the effect is ambiguous for rural consumers and depends on
the horizon at which we evaluate the policy. This in turn is the result of endogenous attrition of
consumers, who form particularly strong tastes for hard alcohol, which is much more prevalent
in rural areas.
    Finally, we address the concern that if rural consumers consume more samogon during the
anti-alcohol campaign, this could generate long-run tastes for samogon as much as for hard
alcohol broadly, which in turn could explain the high rate of alcohol poisoning associated with
greater vodka consumption shown in Column 5, because vodka and samogon consumption are
likely positively correlated. Using a separate instrument for endogenous samogon consumption,
Online Appendix H shows that controlling for the effect of samogon consumption on mortality
from alcohol poisoning does not decrease the effect of vodka consumption.

7.4 Individual-Level Analysis
   In the last step, we use individual-level data. The RLMS is the only data set that has
individual-level consumption data and thanks to its long-run panel dimension also records death
events for members of multi-person households (see Section 3). We use the survey data to
provide additional direct evidence of the mechanism linking alcohol consumption to mortality.
The large effects of alcohol on male mortality makes it possible to study this mechanism despite
                                                22
observing relatively few death events in the RLMS sample (360 among working-age men and
600 in total).
   We exclude individuals below age 22 since Sections 5 and 6 show that alcohol tastes of men
below age 22 have not yet converged to their long-run equilibrium such that their observed
consumption shares are not a good predictor of their future shares. This is important since the
counterfactual simulation of the long-run effect of these changes in alcohol tastes on mortality in
the next section crucially depends on the behavior of these young cohorts as they approximate
the consumption behavior of the population in the new long-run steady state.

                                             [Table 4 about here.]

    Panel A of Table 4 summarizes the main results of the micro-level analysis. We estimate
a standard semi-parametric Cox proportional hazard model to quantify the effect of alcohol
tastes for distinct types of alcoholic drinks on the probability of dying, using the sample of male
consumers.25 We use a similar specification as in our analysis of the effect of changes in alcohol
supply on long-run tastes in Sections 4, 5 and 6, with two modifications. First, we control for
three additional variables: The first indicates whether the individual reports not drinking in
a typical day during the previous month, the second is an indicator of whether the individual
smokes, and the third is an indicator of whether the individual is a heavy drinker.26 Second,
we collapse the data to one observation per individual and we replace time-varying covariates
with their mean. For individuals who report not consuming alcohol in an interview, we set their
shares of beer and vodka to zero before collapsing the data.
    Consistent with the aggregate data in Table 3, Columns 1 and 2 show a strong relationship
between mortality and both the amount of alcohol and the share for vodka consumed. Column 2
decomposes the total effect into the two channels, i) the amount of alcohol and ii) the type of
alcohol consumed, holding fixed the amount consumed. Like in the analysis with aggregate data,
we find that the type of alcohol consumed has a large effect on mortality rates of working-age
men in addition to effect of the total amount of alcohol consumed. A reduction in the share of
vodka by one cross-sectional standard deviation (0.32) decreases the mortality hazard by 20%,
while a one standard deviation reduction in the amount of alcohol consumed (0.09 kg) decreases
mortality by 10%.
    Column 3 shows that these results are robust to controlling for whether an individual is a
heavy drinker, which is the top quartile of the alcohol consumption distribution. Because a high
share of vodka at a low level of consumption might not have a substantial impact on health
  25
      The model estimates λ(a|x) = exp(γ 0 x)λ0 (a), the conditional hazard of death, which approximates the
instantaneous probability of dying at age a conditional on the covariates x. λ0 (a) is the baseline hazard rate that
is common across all individuals and can be estimated non-parametrically and independently of the parameter
γ. λ0 therefore controls for the (unconditional) effect of age on mortality.
   26
      Following the definition in Yakovlev (2018), a heavy drinker is an alcohol consumer in the top quartile of
the distribution of average daily alcohol consumption among males. This threshold corresponds to an average
daily alcohol intake of 150 milliliters of pure alcohol.

                                                        23
outcomes, in Column 4 we test for such non-linearities by adding an interaction term. Indeed,
the positive interaction term suggests that the share of vodka is more important at higher levels
of alcohol. However, adding this term does not significantly change the effect of the share of
vodka. Column 5 shows that we obtain comparable results if we include non-working age men,
with the interaction term playing a bigger role.
    In Column 6 we add the share of beer in addition to the share of vodka and the level of
alcohol. We will use this specification in the next section when we simulate the counterfactual
long-run effect of moving to a new population steady state with a lower population share of
vodka and a higher share of beer.27


8 Simulating Two Counterfactuals
    In this section we use the individual-level estimates from Section 7.4 to simulate two coun-
terfactual scenarios. First, we decompose the substantial changes in male mortality in the past
20 years into the change that is due to changes in the amount of pure alcohol consumed if
consumption was only in the form of light alcohol, and into the additional effect of consuming
some of this alcohol in the form of vodka.
    Second, we analyze what would happen going forward if there was no further change to
the alcohol market or to public policies. This second counterfactual analysis estimates the new
population steady state that would be reached because of the shocks in the 1980s and 1990s if
no other shocks hit the economy and the alcohol market.

                                         [Figure 5 about here]

8.1 Counterfactual 1: Alcohol and the Recent Decline in Mortality
    Panel (a) of Figure 5 shows a substantial decline in male mortality since the mid-1990s,
especially since 2003. We use our micro-level estimates of the mortality hazard in Table 4 and
RLMS data from 1994-2011 to decompose this decline into the contribution of the shares of alco-
hol consumption, the amount of alcohol consumed, and all factors other than contemporaneous
alcohol consumption. We rescale the predictions in each survey year to match the mortality
rates based on official statistics. Based on this decomposition in Panel (b), the share of vodka,
holding fixed the level of alcohol intake (i.e., the difference between the solid black line and the
blue line with cross markers), explains half of the decline in male mortality.

8.2 Counterfactual 2: Forecasting Male Mortality Rates
   Finally, we use the estimated hazard model to study the likely evolution of this downward
trend over the next few decades as the economy converges to a new population steady state.
To do so we simulate a counterfactual scenario that maintains the sample distribution of all
  27
    Adding the share of beer affects the estimated coefficient of the vodka share because both measures are
highly correlated (correlation coefficient of −0.63).

                                                    24
individual characteristics except for the shares of vodka and beer consumed. Specifically, we
predict the shares of vodka and beer for each individual in our sample by regressing alcohol shares
on a full set of cohort effects and the same set of controls used in Table 4, Panel A. To identify
the model, we drop survey year fixed effects as these are quantitatively not very important.
Using the estimated cohort effects, we then predict everyone’s shares at different points in the
future and in turn use the predicted shares together with the individual’s characteristics to
estimate its hazard of death. For example, to predict the hazard of death in 10 years of an
individual born in 1970 we maintain its current characteristics, but we assign it the conditional
cohort effect of individuals born in 1960. Integrating across the entire sample then provides us
with an estimate of the evolution of male mortality as a consequence of the changes in relative
alcohol tastes only. Online Appendix G describes this algorithm in detail.
    Panel B of Table 4 shows the predicted population consumption shares and the annual
mortality rate for the current population of males age 22 to 65 as well as for the corresponding
counterfactual populations in 10, 20, and 55 years, with 55 years being the time at which the
population reaches its new steady state.28 Our results suggest that the mortality rate of males
age 22 to 65 will decrease by 12% over the next 10 years (from 1.42 pp to 1.25 pp), by 23%
over 20 years, and will be cut in half in the new long-run equilibrium. The predicted mortality
rate of 1.42% in 2011 is only slightly lower than its official estimated average from 1994 to
2011, which is 1.55% (not adjusted to the standard population).29 For comparison, the annual
mortality rate in the U.S. is 0.5% and 0.4% in the U.K. and Germany. Hence, the counterfactual
simulation predicts that the further increase in the population share of beer consumption (and
decline in the vodka share) during the transition to the new steady state might further cut the
gap between the Russian and U.S. male mortality in half over the next 55 years.


9 Alternative Explanations
    In this paper we argue that changes in tastes due to changes in the supply of alcohol during
an individual’s formative ages changes its tastes for different types of alcohol persistently. An
alternative explanation of our results that does not involve tastes is an information-based mech-
anism. While a policy that persistently changes consumers’ information and causes persistent
changes in tastes would have the same effect on health outcomes and hence be of similar value
to a policymaker, here we discuss evidence that is inconsistent with such an information-based
explanation.
    First, such a brief information intervention would need to affect rural and urban consumers
differently and only affect young consumers. Hence, to explain our causal estimates, this infor-
mation intervention would have to successfully target young urban consumers that were about
17 years old during the campaign relatively more than their rural counterparts and permanently
 28
      Online Appendix Figure A.4 graphs the entire path of both shares and the mortality rate.
 29
      This 10% difference reflects the missing single-member households; see Section 3.


                                                      25
change their choices over different alcoholic drinks.30 If this were indeed the case it would raise
the question why policymakers would want to limit such a successful information campaign to
urban areas and only to young consumers. However, we are not aware of any study that docu-
ments a targeted effort by the Soviet government to differentially inform young urban consumers
during the campaign.
    One information-based channel that could affect young rural consumers differentially and
persistently is if these consumers learned how to moonshine vodka during the campaign because
this skill was particularly valuable. However, we find that the campaign affects the long-run
share of vodka consumed excluding illicit alcohol, which cannot be explained by learning about
how to produce home-made samogon.
    Second, and more important, such an information campaign would presumably inform con-
sumers about the relative harmfulness of hard alcohol. However, our results show that the
campaign permanently increased the share of hard alcohol consumed by rural consumers that
became adolescents during the campaign, both relative to their urban counterparts but impor-
tantly also relative to older as well as younger rural consumers. Hence, unless such a targeted
information campaign had the perverse goal of (mis)informing young rural consumers that hard
alcohol is less harmful than they thought, it cannot explain our results.
    Third, the effects we identify are very persistent. Even if young rural consumers were
initially misinformed by the campaign, decades later they would presumably have acquired the
same information as most other consumers. However, our results are unchanged if we drop
earlier survey rounds that contain individuals that experienced the anti-alcohol campaign more
recently and hence might not yet have acquired the same amount of information as the rest.


10 Conclusion
    This paper makes three main contributions. First, it documents how public policies, even
temporary ones, can have significant long-run effects by shaping tastes of consumers during
their sensitive ages. Second, it shows that the age at which most consumers form tastes varies
across products and depends on when an individual starts to consume the product regularly.
We find that alcohol tastes from around age 17 while tastes for basics foods form during early
childhood. Shocks to product availability in the 1980s and 1990s significantly changed tastes of
young consumers, and the resulting consumption differences are still large today and thus easily
detectable in survey data decades later.
    Third, this paper shows that the type of alcohol consumed—i.e., hard vs. light alcohol—
has a significant effect on mortality in addition to the negative effect of the amount of alcohol
consumed, which has been the main focus of previous research. We find that effect of changes in
the share of alcohol consumed in the form of hard alcohol, holding fixed the amount of alcohol
  30
    Similarly, changes in social norms and culture also need to affect consumers differently both in rural and
urban areas and as a function of age in order to explain the difference-in-difference estimates.


                                                     26
consumed, on the mortality of working-age men in Russia is about the same as the effect of
changes in total alcohol consumed. The reason for this large effect is the fact that a significant
fraction of deaths among working-age men are related to alcohol, and most of these in turn are
associated with binge drinking, such as alcohol poisoning, traffic accidents and homicides.
    Combining these three contributions, we conclude that public policies targeted at young
consumers can have significant effects on both contemporaneous and long-run health outcomes
by persistently changing consumers’ tastes.


References
Alesina, A. and N. Fuchs-Schündeln (2007). Good-bye lenin (or not?): The effect of communism
  on people’s preferences. American Economic Review 97(4), 1507–1528.

Angrist, J. D. (2014). The perils of peer effects. Labour Economics 30, 98–108.

Atkin, D. (2016). The caloric costs of culture: Evidence from indian migrants. American
  Economic Review 106(4), 1144–1181.

Becker, G. S. and K. M. Murphy (1988). A theory of rational addiction. Journal of Political
  Economy 96(4), 675–700.

Beenstock, M. and G. Rahav (2002). Testing gateway theory: do cigarette prices affect illicit
  drug use? Journal of Health Economics 21(4), 679–698.

Bernheim, B. D., D. Ray, and Ş. Yeltekin (2015). Poverty and self-control. Econometrica 83(5),
  1877–1911.

Bhattacharya, J., C. Gathmann, and G. Miller (2013). The gorbachev anti-alcohol campaign
  and russia’s mortality crisis. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 5(2), 232–60.

Bisin, A. and T. Verdier (2001). The economics of cultural transmission and the dynamics of
  preferences. Journal of Economic Theory 97(2), 298–319.

Bowles, S. (1998). Endogenous Preferences: The Cultural Consequences of Markets and other
  Economic Institutions. Journal of Economic Literature 36(1), 75–111.

Brainerd, E. and D. M. Cutler (2005). Autopsy on an empire: Understanding mortality in
  russia and the former soviet union. Journal of Economic Perspectives 19(1), 107–130.

Bronnenberg, B. J., J.-P. H. Dubé, and M. Gentzkow (2012). The evolution of brand preferences:
  Evidence from consumer migration. American Economic Review 102(6), 2472–2508.

Carroll, C. D., B.-K. Rhee, and C. Rhee (1994). Are there cultural effects on saving? some
  cross-sectional evidence. Quarterly Journal of Economics 109(3), 685–699.

Charness, G. and U. Gneezy (2009). Incentives to exercise. Econometrica 77(3), 909–931.

Chetty, R. (2009). Sufficient statistics for welfare analysis: A bridge between structural and
 reduced-form methods. Annual Review of Economics 1(1), 451–488.


                                               27
Cook, P. J. and M. J. Moore (2000). Alcohol. In A. J. Culyer and J. P. Newhouse (Eds.),
  Handbook of Health Economics, Volume 1, Chapter 30, pp. 1629–1673. Elsevier.
Costa, F. and F. Gerard (2018). Hysteresis and the welfare effect of corrective policies: Theory
  and evidence from an energy-saving program. NBER Working Paper No. 24608.
Danilova, I., V. M. Shkolnikov, D. A. Jdanov, F. Meslé, and J. Vallin (2016). Identifying
 potential differences in cause-of-death coding practices across russian regions. Population
 Health Metrics 14(1), 8.
Dawson, D. A. (2003). Methodological Issues in Measuring Alcohol Use. National Institute on
  Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism.
Denisova, I. (2010). Adult mortality in russia. Economics of Transition 18(2), 333–363.
Deza, M. (2015). Is There a Stepping-Stone Effect in Drug Use? Separating State De-
  pendence from Unobserved Heterogeneity Within and Across Illicit Drugs. Journal of
  Econometrics 184(1), 193–207.
Dhami, S. (2016). The Foundations of Behavioral Economic Analysis. Oxford University Press.
Doepke, M. and F. Zilibotti (2017). Parenting with style: Altruism and paternalism in inter-
 generational preference transmission. Econometrica.
Fujiwara, T., K. Meng, and T. Vogl (2016). Habit formation in voting: Evidence from rainy
  elections. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 8(4), 160–88.
Gavrilova, N. S., V. G. Semyonova, E. Dubrovina, G. N. Evdokushkina, A. E. Ivanova, and
 L. A. Gavrilov (2008). Russian mortality crisis and the quality of vital statistics. Population
 Research and Policy Review 27(5), 551.
Giné, X., D. Karlan, and J. Zinman (2010). Put your money where your butt is: a commitment
  contract for smoking cessation. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 2(4), 213–
  35.
Gorodnichenko, Y., J. Martinez-Vazquez, and K. Sabirianova Peter (2009). Myth and Reality
 of Flat Tax Reform: Micro Estimates of Tax Evasion Response and Welfare Effects in Russia.
 Journal of Political Economy 117(3), 504–554.
Gorodnichenko, Y., K. Sabirianova Peter, and D. Stolyarov (2010). Inequality and volatility
 moderation in russia: Evidence from micro-level panel data on consumption and income.
 Review of Economic Dynamics 13(1), 209–237.
Gruber, J. and B. Köszegi (2001). Is addiction “rational”? theory and evidence. Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 116(4), 1261–1303.
Guiso, L., P. Sapienza, and L. Zingales (2006). Does Culture Affect Economic Outcomes?
 Journal of Economic Perspectives 20(2), 23–48.
Harsanyi, J. C. (1953). Welfare Economics of Variable Tastes. Review of Economic Studies 21(3),
  204–213.
Honoré, B. E. (1992). Trimmed lad and least squares estimation of truncated and censored
  regression models with fixed effects. Econometrica 60(3), 533–565.
                                              28
Ivanova, A. E., T. Sabgayda, V. Semenova, V. Zaporozhchenko, E. Zemlyanova, and S. Y.
  Nikitina (2013). Factors distorting structure of death causes in working population in russia.
  Sotsial’nye aspekty zdorov’ia naseleniia.

Johnson, S., D. Kaufmann, A. Shleifer, M. I. Goldman, and M. L. Weitzman (1997). The
  Unofficial Economy in Transition. Brookings Papers on Economic Ectivity 1997(2), 159–239.

Larcom, S., F. Rauch, and T. Willems (2017). The benefits of forced experimentation: striking
  evidence from the london underground network. Quarterly Journal of Economics 132(4),
  2019–2055.

Malmendier, U. and S. Nagel (2011). Depression babies: Do macroeconomic experiences affect
 risk taking? Quarterly Journal of Economics 126(1), 373–416.

Mills, C. J. and H. L. Noyes (1984). Patterns and correlates of initial and subsequent drug use
 among adolescents. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology 52(2), 231.

Nemtsov, A. V. (1998). Alcohol-related harm and alcohol consumption in moscow before, during
  and after a major anti-alcohol campaign. Addiction 93(10), 1501–1510.

Nemtsov, A. V. (2002). Alcohol-related human losses in russia in the 1980s and 1990s.
  Addiction 97(11), 1413–1425.

Nemtsov, A. V. (2011). A Contemporary History of Alcohol in Russia. Södertörns högskola.

Rehm, J. and K. D. Shield (2013). Alcohol and mortality: Global alcohol-attributable deaths
  from cancer, liver cirrhosis, and injury in 2010. Journal of the National Institute on Alcohol
  Abuse and Alcoholism 35(2), 174–183.

Stigler, G. J. and G. S. Becker (1977). De gustibus non est disputandum. American Economic
  Review 67(2), 76–90.

Stock, J. H. and M. Yogo (2005). Testing for weak instruments in linear iv regression.
  Identification and Inference for Econometric Models: Essays in Honor of Thomas Rothenberg,
  80–108.

Treml, V. G. (1982). Alcohol in the USSR: A statistical study. Duke University Press Durham,
  NC.

Treml, V. G. (1997). Soviet and russian statistics on alcohol consumption and abuse. Premature
  death in the new independent states, 220–238.

Van Ours, J. C. (2003). Is cannabis a stepping-stone for cocaine?            Journal of Health
  Economics 22(4), 539–554.

White, S. (1996). Russia Goes Dry: Alcohol, State and Society. Cambridge University Press.

Yakovlev, E. (2018). Demand for alcohol consumption in russia and its implication for mortality.
  American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 10(1), 106–149.




                                              29
                                                                                                 Figure 1 – Beer Market Expansion

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       30%

                                                     80                                                                                                                  beer retail sales (left axis)
                                                            Post−Soviet:     1990s      1980s                                                                   75
share of beer in total alcohol (by 10−year cohort)




                                                            Transition:      1970s                                                                                       share of beer (right axis)




                                                                                                                     Beer Sales (in annual liters per capita)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       25%




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Share of Beer (in total pure alcohol)
                                                     70     Soviet:          1960s      1950s
                                                                             1940s      1930s                                                                   65

                                                     60
                                                                                                                                                                55                                                                     20%
                                                     50

                                                                                                                                                                45
                                                     40                                                                                                                                                                                15%


                                                     30                                                                                                         35

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       10%
                                                     20                                                                                                         25


                                                     10
                                                                                                                                                                15                                                                     5%
                                                          2001        2003       2005           2007   2009   2011
                                                                                                                                                                  1970   1975    1980      1985     1990   1995   2000   2005   2010


                     (a) beer consumption across cohorts of adolescents                                                                                                              (b) aggregate beer sales

                                       Notes: Panel (a) shows the share of beer consumption across RLMS sample years for 10-year birth
                                       cohorts. We classify cohorts as Post-soviet, transition, and Soviet based on the average year in which
                                       their members turned 17 (based on our findings of the typical age at which alcohol tastes form; see
                                       Section 5). Panel (b) shows the expansion of the aggregate beer market in levels and shares using
                                       aggregate data from the Federal State Statistics Service (Rosstat).




                                                                                                                30
             Figure 2 – Effect of the Anti-Alcohol Campaign on the Alcohol Market
                                                                                                                                                                                 1.3
                                                                                                  6.0

                                                                                                                                            anti-alcohol
                                                                                                  5.5




                                                                                                                                                                                        Beer sales (liters of pure alcohol per capita)
                                              Vodka sales (liters of pure alcohol per capita)
                                                                                                                                             campaign                            1.2

                                                                                                  5.0


                                                                                                  4.5                                                                            1.1


                                                                                                  4.0

                                                                                                                                                                                 1.0
                                                                                                  3.5


                                                                                                  3.0       vodka sales (left axis)
                                                                                                                                                                                 0.9
                                                                                                            beer sales (right axis)
                                                                                                  2.5


                                                                                                  2.0                                                                            0.8
                                                                                                     1980       1982         1984          1986      1988     1990      1992


                                                                                                                       (a) effect on legal alcohol

                                                                                                  65%
                                             Share of home‐made vodka (samogon) in total vodka




                                                                                                  60%          illegal home‐made vodka
                                                                                                               (samogon)

                                                                                                  55%


                                                                                                  50%


                                                                                                  45%


                                                                                                  40%


                                                                                                  35%


                                                                                                  30%


                                                                                                  25%
                                                                                                     1980           1982            1984          1986      1988       1990            1992


                                                                                                        (b) effect on illegal vodka (moonshining)


                                                                                                                   additional share of samogon in rural areas, δDD,t

                                             45

                                             40

                                             35
                          Share of samogon




                                             30

                                             25

                                             20

                                             15

                                             10

                                                        5

                                                        0
                                                                                                 1980          1982             1984              1986       1988         1990                                                           1992


                                        (c) additional consumption of illegal vodka in rural areas
Notes: Panels (a) and (b) show the aggregate effect of the anti-alcohol campaign on alcohol consumption
using national -level data. (a) shows the campaign’s effect on official alcohol sold and (b) on the share of
home-made vodka (samogon) in total vodka consumption. Panel (c) shows the marginal effect (βDD,t ) of
                                                                                                             v
the campaign on rural areas using difference-in-differences with
                                                                 regional -level data from 1980-1992: Srt =
     P1992
αr + t=1981 δD,t · I(year)t + δDD,t · I(year)t × Rural Fractionr + εrt . Rural Fractionr is region r’s fraction of
                        v
rural population and Srt  is its share of samogon consumed in year t.
                                                                               Figure 3 – Taste Formation as a Function of Age

                                         46
                                                                                              taste−formation by age:                           triangular kernel
                                                                                              using triangular kernel
                                                                                                                                   .3
βDD : Exposure to Campaign x I(rural)




                                                                                                                                  .25


                                                                                                                                   .2




                                                                                                                         weight
                                          0
                                                                                                                                  .15


                                                                                                                                   .1


                                                                                                                                  .05
                                        −39
                                              10   12   14   16    18    20     22    24    26    28   30    32    34              0
                                                                  age during anti−alcohol campaign                                      1980                        1985   1990         1995


                                              (a) response to anti-alcohol campaign by age                                                     (b) 5-year triangular weighting kernel

                                          Notes: Panel (a) shows the estimated age at which tastes for vodka form. Panel (b) plots the weighting
                                          kernel used. Dashed lines are two standard error confidence bands using robust standard errors clustered
                                          by individual. The anti-alcohol campaign is shaded in gray in Panel (b), and the maximum impact of
                                          the campaign on the age of taste formation is shown with a vertical dashed line in Panel (a).




                                                                                                                        32
                                                                                                                       Figure 4 – Long-Run Effects of the Beer Market Expansion on Alcohol Tastes

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      90                                                                                  35%
                                                               10                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          beer market
                                                                                                                  share of beer
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            expansion
                                                                                                                  share of vodka                                                                                                                                                                                                      80        beer retail sales
φ: Coefficient for Year−Turned−17




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          30%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (left axis)
                                                                            5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         70
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                share of beer




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Beer Sales (liters per capita)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          25%




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Share of Beer (pure alcohol)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (right axis)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      60
                                                                            0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      50                                                                                  20%


                                                              −5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      40                                                                                  15%

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          10%
                                                 −10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      20
                                                                                          1995−2007




                                                                                                                                     1996−2006




                                                                                                                                                                   1997−2005




                                                                                                                                                                                           1998−2004




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1999−2003




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2000−2002
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      sample windows                      5%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      10


                                                                                                                                                      year in which individual turned 17                                                                                                                                              0                                                                                   0%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1970      1975     1980      1985    1990    1995     2000    2005     2010


                                                                                                                        (a) long-run effects on alcohol tastes                                                                                                                                                                                                   (b) research design
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     35%
                                                                                          8                         share of beer
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              share of beer
                                                  φ: Coefficient for Year−Turned−17




                                                                                          6                                                                                                                                                                                                          30%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Share of Beer (pure alcohol)
                                                                                          4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     25%
                                                                                          2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     20%
                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     5‐year sample windows
                                                                                      −2                                                                                                                                                                                                             15%

                                                                                      −4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     10%
                                                                                      −6
                                                                                                      1970−1974



                                                                                                                         1975−1979



                                                                                                                                                       1980−1984



                                                                                                                                                                               1985−1989



                                                                                                                                                                                           1990−1994



                                                                                                                                                                                                          1995−1999



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2000−2004



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2005−2009




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    5%



                                                                                                                                                               year in which individual turned 17                                                                                                                   0%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1970                      1975      1980      1985     1990     1995        2000      2005      2010


                                                                                                                                                                           (c) placebo tests                                                                                                                                               (d) research design for placebo tests

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .09
                                                                          30
                                                                                                                                                                                                       taste−formation by age:                                                                                                              empirical kernel
                                                                                                                                                                                                       using empirical kernel                                                                       .08
             φ: Long−Run Response to Beer Import Shocks




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .07
                                                                          20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .06

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  weight




                                                                          10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .04

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .03
                                                                                      0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .02

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .01
                                                           −10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0
                                                                                              10                  12     14                      16     18    20    22    24     26    28                                30         32        34
                                                                                                                                                       age during beer market expansion                                                                                                                                      1970              1975       1980       1985      1990        1995      2000          2005      2010



                                                                                                                                        (e) age profile of taste formation                                                                                                                                                                             (f) weighting kernel used


                                                                                      Notes: The right panels show the research designs and the empirical kernel used to identify the effect
                                                                                      of the beer market expansion on alcohol tastes, shown in the left panels (see Section 5 for details). The
                                                                                      regressions control for the level of total alcohol intake, the log of real income, subjective health status,
                                                                                      body weight, education, marital status, and a full set of year, age, and region fixed effects. The beer
                                                                                      market expansion is shaded in light blue. Dashed lines show two standard error confidence bands using
                                                                                      robust standard errors clustered by individual.       33
                                                                                Figure 5 – Alcohol Tastes and Mortality

                                                                                 Russian male mortality                 vodka          total alcohol
                                                                                 US male mortality                      beer

                                                                   1.8                                                                                 14

                          male mortality, age 20−64 (in %, SMR)                                                                                        12




                                                                                                                                                            alcohol per capita (pure alcohol)
                                                                   1.6

                                                                   1.4                                                                                 10

                                                                   1.2                                                                                 8

                                                                   1.0                                                                                 6

                                                                   0.8                                                                                 4

                                                                   0.6                                                                                 2

                                                                   0.4                                                                                 0
                                                                         1970    1975    1980     1985      1990     1995     2000    2005   2010



                                                                                    (a) types of alcohol and male mortality


                                                                  1.8

                                                                  1.6
    male mortality, age 22−65 (in %, SMR)




                                                                  1.4

                                                                  1.2
                                                                                   E(mortality | alc. intake ≥0, vodka share ≥0)
                                                                  1.0
                                                                                   E(mortality | alc. intake ≥0, vodka share =0)
                                                                                   E(mortality | alc. intake =0)
                                                                  0.8

                                                                  0.6

                                                                  0.4

                                                                  0.2

                                                                  0.0
                                                                        1970    1975    1980      1985     1990      1995      2000   2005     2010


                                                 (b) decomposition of the effect of alcohol on male mortality

Notes: This figure shows the effect of alcohol on mortality of working-age men.
The anti-alcohol campaign is shaded in gray and the beer market expansion in
light blue. Standardized mortality rates (SMR) use the U.S. standard popula-
tion of 2000. Panel (b) decomposes the effect of alcohol on male mortality using
the estimated hazard model in Table 4 and RLMS data from 1994-2011. The
green line with circle markers shows the predicted mortality rate for abstainers
calculated by setting the amount of alcohol consumed (and the share of vodka)
to zero. The blue line with cross markers adds consumers who consume all
alcohol in the form of beer (i.e. with positive alcohol intake but a share of
vodka of zero). The solid black line shows the unconditional mortality rate,
adding men who also consume vodka.



                                                                                                               34
                                                   Table 1: Descriptive Statistics

                                                               N        Mean     St.Dev.    p75      N       Mean     St.Dev.     p75

 Alcohol Shares                                                            Males                               Females
  Share   of   beer                                          46,985       29.3       35.3   38.5   45,182      22.6        35.5   32.9
  Share   of   home-brewed beer (starts in 2008)             14,363        0.1        1.5      0   14,837       0.0         0.6      0
  Share   of   vodka                                         46,985       52.9       39.7   92.3   45,182      34.9        42.1   78.4
  Share   of   home-produced vodka (samogon)                 46,985        8.7       24.3      0   45,182       3.7        17.0      0
  Share   of   wine                                          46,985        7.4       20.9      0   45,182      35.7        42.3    100
  Share   of   other alcohol                                 46,985        1.8       10.9      0   45,182       3.1        15.2      0

 Socio-Economic Demographics                                       Male Alcohol Consumers                      All Males
   Age                                                      46,985       41.4      15.4       52     68,350     42.5      16.4     54
   Birth year                                               46,985     1962.4      16.4 1976         68,350 1961.3        17.3 1975
   I(turned 17 in a rural area)                             46,972        0.6       0.5        1     68,322      0.5       0.5      1
   Daily alcohol intake when drinking (in g of ethanol)     46,985      144.7     133.8 200.0        68,350    101.4     132.0 146.0
   I(no alcohol consumed in the past 30 days)               46,985          -          -       -     68,350      0.3       0.5      1
   Total monthly real income                                45,280      245.1     426.6 300.3        65,688    233.7     404.2 288.3
   I(college degree)                                        46,950        0.4       0.5        1     68,290      0.4       0.5      1
   Subjective health status (1=very good, 5=very bad)       46,884        2.7       0.7        3     68,186      2.7       0.7      3
   Body weight (in kg)                                      44,180       76.7      13.7     85.0     64,114     76.5      13.6   85.0
   I(married)                                               46,985        0.7        0.5     1.0     68,350      0.7       0.5      1
Notes: We use rounds 5 to 20 of the Russian Longitudinal Monitoring Survey (RLMS) corresponding to years 1994-2011 except for
1997 and 1999 when the survey was not conducted. All individuals are age 18 or above. To safe space, the indicators I(turned 17 in
a rural area) and I(no alcohol consumed in the past 30 days) are referred to as I(rural) respectively I(abstainer) from here on.
                                            Table 2: Long-Run Effect of the Anti-Alcohol Campaign on Alcohol Tastes

                                                                             Share of vodka                                                 Share of     Share of
 Dependent variable:                                                                                          Log(alcohol) I(abstainer)
                                                                                                                                              beer     hard alcohol
                                                              (1)        (2)           (3)         (4)             (5)            (6)          (7)         (8)
                                                      (a)
 I(became adolescent during campaign) × I(rural)            5.243***   5.049**       5.008**    5.232***         7.594*          0.280      -3.129*       3.027*
                                                             [2.016]   [2.009]       [1.998]     [1.986]         [4.585]        [2.247]     [1.730]       [1.780]
 I(became adolescent during campaign)(b)                     -1.296     -0.930       -0.945       -1.038         -8.431**        1.145       -0.069       -0.893
                                                             [1.514]    [1.497]      [1.490]      [1.483]         [3.532]       [1.679]      [1.370]      [1.385]
 Sum of diff-in-diff and diff coefficients, (a)+(b)         3.947***   4.119***     4.063***    4.194***         -0.836          1.425      -3.198**       2.134
                                                             [1.524]    [1.527]      [1.521]     [1.505]         [3.336]        [1.724]      [1.248]      [1.313]
 Alcohol intake (in grams of ethanol)                                  0.063***     0.064***    0.065***                                   -0.104***     0.099***
                                                                        [0.003]      [0.003]     [0.003]                                     [0.003]      [0.004]

 Year, age, region, rural FE                                  Yes        Yes          Yes          Yes             Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes
 Real income and relative price                                                       Yes          Yes             Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes
 Socio-economic demographics                                                                       Yes             Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes

 Observations                                                29,083     29,083       29,083       29,083         29,083         40,507       29,083       29,083
 R-squared                                                   0.107       0.144       0.146         0.152          0.076          0.075        0.258        0.256
 Sample mean of dependent variable                           47.37      47.37         47.37       47.37           459.3          27.81       36.66        57.50
Note: Socio-economic demographics include education, marital status, body weight, and subjective health status. The length of the anti-alcohol campaign is
defined to last from 1986 to 1990 based on Figure 2. Adolescence is defined as being 17 years old based on the analysis in Section 5. Both of these assumptions
are relaxed in Online Appendix C. Since the level of alcohol is highly skewed to the right, Column 5 winsorizes the dependent variable at the 95th percentile.
For comparability with the alcohol shares, which are in percentages, I(abstainer) and Log(alcohol) are multiplied by 100; see the sample mean reported in the
last row. We also report the sum of the coefficients of the difference-in-difference and the single difference estimators, (a)+(b), which captures the effect of the
campaign on rural consumers that became adolescent during the campaign relative to rural consumers that became adolescent before or after the campaign. The
main effect, I(rural), indicates the place of residence at age 17 and is included in all specifications. Robust standard errors in parentheses are clustered by
individual; ***, **, * denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
                                                              Table 3: Effect of Alcohol Tastes on Mortality

                                                  A. National Male Mortality           B. Regional Male Mortality Rate (in logs) by Cause of Death:        C. 1st Stage:
Dependent variable:
                                                        Rate (in logs)                     all causes        alc. poisoning     external      cancer       vodka share
                                                      (1)              (2)              (3)           (4)          (5)            (6)          (7)              (8)
Share of vodka                                     1.456***         1.454***          1.253***     1.271***      3.836**        1.230**      -0.190
                                                    [0.251]          [0.200]           [0.455]      [0.473]      [1.532]        [0.523]      [1.225]
I(became adolescent during campaign) × I(rural)                                                                                                              6.234***
                                                                                                                                                              [1.950]
Log(total alcohol)                                                  1.423***                        -0.032        -0.189         -0.017       0.005          0.059***
                                                                     [0.293]                        [0.039]       [0.125]        [0.042]     [0.073]          [0.013]
I(became adolescent during campaign)                                                 -5.281***    -5.440***     -10.331**      -6.455***      1.726           -1.965
                                                                                       [1.488]      [1.524]       [4.934]        [1.674]     [3.813]          [1.298]

Log population                                        Yes              Yes              Yes          Yes           Yes            Yes          Yes             Yes
Quadratic time trend                                  Yes              Yes
Year, age, region, rural FE and log income                                              Yes          Yes           Yes            Yes          Yes              Yes
Observations                                           44               44             1,343        1,343         1,327          1,343        1,273            1,343
R-squared                                            0.785            0.868            0.596        0.592         0.592          0.654        0.584            0.245
1st-stage F-statistic                                                                  10.55        10.22         10.22          10.22        8.744
Estimator                                            OLS              OLS               IV           IV            IV             IV           IV              OLS
Notes : Columns 1-2 use the national male mortality rate and alcohol sales by type of alcohol from 1970-2013. Columns 3-8 use regional alcohol sales by year, region, age
and type of settlement (urban/rural) from 1994-2011 and the total number of deaths (Columns 3-4) as well as cause-specific deaths (Columns 5-7), such as alcohol
poisoning fatalities, external but alcohol-related causes of death, and cancer deaths unrelated to alcohol. The set of additional controls includes log populaton and a
quadratic time trend in Columns 1-2 and log population, log regional GDP per capita and year, age, region and rural FE in Columns 3-8. Robust standard errors in squared
brackets are clustered by region. ***, **, * denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
                Table 4: Individual-Level Mortality Analysis and Simulation of Counterfactuals

A. Cox Proportional Hazard Model           (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)

Share of vodka                          0.619***     0.630***     0.631***     0.686***     0.534***      0.512**
                                         [0.190]      [0.192]      [0.192]      [0.196]      [0.158]      [0.205]
Total alcohol (kg of ethanol)                        1.125**        1.022       -1.967      -3.064**       -2.116
                                                      [0.526]      [0.642]      [1.527]      [1.426]      [1.529]
Share of vodka × Total alcohol                                                 5.342**      7.245***      5.400**
                                                                                [2.207]      [1.876]      [2.172]
Share of beer                                                                                            -0.842**
                                                                                                          [0.426]

Socio-economic demographics                Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes
Heavy-drinking indicator                                             Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes
Sample (age)                              22-65        22-65        22-65        22-65        ≥ 22         22-65

Observations                             6,623        6,623        6,623        6,623        7,506        6,623
Number of deaths events                    356          356          356          356         599          356
Pseudo R-squared                         0.0852       0.0858       0.0858       0.0873       0.0736       0.0885


                                         population share of         male mortality,
B. Counterfactual Simulations            vodka        beer           age 22-65 (%)
current year                              46.2        31.4                1.43
in 10 years                               32.0        42.4                1.26
in 20 years                               22.5        49.4                1.10
new long-run steady state                 14.5        55.9                0.81
Notes : The dependent variable in Panel A are death events of family members in non-single households in
the RLMS from 1994-2011. The independent variables have a sample mean (standard deviation) of 0.11
(0.09) liters for total alcohol, 0.46 (0.32) for the share of vodka, and 0.31 (0.29) for the share of beer. ***, **,
* denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
                                    Online Appendix

              The Long-Run Effects of a Public Policy
                on Alcohol Tastes and Mortality
                            Lorenz Kueng           Evgeny Yakovlev



A Data Appendix
   We use data at three levels of aggregation: national-level, regional-level, and individual- or
household-level.

A.1 National-Level Data
    Population data is provided by the World Bank (http://data.worldbank.org) and mortality
rates by gender are based on the Human Mortality Database (www.mortality.org). National-
level data on alcohol sales going back to 1970 are provided by the Federal State Statistics
Service (FSSS or Rosstat, www.gks.ru/wps/wcm/connect/rosstat main/rosstat/en/main) and
its predecessor Goskomstat.

Measuring Illegal Vodka Consumption There are two main approaches used in the lit-
erature to estimate samogon consumption. The first approach uses aggregate sales of sugar,
which is one of the main ingredients in the production of samogon (Nemtsov 1998). The second
approach uses data on violent and accidental deaths and deaths with unclear causes obtained
from autopsy reports (Nemtsov 2002). For such death events, there exist measures of alcohol
concentration in the blood of the victim that can be used to estimate aggregate alcohol con-
sumption. This approach gives similar estimates of samogon production as the first approach.
Nemtsov (2011) provides a comprehensive survey of this literature, including a discussion of the
limitations of both approaches. We use the estimates summarized in his book and we extend
the series back to 1970 using Tables 8-2 and 8-3 in Treml (1997).
    While samogon was by far the main source of illegal alcohol in the Soviet Union, much of
the illegal alcohol consumed since 1992 comes from illegal imports as well as illegal production
of unregistered alcohol by firms as a form of tax evasion. Unfortunately, estimates of samogon
after 1991 do not distinguish between the production of home-made vodka (samogon) and other
unregistered alcohol imported or produced by firms. From 1991 on we therefore follow the
first approach and use changes in sugar sales per capita shown in Panel (a) of Figure A.1 to
decompose the total amount of unregistered vodka into low-quality samogon and high-quality
tax-evaded vodka produced by firms. Our estimates suggest that the latter accounts for about
35% of all unregistered vodka, consistent with independent estimates of the size of Russia’s

                                               1
shadow economy (Johnson, Kaufmann, Shleifer, Goldman, and Weitzman 1997). Finally, we
note that these approaches cannot distinguish the type of alcoholic good that was produced at
home, in particular whether it was homemade beer, wine, or samogon. Samogon, however, is
much more prevalent than homemade beer. This is largely because homemade beer requires
ingredients that do not grow naturally in Russia. Based on data from the RLMS for years
2008–2011, only 0.3% of male alcohol consumers consumed homemade beer compared to 6.2%
who consumed samogon, with 2008 being the first year respondents were asked about their
consumption of homemade beer.

A.2 Regional-Level Data
    Regional-level data come from several sources. First, regional alcohol sales by type of alco-
hol, including beer, and regional mortality data by cause of death from 1998 to 2014 come from
the Federal State Statistics Service (FSSS). Second, regional data on alcohol consumption and
mortality from 1980 to 1992, which covers the period before and during the anti-alcohol cam-
paign, is based on Bhattacharya et al. (2013). This dataset contains information of total alcohol
consumed and of samogon production but does not break out consumption by other types of
alcohol, in particular beer. However, since home-produced beer was only a minor share of total
alcohol consumption during the Soviet Union, this is only a minor limitation. Bhattacharya
et al. (2013) provide an extensive discussion of this data in their online appendix. Third, we
use the Russian Fertility and Mortality Database (RusFMD) of the Centre of Demographic
Research at New Economic School (CDR NES), which contains detailed fertility and mortal-
ity indicators of Russia’s regions. The database includes gender- and age-specific mortality
indicators separately for urban and rural areas of 85 Russian regions, covering years 1989-
2014. The information is based on official but previously unpublished data from the FSSS; see
www.demogr.nes.ru/en/demogr indicat/data for more details. Cause-specific mortality data is
available for 5-year age groups while data on total mortality from all causes of death is available
for 1-year age groups.

A.3 Individual-Level and Household-Level Data
    Micro-level data comes from two sources. The main source is the Russian Longitudinal Mon-
itoring Survey (RLMS). We supplement this data with additional household expenditure data
from the National Survey of Household Welfare and Program Participation (NOBUS). NOBUS
covers new or “western” goods better than the RLMS. These new goods became increasingly
available only due to increased imports and foreign direct investments after the collapse of the
Soviet Union in the second half of the 1990s.




                                                2
A.3.1    Russian Longitudinal Monitoring Survey (RLMS)

    The RLMS is a nationally representative survey conducted by the Carolina Population Cen-
ter at the University of Carolina at Chapel Hill and the Higher School of Economics in Moscow
and covers 33 regions (Russian oblasts) plus the cities of Moscow and St. Petersburg. Two
regions are predominately Muslim and hence contain fewer households that consume alcohol.
    In our analysis of alcohol consumption patterns, we take advantage of the detailed disaggre-
gated responses by each individual household member age 18 and above provided in the health
module of the RLMS (“Health Evaluation” section). Reported household expenditures on alco-
holic beverages on the other hand are of much poorer quality than the individual consumption
measures. For instance, 47% of males who report having consumed alcohol during the previous
month report zero household expenditures on alcohol, and another 11% do not report their
spending on alcohol at all. Individual consumption data on the other hand tend to be of much
higher quality and have fewer nonresponses. This is most likely due to the fact that the health
questions are asked in isolation without any other person being present except the interviewer
in order to maintain full confidentiality. The average self-reported household budget share of
alcohol in our sample is 5% for households reporting positive alcohol expenditures. This number
is severely downward biased due to underreporting and more so than in other countries. Treml
(1982), for example, shows that this level of underreporting already existed in earlier surveys,
resulting in estimated alcohol expenditure shares of only 3%. Instead, we estimate the average
share of alcohol in total retail sales based on official statistics to be 9% over our sample period
(see Goskomstat, Statistical Yearbook, Table 20.16). While this measure of the alcohol budget
share is conceptually close to the budget share in non-durable expenditures, the estimated mag-
nitude is most likely understating the alcohol budget shares of the individuals in our sample.
Many households do not consume any alcohol at all, either for religious, health, or other reasons
and official sales do not include the consumption of illegally obtained or homemade alcohol.
Hence, the typical household’s expenditure share in our sample could be well above 10%.
    Since there is no consistent aggregate price index, especially early in the sample and during
the financial crisis of 1997-1998, we follow the literature and express real income by deflating
it by the price of milk, which is stable over time and is measured at a geographical level which
roughly corresponds to the area of a small city. The corresponding real series is then comparable
across our sample period from 1994 to 2011. Moreover, by deflating income by the price of milk
reported by the household, we implicitly also control for time-varying local effects. Inflation
measured using the official aggregate consumer price index (CPI) is 320% in 1994 and 200%
in 1995, and it jumps from 28% in 1998 to 85% in 1999 (see http://stats.oecd.org). While
this might be an accurate measure of inflation, using the CPI for our sample does not result
in reasonable income figures across years. In particular, it appears to deflate income in later
years too much relative to earlier rounds. Using nominal income or income deflated with the
aggregate price index provided by Goskomstat and Rosstat instead does not affect any of our

                                                3
results because any difference induced by applying a different aggregate price index is fully
absorbed by the period fixed effects. However, the summary statistics reported in Table 1 for
real income would not be reasonable.

Measures of Alcohol Consumption We assume that beer contains 5% pure alcohol and
vodka contains 40% pure alcohol, based on recommendations from the National Institutes of
Health (Dawson 2003). Some researchers take into account the possibility that the percentage
of alcohol contained in beer has increased from around 2.85% in the Soviet Union to around
5% in 2000 (Nemtsov 2002 and Bhattacharya et al. 2013). We instead assume a constant share
both for simplicity and to be conservative with respect to the growth rate of beer sales relative
to vodka sales measured in pure alcohol. This assumption does not affect our results.
    We then calculate consumption shares of total (pure) alcohol. We use the term “vodka”
to include vodka and other hard liquor, but we exclude homemade liquor, i.e., samogon. The
production of homemade liquor for personal consumption became legal only in 1997, and selling
it remains illegal today. This variable is therefore measured very imprecisely and we do not
include it in the main analysis.31 We then document how our results change when we include
this noisy measure of alcohol consumption. As expected, we find that the point estimate is
smaller (attenuation bias) and less precisely estimated. The term “beer” includes home-brewed
beer in addition to purchased beer. The fraction of home-brewed beer however is negligible for
the vast majority of households, and thus it was not asked separately in most rounds of the
survey.

Sample Attrition Although generally low in comparison to other expenditure survey panels,
sample attrition could be a problem as with any other survey-based analysis. Average interview
completion rate outside St. Petersburg, Moscow City, and Moscow Oblast is over 88%.32 To deal
with attrition, RLMS replenishes its sample on a regular basis, especially in the areas of high
mobility and non-response rates such as Moscow and other large cities and concludes that “the
main effects [of attrition] are in the Moscow/St. Petersburg sample. Because of high attrition
the Moscow/St. Petersburg sample in round 10 was replaced with a new sample. And starting
with 2001 the Moscow/St. Petersburg observations from 1994 sample are no longer a part of the
cross-sectional RLMS sample”; see www.cpc.unc.edu/projects/rlms-hse/data/documentation/
faq. Online Appendix C provides extensive robustness checks of our main findings to sample
attrition (Table A.2, Panel B).
  31
     Samogon consumption is much lower today than in the Soviet era. We exclude this variable from our main
analysis because it is noisy, not because we think it is not important.
  32
     See www.cpc.unc.edu/projects/rlms-hse/project/samprep for a detailed discussion of attrition in the RLMS.
Gorodnichenko, Sabirianova Peter, and Stolyarov (2010) and in particular Denisova (2010) provide a more in-
depth analysis of sample attrition. During the 13 year period from 1994 to 2007 analyzed in Denisova (2010),
61% of individuals in the initial sample left it as their households moved out of the surveyed dwellings. This
corresponds to an annual average attrition rate of 7%. Moscow and St. Petersburg however have a response rate
of only 60%. We therefore perform robustness checks excluding these two sampling units from our analysis.

                                                      4
Comparison of Survey Consumption with Administrative Data Figure A.1 compares
consumption data obtained from the RLMS with corresponding National Income and Product
Account (NIPA) data and alcohol retail sales. Panel (b) is taken from Figure 2 of Gorodnichenko,
Martinez-Vazquez, and Sabirianova Peter (2009). The authors state that “both RLMS and
NIPA measures of consumption per capita include expenditures on durables but exclude imputed
in-kind expenditures” and are deflated using the CPI. “The 1998 discrepancy in Panel B can
be explained by the fact that RLMS had been conducted right after the August financial crisis
whereas NIPA’s numbers are averaged over the year.” Hence, consumption per capita in the
RLMS matches NIPA personal consumption per capita reasonably well.
    Panel (c) compares the evolution of the ratio of vodka to beer, both measured in pure alcohol,
between the RLMS and official retail sales. Although the two series have a similar trend, they
diverge in early years. It is important to note that the two series are conceptually different (see
the discussion above of estimated unregistered alcohol at the national level). Retail sales only
measure official alcohol sales that were subject to a sales tax. However, with the privatization
after the collapse of the Soviet Union, the size of the shadow economy increased dramatically,
with estimates around 40% of GDP (Johnson et al. 1997). The RLMS on the other hand
measures total alcohol consumed, including alcohol produced in the informal economy. Starting
in 2008 the two measures are almost identical.
    Panel C of Table A.2 shows that our results are robust to reweighting the data to match the
share of registered vodka in total retail sales of alcoholic beverages.

Mortality Hazards For our analysis of the long-run effects of changes in alcohol tastes on
male life-expectancy it is important to know whether the RLMS gives an accurate representation
of death events from life tables, although based on a much smaller sample. This issue has been
studied by Denisova (2010), who concludes that “the attrition bias is likely to be rather limited”
and that overall, “the RLMS is reasonably good in measuring adult mortality, while the richness
of the individual-level information ... with the carefully measured household data makes it very
attractive to study the determinants of mortality.” Death events in the RLMS are inferred
directly from survey responses. In the cases where some members of the household are absent
in a given interview round, the interviewer asks for the reason, and one of the possible answers
given is the member’s death. Of course, this source of data has its limitations. For instance,
we do not have information on death events for single households. To mitigate some of those
shortcomings we restrict our sample to males age 22-65, which are also individuals for whom
excessive drinking is a major problem. Furthermore, we exclude households that appear only
once in the survey. 5.6% of men in our initial sample died during the sample period before
reaching age 65. Of those, 44% died before reaching age 50 and 18.4% before age 40. As
mentioned in Section 3, Brainerd and Cutler (2005) use the same data for their analysis of
mortality trends in Russia and summarize the data as follows:


                                                5
       “For families where there is at least one member surviving, the survey asks if anyone
       died during the time period. We are thus able to identify deaths among the vast
       majority of multiple-person households (about 85 percent of the population is in
       multiple-person households). Our analysis of mortality in subsequent sections is based
       on these multiple-person households. Trends in mortality in the RLMS match trends
       from the aggregate data, although the level of mortality in the RLMS is 10 - 20 percent
       lower than the national data.” (p.113)
The 10-20% gap between the level of mortality measured in the RLMS and national-level mor-
tality is due to the sample restrictions mentioned above, in particular the need to restrict the
analysis to multi-person households.

A.3.2     National Survey of Household Welfare and Program Participation (NOBUS)

    The National Survey of Household Welfare and Program Participation (NOBUS), which
was collected in 2003 by Goskomstat in collaboration with the World Bank and includes about
45,000 households across 80 regions in Russia, contains detailed household-level expenditure
data. We use this data to study the effect of import shocks to other non-alcoholic market goods
on tastes. Table A.3 provides a detailed description and motivation for classifying the goods in
the seven consumption categories into either “ new” or “traditional” depending on whether the
good became available mostly after the collapse of the Soviet Union (“new”) or whether it was
already available before the early 1990s (“traditional”). The goods in the seven categories are
assumed to be close but imperfect substitutes.


B Taste vs. Age Effects
    In this section we leverage the survey’s panel dimension to provide additional non-experimental
evidence for the new mechanism proposed in this paper. A common hypothesis for heterogeneity
in alcohol consumption put forward in the health literature are “steppingstone” or “gateway”
effects of light drugs for the consumption of harder drugs later in life. In the case of alcohol,
this means that beer might serve as a steppingstone earlier in life for the consumption of harder
alcoholic substances later in life. According to this theory, people would start out with beer
but eventually switch to vodka. Several studies have analyzed this hypothesis in the context of
various types of non-alcoholic drugs.33 To the best of our knowledge our study is the first to
analyze the steppingstone effect of light alcohol towards harder alcoholic beverages.
    We decompose both alcohol shares into unconditional age and cohort effects. A steppingstone
effect of beer would generate within-consumer variation where younger consumers start out with
  33
     For instance, Mills and Noyes (1984) and Deza (2015) find evidence for a modest steppingstone effect of
marijuana and alcohol for the consumption of harder non-alcoholic drugs later on. Similarly, Beenstock and
Rahav (2002) find a steppingstone effect in cigarette consumption leading to an increase in the probability of
smoking marijuana later on. Van Ours (2003) finds that unobserved individual heterogeneity and steppingstone
effects can explain many patterns of drug consumption.

                                                      6
beer before gradually substituting to harder alcohol as they become older. This would result in
a downward sloping life-cycle profile of the beer share. If changes in alcohol shares are instead
driven by persistent changes in tastes, then different cohorts would have relatively flat alcohol
life-cycle profiles. The initial share of beer relative to vodka would increase from one cohort to
the next, so that the intercept of the age profile of younger cohorts would be higher than that
of older cohorts for beer consumption, and vice versa for the share of vodka.
     The top left panel of Figure A.2 shows the unconditional age and cohort profile of both
alcohol shares. The pooled cross-sectional moments seem to support both mechanisms, step-
pingstone effects and changes in persistent tastes implied in the cohort effects. Survey year
effects do not play a significant role as shown in the middle left panel.
     Next, we exploit the panel dimension of the data to assess the relative contribution of those
two forces in the middle right panel by showing the average drinking patterns after taking
out individual means. Specifically, for each individual we subtract his average share, and we
normalize the average of the first observed share across all individuals to zero. Hence, this figure
shows the average slope of the age profile over all individuals in the sample after controlling
for individual fixed effects. Under the steppingstone hypothesis, this demeaned consumption
profile should retain a significant slope, positive for vodka consumption and negative for beer.
On the other hand, if changes in consumption shares are driven by changes in persistent tastes
across cohorts, then these profiles should be relatively flat. The pattern shown in this figure
strongly supports the latter, and there is little evidence for much change within cohorts over
time and hence for steppingstone effects.
     The average individual’s slope shown in the middle panel could mask a steppingstone effect
if tastes form very quickly during early adulthood and then remain fairly constant. This could
generate an age profile that is steep at the beginning and then flattens out quickly. In this case,
the average slope across all individuals would be small, since most individuals in our sample
would be in the flat part of their life-cycle profile, even though the age profile is steep at the
beginning. In the bottom-left panel we assess this hypothesis by plotting the demeaned age
profile of individuals starting from age 18 and following them up to at most age 24. That is,
we perform the same analysis as in the middle right panel on this subsample, again controlling
for individual fixed effects and normalizing the initial share to zero, which is now the share at
age 18. The bottom-left panel shows that there indeed is a steeper age profile from age 18 to
about age 22.


C The Anti-Alcohol Campaign: Robustness
   In this section we provide an extensive sensitivity analysis of our benchmark result for the
anti-alcohol campaign in Column 4 of Table 2. These robustness checks are shown in Table A.2.
   First, we perform robustness checks of our main results to concerns related to the use of
the survey data. In particular, we analyze the effect of sample attrition (Panel A), of different

                                                 7
definitions of rural consumers (Panel C), and we provide an alternative estimation that reweights
the data to match the share of registered vodka in total retail sales of alcoholic beverages
(Panel B). Finally, Panel D shows various additional robustness checks.

C.1 Sample Attrition
    We assess the robustness of our main results to sample attrition in Panel A of Table A.2.
In Column 1 we drop the three sampling units with the highest attrition rates, St. Petersburg,
Moscow City, and Moscow Oblast and find that the effect becomes slightly stronger, consis-
tent with the hypothesis that data from these subsamples contain more measurement error.34
Column 2 interacts the difference-in-difference variable with the survey year to assess whether
the treatment effect changes depending on the survey years used. The interaction term is sta-
tistically insignificant and economically small. Similarly, in Column 3 we find no systematic
difference in the treatment effect when interacting it with number of years each respondent is
in the sample. Hence, “survey fatigue” does not seem to affect our main results. Finally, in
Columns 4 and 5 we collapse the data to a single cross-section. In Column 4 we assign an indi-
vidual to the year it was first sampled while in Column 5 we assign it randomly to any year in
which it responded. The results are similar as the baseline estimates, although with larger point
estimates and standard errors. The results in Panel A therefore suggest that sample attrition
does not substantially affect our main result in Table 2.
    Finally, because attrition is higher before 2001 as discussed in Online Appendix A, we use
survey years 2001-2011 as our baseline sample in Table 2. Column 15 of Table A.2 shows that
our results are qualitatively robust to using the full sample 1994-2011.

C.2 Comparison with Administrative Retail Sales Data
    Online Appendix A shows that starting in 2008, administrative retail sales and alcohol con-
sumption measured in the RLMS match up well. In Panel B we therefore test the robustness of
our results to potential mismeasurement of alcohol consumption in the RLMS relative to admin-
istrative retail sales. In Column 6 we restrict our sample to survey waves between 2008 and 2011
and find quantitatively similar results as in our baseline specification, although substantially
less precisely estimated due to the smaller sample size. In Column 7 we instead reweight the
RLMS data to match the annual share of vodka based on retail sales. Again, we find similar
results as in our benchmark specification. Therefore, the results in Table 2 do not seem to be
affected by potential underreporting in the survey.

  34
    Ideally, one could directly estimate the treatment effect of the anti-alcohol campaign on survey exit. However,
in our case the treatment causes “natural” attrition under the null hypothesis since treated households have
higher mortality rates because they formed long-run relative tastes for hard alcoholic drinks, a point we document
in our analysis of the effect of relative alcohol tastes on mortality.




                                                        8
C.3 Definition of Rural and Urban Consumers
    In our main analysis we take advantage of the detailed demographic information in the RLMS
to measure the place an individual most likely lived in around age 17, i.e., during adolescence.
The RLMS provides two measure that can be used to proxy for this unobserved variable. In
addition to recording current residence, the survey also asks about the respondents’ birthplace.
    In Panel C we construct various indicators for whether an individual became adolescent in
a rural area. In Column 8 we start by only using the current place of residence and use a strict
definition of rural, only including places with a population of less than 100,000. In Column 9
we relax this definition to include places with a population less than 250,000. Both definitions
yield similar results, and both are in line with the baseline estimates, which uses both the
current place of residence and the self-reported place of birth. Columns 10 and 11 first use
the self-reported place of birth and then impute the remaining missing data with the current
place of residence, using both the strict (Column 10) or the broader definition of a rural area
(Column 11). Both estimates are quantitatively similar to our benchmark result. Finally, in
Column 12 we only use the place of birth for the subset of individuals that answer this question.
While substantially less precise due to the much smaller sample size, the point estimate is similar
to the baseline estimate. We therefore conclude that our main results in Table 2 are robust to
using different definitions of the difference-in-difference interaction variable, I(rural).

C.4 Additional Robustness Checks
    In Panel D we provide additional robustness checks of the main results of the anti-alcohol
campaign on taste formation in the long run.
    In light of the beer market expansion discussed in Section 6, one might be concerned that
consumers in the control group that became adolescent after the end of the campaign faced
different initial conditions than consumers that turned 17 before the campaign, and hence that
the former do not form a proper control group for the analysis in Section 4. Here, we address
this concern in two steps.
    First, we drop households that turned 17 after 1995 when the beer market started to expand
due to large inflows of imports and foreign direct investments. Although we cannot reject
the hypothesis that the effect in Column 13 is the same as our benchmark result, the larger
point estimate suggests that consumers that turned 17 before the campaign might be a more
appropriate control group.
    Second, we extend the difference-in-differences design of equation (2) to include two different
sets of control groups, one containing men who turned 17 before 1986, and another with men
who turned 17 between 1991 and 1995:
       Sitvodka = βDD,1 · I(became adolescent before campaign)i × I(urban)i                    (6)
              + βDD,2 · I(became adolescent after campaign)i × I(urban)i


                                                9
                + βD,1 · I(became adolescent before campaign)i
                + βD,2 · I(became adolescent after campaign)i + λ · I(urban)i + γ 0 xit + it .

This specification, shown in Column 14, effectively decomposes the effect in Column 13, sup-
porting the intuition that older individuals who turned 17 before the start of the campaign
might form a more appropriate control group.35
    In Column 15 we extend the baseline sample by including all available survey years from
1994 to 2011. While the coefficients are again not statistically different from the baseline results,
the lower point estimates suggest that using the earlier part of the sample leads to a downward
bias since individuals’ consumption shares have not yet reached their steady state.
    We assess this conjecture in Column 16 by restricting the sample to survey years after 2005,
therefore estimating the effect of the campaign in the very long run, more than 17 years after
the end of the campaign. We indeed find that the effect is larger, although we again cannot
reject that it is statistically different from the baseline estimate because of the larger standard
error due to the small sample size.
    In Column 17 we use the statutory start date of the campaign instead of the estimated date
based on Figure 2. Adding individuals that turned 17 in year 1985 does not affect the results.
However, Section 5 shows that this does not mean that the power of the research design is low.
    One might also be concerned that our results could be sensitive to heavy drinkers or alco-
holism. In Column 18 we address this concern showing that the results are robust to dropping
all consumers in the top quartile of the alcohol consumption distribution.
    In Column 19 we include all men age 14 and above, the lowest age at which individuals are
asked to complete the health module. Our main analysis restricts the data to males age 18
and above because we are concerned with underreporting by individuals younger than the legal
drinking age. However, Column 19 shows that we obtain similar results when including minors.
    Column 20 also controls for permanent income. We measure permanent income by forming
income quintiles by 10-year age groups (i.e., five income bins within each cell of individuals age
18-24, 25-34, 35-44, 45-54, 55-65), assigning missing income values a separate income bin. We
then add fixed effects for each of these 30 cells. Column 20 shows that we again obtain similar
results as in our benchmark specification.
    The main empirical analysis follows the previous literature and uses the share of vodka
consumed as the dependent variable. However, these two-sided truncated models can be severely
biased if estimated with OLS including fixed effects. We use the estimator developed in Honoré
(1992) to explore this issue. This pairwise trimmed least-squares estimator for truncated models
in panel data with fixed effects is consistent in this setting and does not require parametric
assumptions for the disturbance terms. Column 21 shows that this alternative estimator yields
  35
     We interact the policy with the indicator for turning 17 in an urban area, I(urban), which is the complement
of I(rural), because this specification maintains the sign for the difference-in-differences coefficient and hence
makes it easier to compare causal effects across columns.


                                                       10
very similar results as our benchmark specification.

C.5 Placebo Tests
    We perform three placebo tests that assign 5-year treatment windows to periods other than
1986-90. Instead of randomly assigning treatment windows, we show all possible assignments
over the sample period starting in 1970, the first year we have estimates of aggregate samogon
consumption.
    Panel (a) of Figure A.7 shows the design of this first placebo test. Specifically, we use 15-
year rolling windows starting with consumers who turned 17 between 1960 and 1974 and ending
with the sample of men who turned 17 before 2002.36 Within each sample we estimate the same
difference-in-differences specification as in equation (2), with a 5-year treatment window in the
center.
    According to our identification strategy we should not see any effect of the placebo treatment
in years prior to the actual campaign. This prediction holds conditional on 17 being the sensitive
age for alcohol taste formation based on Section 5. As the 15-year sample enters the campaign
period 1986-90, we should initially see β̂DD decrease as the true treatment group gets mistakenly
assigned to the control group on the right. The coefficient should then gradually increase as
the assigned treatment group more and more covers the actual treatment period, reaching its
peak around the 5-year period from 1986-90. If we assign the 5-year treatment indicator to
periods after 1990, then the outcome will depend on how quickly tastes form. In Section 5 we
showed that tastes for hard alcoholic beverages form in a narrow interval centered at age 17.
Hence, β̂DD should decrease back to zero, before becoming negative again as we falsely assign
the actual treatment group to the control group on the left. Finally, the coefficient should
gradually increase back to zero. Our difference-in-differences identification strategy therefore
predicts a W-shaped pattern for β̂DD , which is a stronger test than the typical placebo test
which would just predict no effect.
    Panel (b) plots the evolution of β̂DD together with 95% confidence intervals. Consistent with
our research design, we see this W-shaped pattern emerge. The peak response occurs when the
treatment window reaches the actual treatment period from 1986-90.
    The second placebo in Panel (c) uses the same research design shown in Panel (a) except
that we assign individuals to the treatment window if they turned 30 during that 5-year window
(instead of 17 as in Panel b). We choose age 30 because based on our hypothesis about taste
formation, consumers have already formed most of their alcohol tastes by that age and hence
their preferences are no longer malleable. Panel (c) shows that we indeed do not find any effect
of the anti-alcohol campaign on these middle-aged men.
    The third placebo test in Panel (d) implements the same research design as in Panel (b)
but uses an outcome variable that should not be affected by the anti-alcohol campaign. This
  36
    2001 is the last year in which we have data on tea consumption used in the second placebo test discussed
below.

                                                    11
approach mimics actual placebo tests used in clinical trials. Since we want to perform the same
test as before, which is at the level of the individual rather than the household, we need to use
data from the same health module of the RLMS. This module is the only place where we see
individual consumption as opposed to household-level expenditures. Fortunately, until 2001 the
health module asked respondents whether and how often they drink tea. We use the weekly
frequency of tea consumption as the dependent variable in this second placebo test.
    Panel (d) shows that the difference-in-differences estimator is never statistically significant
even though it has similar precision as the first placebo test in Panel (b). In particular, we
do not find any effect of the actual anti-alcohol campaign from 1986-90 on tea consumption,
providing credibility to our research design.

C.6 Using Different Kernels for the Taste Age Function
    This section shows that our estimates of the typical age at which men form their alcohol
tastes in Section 5 are robust to the choice of weighting kernel. To show this, we use two
alternative kernels shown in the right panels of Figure A.8. The first is an empirical kernel
shown in Panel (b), which reflects the treatment intensity we estimated using the regional
difference-in-difference estimate in (1). The other is a 5-year uniform kernel shown in Panel (d),
covering the campaign’s duration from 1986-90. This kernel only uses information about the
length of the intervention but not the intensity of the campaign, similar to the triangular kernel
used in Figure 3.
    Panels (a) and (c) show that we obtain similar age profiles for taste formation for those two
alternative kernels. Hence, our results are robust to alternative choices of weights assigned to
the different years spanned by the anti-alcohol campaign.

C.7 Long-Run Means for Urban and Rural Consumers
    Finally, in this section we provide another way to visualize the effect of both events (the
anti-alcohol campaign and the expansion of the beer market), which complements Figure 1.
    Panel (a) of Figure A.9 shows the effect of the anti-alcohol campaign on the long-run shares
of beer consumed by men who turned 17 around that time, separately for urban and rural
consumers following your suggestion. For robustness, in panels (b) to (e) we also plot the
corresponding graphs where we use the other definitions of rural areas corresponding to the
robustness checks in Table A.2, Panel C. The figure shows that the differences in the share
of beer consumption between urban and rural youth is statistically significant only for cohorts
which turned 17 years old during the anti-alcohol campaign.
    Figure A.10 extends this analysis over the entire sample period, covering both experiments.
Similar to the regression approach in the paper, we combine two consecutive birth cohorts (e.g.,
birth years 1960 and 1961) to avoid having cells with too few observations. (In the regression
approach in Figures 4, 5 and A.7, we use rolling windows of 5-year birth cohorts.) The top


                                                12
figure shows the share of beer consumed. We see a significantly larger long-run share of beer
consumption among two consecutive two-year birth cohorts of urban consumers who turned 17
during the campaign relative to rural consumers who also turned 17 during the campaign. For
other birth cohorts, the two series of beer shares instead track each other fairly closely. Stepping
back and looking at the entire pattern of beer consumption shows a kink in the time series (or
rather “cohort series”), with a rapid increase in the long-run share of beer consumed among
consumers who became adolescent during the 1990s and 2000s, when the overall beer market
expanded most rapidly.
    The bottom figure shows the same analysis for the long-run average of the log of total alcohol
consumption. Consistent with Column 5 of Table 2, this series is noisier than the series of beer
shares (i.e., the regression estimates in Table 2 are less precise for the log of total alcohol than
for the share of vodka). Zooming in on the period around the anti-alcohol campaign, we see
a decrease in alcohol consumption among urban consumers relative to rural consumers, who
are not much affected by the campaign. Looking at the overall series (both urban and rural
consumers), we see a downward trend in total alcohol consumption for younger birth cohorts
who became adolescent after the end of the Soviet Union, consistent with the beer market
expansion.


D Identification Using A Migrants Research Design
    In this section we use a completely different research design based on migrants. This is
the main approach taken by the previous literature on taste formation, including Bronnenberg
et al. (2012) and Atkin (2016). We use three sets of movers to provide additional independent
evidence for the mechanism.
    First, we use migrants that moved from rural to urban areas in Russia to complement
our difference-in-difference analysis of the anti-alcohol campaign. Table A.6 shows the results
from this exercise. Consistent with taste changes and the fact that vodka consumption is more
prevalent in rural areas, Columns 1 and 2 show that individuals who moved from a rural area to a
city and thus had easier access to liquor during their taste-forming years consume a significantly
larger share of vodka. This difference is relative to both consumers that moved between cities—
the reference group—and to consumers that always lived in the same urban location, as shown
by the difference between the two groups, i.e., (a)-(b). The average share of vodka among all
urban consumers is 54 pp and is more than 11 pp higher for individuals that moved from a
rural area to a city. More than 2 pp of this difference cannot be attributed to either age, year,
income, or relative price effects, or any other observable characteristics.37
    Second, we use information about the birth country for individuals who moved to Russia
from another republic of the former Soviet Union.38 While vodka and beer production was
 37
      We find similar results if we use the much smaller set of migrants from urban to rural areas.
 38
      Unfortunately, we do not have information on the country of origin for immigrants from non-Soviet countries.


                                                        13
relatively uniform across countries of the former Soviet Union (although different for rural and
urban areas), production of wine was heavily concentrated in only two republics, Moldova and
Georgia.39 Columns 3 and 4 show that migrants from those wine-producing Soviet republics
consume a significantly larger share of wine compared to all other consumers. This effect is
also economically significant. The wine share of immigrants from wine-producing republics is
twice as large as that of all other consumers. Of this 4 pp difference, 3 pp cannot be explained
by other covariates, and this difference is robust to using consumers that never moved as the
reference group.
    Third, we use the leave-out mean wine share by country of origin to construct a continuous
measure of market exposure during the taste-forming years. The leave-out mean is the average
consumption share among all immigrants from a given republic, excluding other individuals
living in the same location, such as a town or city (the survey’s so-called secondary sampling
units). Column 5 shows that this leave-out mean is a good predictor of individual consump-
tion shares. However, it might potentially be affected by local unobservables, a point recently
emphasized by Angrist (2014). To address this issue we use a second, noisier measure of the
individual’s initial market conditions: aggregate domestic consumption data from the World
Health Organization for years between 1991 and 2010 for each of the fifteen countries of origin
in the survey. These average shares range from 65% in Georgia to 5% in Kazakhstan, while
Russia’s share is just 9%. We use the noisier but arguably more exogenous country-of-origin
shares to instrument for the less noisy but potentially endogenous leave-out means. The IV esti-
mates are qualitatively similar to the OLS estimate. The fact that the IV estimate in Column 6
is larger than the OLS estimate indicates measurement error in the leave-out mean. Finally,
Column 7 shows that the results are robust to controlling for age, year, real income, relative
prices, and any other observable characteristic, most importantly city fixed effects. Column 8
reports the corresponding first stage regression.
    In summary, this analysis provides additional evidence of persistent alcohol tastes that are
shaped by the socio-economic environment during adolescence. Hence, these results are con-
sistent with the findings from the anti-alcohol campaign and the beer market expansion even
though they are based on a completely different research design.


E Taste Changes for Non-Alcoholic Goods
    This section addresses the concern that our results might only apply to addictive substances.
In order to identify changes in long-run tastes for other non-alcoholic goods we use the opening
of many other markets in the 1990s.
    Identifying such tastes is more challenging. Conceptually, the hypothesis that tastes are
formed when consuming a new good regularly for the first time implies that food tastes are
  39
    A part of Russia, Krasnodarskiy Kray, and a part of Ukraine, Crimea, also produced wine, but these two
regions are small relative to the size of the corresponding republic.


                                                   14
formed during childhood. This creates a problem since children do not necessarily make their
own consumption decisions. Hence, the effect of the exogenous changes in market conditions
due to imports in the late 1990s will be dampened by the accumulated tastes of the parents
who are making consumption decisions on behalf of their children.
    In addition to this conceptual problem, there are several measurement issues that further
complicate the clean identification of changing tastes for non-alcoholic goods. First, the parents’
own consumption tastes obviously depend on their age. Unfortunately, we do not know the age
of the survey respondents’ parents. Second, when analyzing non-alcoholic goods, we must rely
on household-level expenditure data instead of the individual-level consumption data available in
the survey’s health module. These expenditure data might be measured with substantially more
error. Moreover, several individuals can decide on the consumption bundle in a multi-person
household. Unfortunately, there are only few single households in the data which would mitigate
this problem. Similarly, there are only few households where both spouses were born in the
same or a similar cohort. Therefore, it is important to realize that household-level expenditures
reflect complex, aggregated preferences which make a direct mapping from changes in market
conditions to cohort differences in consumption patterns difficult.
    With the exception of certain types of meat, the expenditure questionnaire of the RLMS
does not provide sufficient details about those new, more “exotic” or “western” goods that
became available only after the fall of the Soviet Union, such as pineapples and bananas for
example.40 We therefore turn to a second source of micro-level expenditure data that has
more detailed, disaggregated expenditures allowing us to differentiate between those new goods
and more traditional goods in the same category (i.e., close substitutes) that were also available
during the Soviet Union. The National Survey of Household Welfare and Program Participation
(NOBUS), which was collected in 2003 by Goskomstat in collaboration with the World Bank and
includes about 45,000 households across 80 regions in Russia, contains detailed household-level
expenditure data.
    We identify seven expenditure groups for which we can classify the goods as either new or
traditional. Listing the new goods first, these are subtropical fruits such as pineapples and ba-
nanas vs. apples, pears and plums; chocolate vs. jam and honey for desserts; yoghurt vs. cottage
cheese for breakfast; long-lasting vs. short-lived milk; frozen and canned fruits vs. dried fruits;
and chicken vs. pork and beef for meat. The availability of the new goods is mostly caused
by two factors, the import of previously unavailable goods, such as subtropical fruits, and the
inflow of modern technologies, such as new ways to preserve milk or new technologies to produce
chicken at much lower cost. Table A.3 provides more detail about our classification of each good
and Table A.4 contains the corresponding summary statistics.
    We restrict our analysis to households for which both head and spouse were born in the same
10-year cohort window to mitigate the preference aggregation issue. To have a sufficient sample
  40
    For instance, in the RLMS we only have data on fresh fruits; dried fruits and berries; fresh berries; fruit and
berry preserves; and melons and watermelons, including pickled and dried.

                                                        15
size, especially when estimating tastes good-by-good, we group the households into those born
in the 1970s, the 1980s, and those born in the 1960s or earlier, which is the reference group.
Because the survey was done in 2003 we do not have households born in the 1990s. Hence, the
estimates in this analysis are likely lower bounds for the effect of the import shocks on long-run
tastes since younger cohorts that are most responsive to the new market conditions have not
formed their own households yet.
    Table A.7 shows that consistent with tastes forming early in life, younger cohorts consume a
significantly larger share of new “western” goods relative to traditional goods. This is true even
after controlling for real income, family size as well as region respectively region-by-good fixed
effects that capture relative price differences across regions. Column 1 uses all information in a
pooled household-by-goods panel estimator, while Columns 2 to 8 show that the same pattern
emerges good-by-good, although less precisely estimated.
    Since NOBUS has only a single cross-section, we cannot separate cohort from age effects.
We therefore turn again to the RLMS which contains sufficiently detailed data for one of the
categories, chicken vs. beef and pork consumption. The RLMS also allows us to control for
household age. Focusing on meat consumption has the additional advantage that we also have
a long time-series of aggregate meat sales going back to 1970 to document these substantial
changes. Figure A.5 shows similar rapid changes in the meat markets after the fall of the Soviet
Union as in the alcohol markets. Columns 9 and 10 provide comparable estimates of the effects
of the imports and foreign direct investments on the share of chicken consumed by younger
cohorts in the RLMS as in the NOBUS data, even after we control for age and relative prices.
The estimates are somewhat less precise due to the much smaller sample size of the RLMS.
    Finally, we note a couple of potential shortcomings of this analysis. One potential confound-
ing factor is learning. For example, if there are fixed costs to learning how to consume these new
goods (e.g. how to prepare them), then younger consumers will benefit more from acquiring
these skills over their life-cycle than older consumers even if they have the same preferences.
Another potential confounding factor is status. Younger people may be more concerned with
acquiring social status than older consumers. In that case, the larger consumption share of new,
more expensive goods among young consumers may instead reflect signaling value, especially if
the consumption of those goods is conspicuous.


F A Structural Model of Taste Changes
    Several structural models can give rise to the persistent long-run effects of public policies
we identified in the main paper. In this section we propose one particular structural model of
taste changes under which even temporary policy interventions can lead to persistent effects in
the long run. This basic model is consistent with the consumption patterns documented in the
paper. The model extends the habit formation model by Becker and Murphy (1988) to allow
for two habit-forming goods, illustrating that in this situation several steady-state consumption

                                               16
patterns are possible even in the absence of any unobserved individual heterogeneity. A person’s
consumption shares in steady state depend solely on his initial consumption pattern. Moreover,
it is hard to change these consumption patterns even with very large shocks once the stock of
habit is sufficiently large. Hence, policies aimed at increasing the relative price of one good may
not induce everybody or even many to reduce the consumption of this good. Instead, due to the
stock of habits already accumulated, people who are accustomed to this particular good will still
prefer it even after the policy change. This implies that policies that influence the initial choices
of younger generations can have long-run consequences over their entire life span—intended or
otherwise.

F.1 Model Setup
    For simplicity we assume that consumers spend all of their budget on two habit-forming
goods, beer and vodka. We also assume that consumers are myopic, i.e., that they maximize
only current utility and do not save, that there are no outside goods, that income does not
change over time, and that there is no uncertainty.41
    The individual derives flow utility u(vt , bt , Htv , Htb ) from consuming vodka vt and beer bt and
also from the corresponding stocks of habit Htv and Htb . The utility function has properties that
are common in the literature, specifically that ug > 0, ugg < 0, and ugHg > 0 with g ∈ {b, v}.
These assumptions imply in particular that the marginal utilities of consuming beer or vodka
are positive and increasing with the stock of habit of the corresponding good. Assuming a
common rate of depreciation δ of the two habit stocks, they evolve as

                                 g
                                Ht+1 = (1 − δ)Htg + gt , H0g ≥ 0, δ ∈ [0, 1].                                 (7)

The budget constraint is pvt vt + bt = yt . Without loss of generality, we focus on interior
solutions.42 The first-order condition of this optimization problem is

                     uv (vt , yt − pvt vt , Htv , Htb ) − pvt ub (vt , yt − pvt vt , Htv , Htb ) = 0 ,        (8)

where uv and ub are the partial derivatives with respect to the first and second arguments,
respectively. Since we are interested in the long-run effects of habit formation, we focus our
analysis on the properties of the model’s steady state. In the steady state where prices, income,
and consumption are constant such that pvt = pv , yt = y, and gt = g, the expression for the
stocks of habit is g/δ. The first-order condition that implicitly defines the steady state can then
  41
     Below we reach the same qualitative conclusions if consumers are forward looking and solve a fully dynamic
problem.
  42
     If there are corner solutions, there is always a symmetric specification with at least 3 equilibria where the
two stable equilibria have a consumption share in each good of either 1 or 0.




                                                           17
be rewritten as

           uv (v, y − pv v, v/δ, (y − pv v)/δ) − pv ub (v, y − pv v, v/δ, (y − pv v)/δ) = 0 .                (9)

In general, this is a non-monotonic function in the steady-state vodka consumption v.43 De-
pending on the parametrization of the utility function u, equation (9) may have a different
number of solutions. Figure A.6 illustrates that for certain parametrizations, there is a unique
solution, but for many other parametrizations several steady states exist, up to a continuum of
solutions.44 These multiple equilibria are derived without any consumer heterogeneity except
for differences in initial conditions. A person who initially consumes primarily beer will also
prefer beer in the long-run steady state, and vice versa for vodka.

F.2 Model Properties and Extensions
    This section shows that the model above with two habit forming goods can have any number
of equilibria. We then provide three numerical examples that generate, respectively, one, three,
and an infinite number of equilibria. We also show how to map the steady state, which the
model expresses in levels, to alcohol shares, which is the concept we use in our empirical analysis.
Finally, we show that these insights from be basic myopic model extend to a model with forward-
looking consumers.

F.2.1    Number of Equilibria in the Model with Myopic Consumers

   The steady state first-order condition (FOC) for myopic agents as a function of the level of
vodka consumption, v, is

                  F = uv (v, y − pv v, [δ/(1 − δ)]v, [δ/(1 − δ)][y − pv v])
                           −pv ub (v, y − pv v, [δ/(1 − δ)]v, [δ/(1 − δ)][y − pv v]) = 0.

Differentiating F with respect to v yields

uvv − pv uvb + δ/(1 − δ)uvH v − pv δ/(1 − δ)uvH b − pv [ubv − pv ubb + δ/(1 − δ)ubH v − pv δ/(1 − δ)ubH b ].

Given the assumptions that ugg < 0, uH g H g < 0, and ugH g > 0, some terms in this expression are
positive, e.g., δ/(1 − δ)uvH v , p2v δ/(1 − δ)ubH b , and some are negative, e.g., uvv , p2v ubb . Therefore,
the sign of the overall sum is ambiguous.
  43                                                                                  v
     This condition can also be expressed as a function of the share of vodka, S v = v+b , by using the fact that
            v
        y·S
v = 1−(1−pv )S v ; see below.
  44
     See below for a proof. Similar results are obtained for the model with forward-looking consumers because
the steady-state Euler equation is also non-monotonic in the consumption levels.




                                                       18
F.2.2     Numerical Examples

One Equilibrium Let the utility function be u = ln(b)·Lb +ln(v)·Lv —with Lg = ln(1.1+H g )
for g ∈ {b, v}—so that the marginal utility is ug = Lgg . The FOC is

                                        0 = uv − pv · ub
                                            Lv pv Lb
                                          =      −
                                             v      b
                                            Lv     Lb
                                          =      −
                                            pv v    b
                                            Lv        Lb
                                          =      −        .
                                            pv v y − pv v

Solving for v we obtain

                                                    Lv     y
                                         v =              · .
                                                 L v + L b pv
                                                      √           √
Three Equilibria Let the utility function be u = b · Lb + v · Lv —with Lg = ln(1.1 + H g )
for g ∈ {b, v}—so that the marginal utility is ux = 2L√gg . Solving for v we obtain

                                                       R·y
                                          v =                   ,
                                                     1 + R · pv
                       2
                Lv
with R =       pv ·Lb
                             .

                                                                          √              √
Continuum of Equilibria Let the utility function be u =                       b · Hb +       v · H v , so that the
                         √
                            g
marginal utility is ug = 2√Hg . Solving for v we obtain

                                                       R·y
                                          v =                   ,
                                                     1 + R · pv
             Hv
with R =   p2v ·H b
                        .


F.2.3     Expressing the Model Solutions in Terms of Shares
           g                                         Sv
   Sg =   b+v
                , Sb + Sv = 1 , pv v + b = y , and   Sb
                                                          = vb . Hence,

                                         Sv        Sv
                                    v =     b=          (y − pv v)
                                         Sb      1 − Sv
                                              y · Sv
                                       =                 .
                                         1 − (1 − pv )Sv




                                                     19
F.2.4   Allowing for Forward-Looking Consumers

   We now relax the assumption of myopic behavior. Forward looking agents maximize the
present value of utility from consuming beer and vodka,
                                                      ∞
                                                      X
                      U = u(vt , bt , Htv , Htb ) +         β i [u(vt+i , bt+i , Ht+i
                                                                                  v      b
                                                                                      , Ht+i )].
                                                      i=1


To keep the model simple, we follow Gruber and Köszegi (2001) and assume no savings and
that the stock of habits evolves as follows:

                                            g
                                           Ht+1 = δ(Htg + gt ).

The FOC for vt , after substituting for bt using the budget constraints, is
                                              ∞
                                              X
                            uvt − pvt ubt +         β i δ i (uHt+i
                                                               v   − pvt uHt+i
                                                                           b ) = 0.

                                              i=1


The FOC for vt+1 is
                                              ∞
                                              X
                     uvt+1 − pvt+1 ubt+1 +          β i δ i (uHt+i+1
                                                               v     − pvt+1 uHt+i+1
                                                                               b     ) = 0.
                                              i=1


Combining the two FOCs and analyzing the steady state we obtain the following Euler equation:

                                 δ      δ                                     δ      δ
   0=          uv (v, y − pv v, 1−δ v, 1−δ [y − pv v]) − pv ub (v, y − pv v, 1−δ v, 1−δ [y − pv v])
           βδ                       δ      δ                                        δ      δ
        + 1−βδ [uH v (v, y − pv v, 1−δ v, 1−δ [y − pv v]) − pv uH b ((v, y − pv v, 1−δ v, 1−δ [y − pv v])].

Assuming that ug → ∞ as g → 0 guarantees the existence of a steady state.
    To check the possibility of multiple steady states, we can analyze the monotonicity of the
right-hand side of the steady-state Euler equation by taking the first derivative with respect to
v,

                                                                    δ
dRHS(v)/dv =                      uvv − 2pv uvb + p2v ubb +           [u v
                                                                   1−δ vH
                                                                               − 2pv uvH b + p2v ubH b ]
                     βδ                                                      δ
                  + 1−βδ [uvH v − pv ubH v − pv uvH v + p2v ubH b +            [u v v
                                                                            1−δ H H
                                                                                           − 2pv uH v H b + p2v uH b H b ]].

This expression can be both negative and positive. To see this, assume that the utility function
is separable in the two goods and their stocks of habit. Then the expression above can be
rewritten as
                             h                                              i
                                     2        βδ   δ                2
                 dRHS(v)/dv = uvv + pv ubb + 1−βδ 1−δ (uH H + pv uH b H b )
                                                          v  v

                                  h                                   i
                                      δ      βδ
                                + ( 1−δ  + 1−βδ  )(uvH v + p2v ubH b ) .
                                                        20
The terms in the first square brackets are all negative, while the terms in the second square
brackets are all positive. Thus, depending on the relative magnitude of these terms, the first
derivative can be positive or negative. The following utility specifications provide two examples,
one with a unique and stable steady state and one with three steady states, two of which are
stable and one is unstable. We again set pv = y = 1 so that the consumption levels correspond
to shares, and for simplicity we assume that β = 1 and δ = 0.5. Then the utility parametrization
     √      √                                                     √      √
u = g + H g + gH g results in a one equilibrium, while u = g + H g + 5gH g yields three
equilibria.


G Algorithm for Predicting Male Mortality Rates
    Let the forecast horizon H = 0 denote the current sample from 1994 to 2011. For simplicity,
let us consider the example of an individual i that is 30 years old, was born in 1970, and has
characteristics xi . We then predict consumptions shares by running the linear regression

                                    Sig = ϕc + γ 0 xi + αa + ui ,

where ϕc are birth year effects, i.e., ϕ1970 and α30 for our individual. Similarly, we predict the
mortality hazard by running the corresponding Cox regression,

                               λ(a|xi , Sig ) = exp(δ 0 Sig + ϑxi )λ0 (a).

Suppose we want to forecast the mortality rate in one year, i.e., at horizon H = 1. In order to
do so we proceed with the following steps:
  1. First, we predict the consumption shares by assuming that the same individual, with char-
     acteristics xi and age 30, also represents a 30 year old next year, but with the consumption
     habit of a 30 year old next year, i.e., with ϕ1971 conditional on the covariates above, that is

                                      Ŝig |H=1 = ϕ̂1971 + γ̂ 0 xi + α̂30 .

  2. Next, we plug the predicted shares in the estimated mortality hazard,

                                  λ̂i |H=1 = λ(a = 30|xi , Ŝig |H=1 ; δ̂, ϑ̂).

  3. Finally, doing this for all individuals in the sample and integrating over all individuals, we
     obtain the predicted male mortality rate at horizon H = 1.


H Mortality and Long-Run Tastes for Vodka vs. Samogon
   Table A.8 addresses the concern that if rural consumers consume more samogon during the
anti-alcohol campaign, this could generate long-run tastes for samogon as much as for hard

                                                   21
alcohol broadly, which in turn could explain the high rate of alcohol poisoning associated with
greater vodka consumption in Column 5 of Table 3, because vodka and samogon consumption
are likely positively correlated.
    Recall that in Table 3 we use the difference-in-differences estimator from the anti-alcohol
campaign to instrument for the share of vodka in the 2nd -stage IV regression of mortality on
alcohol poisoning. Unfortunately, as shown in Column 2 of Table A.8, we do not find statistically
significant changes in differences in the share of samogon consumed between urban and rural
consumers for those who turned 17 during compared to those who turned 17 before or after the
anti-alcohol campaign. Because of this, we cannot use this difference-in-differences estimator to
instrument for the share of samogon, because it would be a weak instrument.
    To address this concern, we therefore propose two other IV approaches. First, we note that
there is a significant difference between rural and urban areas in the average shares of samogon
consumed in the cross-section. We therefore use both the difference, I(rural), as well as the
difference-in-differences, I(became adolescent during campaign) × I(rural), as instruments for
the two endogenous variables in the regression of mortality on the share of vodka consumption
and the share of samogon consumption. Column 1 of Table A.8 shows the 2nd stage and
Columns 2 and 3 show the corresponding 1st stages for the share of samogon consumption
(Column 2) and the share of vodka consumption (Column 3), respectively. Second, in addition
to this IV regression shown in Columns 1 to 3, in Column 4 we also show another IV regression,
where we only instrument for the share of samogon consumption using I(rural), which does not
suffer from the weak instrument problem.
    Both IV regressions suggest that the share of samogon consumption and the share of vodka
consumption both increase mortality from alcohol poisoning. That is, controlling for the effect
of samogon consumption on mortality does not decrease the effect of vodka consumption on mor-
tality from alcohol poisoning. The point estimates suggest that the effect of vodka consumption
on mortality is slightly larger, although the difference is not statistically significant.
    Of course, these instrumental variables have their own drawbacks and are in our opinion
less convincing that the analysis in the main text. Hence, this new IV approach only provides
suggestive evidence that the effect of vodka consumption on alcohol poisoning is not driven by
correlated changes in samogon consumption.




                                               22
                                      Figure A.1 – Comparison of RLMS Data with Official Statistics

                                                                                              Sugar Retail Sales per Capita (in kg)

                                                      31

                                                      29

                                                      27

                                                      25

                                                      23

                                                      21

                                                      19

                                                      17

                                                      15
                                                        1970                         1975   1980    1985      1990     1995   2000     2005         2010



  2: Comparison of RLMS with Official Statistics
                                          (a) sugar consumption

              A.Income per capita                                                                  B.Consumption per capita
                                                       1000 2000 3000 4000 5000




 4     1996      1998      2000      2002       2004                              1994      1996            1998          2000         2002                2004

                 RLMS                 NIPA                                                                 RLMS                         NIPA

     C.Consumption-Income Gap in RLMS                 (b) comparison of RLMS   andrate,
                                                                         D.Saving   aggregate
                                                                                        %     consumption
                                                       10




                                                                                                           Vodka/Beer Ratio
                                                  9
                                                       8




                                                  8
                                                       6




                                                  7
                                                       4




                                                                                                                                     Retail Sales
                                                  6
                                                       2




                                                                                                                                     RLMS
                                                  5
                                                       0




                                                  4

 4     1996      1998      2000      2002       2004                              1994      1996            1998          2000         2002                2004
                                                  3

            Income                Consumption     2
                                                                                                           RLMS                         HBS

                                                  1
 The RLMS measure of household disposable       0
                                                         income per capita is after taxes and transfers given,
 cludes in-kind consumption, such as owner-occupied1998housing
                                                 1994   1996         2000   and
                                                                             2002 home-grown
                                                                                    2004    2006      food.2010The matching
                                                                                                    2008

 easure is disposable income for the “household account” after taxes and transfers minus in-kind
  tion (Goskomstat 2007a). Both RLMS and             (c) NIPA
                                                         comparison    of RLMS
                                                                  measures          and alcohol retail
                                                                                of consumption           per sales
                                                                                                              capita include
 ures on durables but exclude imputed in-kind expenditures (Goskomstat 2007a). All RLMS
                Notes:monthly
 s are deflated using     Panel (a)CPI
                                    shows
                                       andthe
                                            thetime
                                                  dateseries   of per capita
                                                         of interview.     Allretail
                                                                                 NIPAsales     of sugarare
                                                                                          measures         from  1970-2014,
                                                                                                              deflated  usingan important ingredient of
 verage CPI. RLMS income and consumption for 1997 are imputed using the lagged RLMS value 2-year moving average.
                illicit vodka  (samogon).   The   blue   line is the raw   data   and    the  red  line   is the corresponding
                Panels (b) and (c) compare consumption data obtained from the RLMS with corresponding data from national accounts
  d by the 1997(NIPA)
                  growthandratealcohol
                                 from NIPA.      The 1998 discrepancy in Panel B can be explained by the
                                       retail sales. Panel (b) is taken from Gorodnichenko et al. (2009). Panel (c) compares the ratio
   RLMS has been        conducted   right  after   the August
                of vodka to beer based on (official)               financial
                                                            registered  alcoholcrisis
                                                                                  retail while     NIPA’s
                                                                                           sales and      basednumbers     are
                                                                                                                 on self-reported data in RLMS (both
   over the year.measured
                    Officialin numbers   of saving
                               pure alcohol).          rate  are  obtained    from    the   Household        Budget   Survey
mstat 2007b).
                                                                                 23
                                                                    Figure A.2 – Non-Parametric Decomposition of Alcohol Share Dynamics


                                                                 beer share (left axis)              beer sales (right axis)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        70
                                                                 vodka share (left axis)                                                                                                                                                                                             vodka
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     beer
                                                                                                                                 12




                                                                                                                                                                                                average share in total alcohol intake
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        60
  average share in total alcohol intake




                                          70
                                                                                                                                 10




                                                                                                                                       beer sales (in billion liters)
                                          60                                                                                                                                                                                            50
                                                                                                                                 8
                                          50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        40
                                                                                                                                 6
                                          40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        30
                                          30                                                                                     4

                                          20                                                                                     2                                                                                                      20

                                          10                                                                                     0                                                                                                      10
                                                    1950      1960       1970       1980       1990      2000        2010                                                                                                                    18 20   25       30      35      40       45     50        55   60        65
                                                    year−turned−18 (for individual shares) and calendar year (for sales)                                                                                                                                                       age




                                          70                                                                                                                                                                                            30
                                                                                           vodka                                                                                                                                                                                 vodka
                                                                                           beer                                                                                                                                                                                  beer
average share in total alcohol intake




                                          60                                                                                                                                                                                            20
                                                                                                                                                                        share after individual fixed effects
                                                                                                                                                                         (first share normalized to zero)
                                          50                                                                                                                                                                                            10


                                          40                                                                                                                                                                                             0


                                          30                                                                                                                                                                                        −10


                                          20                                                                                                                                                                                        −20


                                          10                                                                                                                                                                                        −30
                                               2001       2002    2003    2004    2005 2006 2007        2008    2009     2010   2011                                                                                                         1            3              5              7               9         11
                                                                                    calendar year                                                                                                                                                                  years in sample (interviews)




                                               30                                                                                                                                                                                       30
                                                                                             vodka                                                                                                                                                                               vodka
                                                                                             beer                                                                                                                                                                                beer
                                               20                                                                                                                                                                                       20
share after individual fixed effects




                                                                                                                                                                        share after individual fixed effects
 (first share normalized to zero)




                                                                                                                                                                         (first share normalized to zero)




                                               10                                                                                                                                                                                       10


                                                0                                                                                                                                                                                        0


                                           −10                                                                                                                                                                                      −10


                                           −20                                                                                                                                                                                      −20


                                           −30                                                                                                                                                                                      −30
                                                     18             19           20         21          22          23          24                                                                                                           25               26                27                 28             29
                                                                                           age                                                                                                                                                                                 age




                                        Notes: These figures show the profiles of the shares of beer and vodka consumed by men in the RLMS. The dashed
                                        lines represent two standard error confidence intervals. The top-left panel shows the age profile. The top-left panel
                                        shows the alcohol shares by cohorts measured by when and individual turned 18. We also add the volume of beer sold
                                        in the year. The vertical dashed line marks the start of the anti-alcohol campaign in 1985. The top-right panel shows
                                        the age profile for working-age men. The middle-left panel shows the average shares by survey year. The middle-right
                                        panel graphs the shares against the number of years an individual is observed in the sample, after controlling for
                                        individual fixed effects. The two bottom panels show the age profile for the two subgroups of individuals age 18 to 24
                                        and 25 to 29 as a function of age, again after controlling for individual fixed effects. Figure A.3 provides similarly flat
                                        profiles for five-year age intervals from age 30 to 64.
                                                                                                                                                                            share after individual fixed effects                         share after individual fixed effects                         share after individual fixed effects
                                                                                                                                                                             (first share normalized to zero)                             (first share normalized to zero)                             (first share normalized to zero)




                                                                                                                                                                     −30
                                                                                                                                                                           −20
                                                                                                                                                                                   −10
                                                                                                                                                                                            0
                                                                                                                                                                                                     10
                                                                                                                                                                                                              20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  −30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        −20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                −10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               −30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     −20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             −10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 30




                                                                                                                                                                50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          30




 Figure A.2.
                                                                                                                                                                51
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             41
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          31
                                                                                                               share after individual fixed effects




                                                                                                                                                                52
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             42
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          32




                                                                                                                                                               age
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            age
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         age
                                                                                                                (first share normalized to zero)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   beer
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                beer
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             beer




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   vodka
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                vodka
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             vodka




                                                                                                        −30
                                                                                                              −20
                                                                                                                      −10
                                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                                                        10
                                                                                                                                                 20
                                                                                                                                                          30




                                                                                                   60
                                                                                                                                                                53
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             43
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          33




                                                                                                   61
                                                                                                                                                                54
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             44
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          34




25
                                                                                                                                                                            share after individual fixed effects                         share after individual fixed effects                         share after individual fixed effects




                                                                                                   62
                                                                                                  age
                                                                                                                                                                             (first share normalized to zero)                             (first share normalized to zero)                             (first share normalized to zero)




                                                                                                                                                      beer
                                                                                                                                                      vodka
                                                                                                                                                                     −30
                                                                                                                                                                           −20
                                                                                                                                                                                   −10
                                                                                                                                                                                            0
                                                                                                                                                                                                     10
                                                                                                                                                                                                              20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  −30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        −20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                −10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               −30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     −20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             −10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 30




                                                                                                                                                                55
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             45
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          35




                                                                                                   63
                                                                                                                                                                56
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             46
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          36




                                                                                                   64
                                                                                                                                                                57
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             47
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          37




                                                                                                                                                               age
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            age
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         age




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   beer
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                beer
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             beer




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   vodka
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                vodka
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             vodka




                                                                                                                                                                58
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             48
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          38
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Figure A.3 – Demeaned Alcohol Shares over the Life-Cycle, Ages 30-64




                                                                                                                                                                59
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             49
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          39




 Notes: These figures provide the same analysis over the remaining part of the life-cycle as in
         Figure A.4 – Simulated Dynamics of Alcohol Shares and Mortality


                                            60
                                                      share of vodka
                                                      share of beer

                                            50
         alcohol share




                                            40



                                            30



                                            20



                                            10
                                                  0    5    10      15       20     25     30      35     40   45   50   55
                                                                         horizon (years relative to 2011)


                                                                     (a) predicted alcohol share


                                            1.5


                                            1.4
         male mortality (in %), age 22−65




                                            1.3


                                            1.2


                                            1.1


                                             1


                                             .9


                                             .8
                                                  0    5     10      15    20     25     30      35    40      45   50   55
                                                                       horizon (years relative to 2011)


                                                                  (b) predicted male mortality rate
Notes: These figures shows the predicted consumption shares (Panel a) and implied mortality rates
(Panel b) for males age 22 to 65 as a function of the forecast horizon in years.




                                                                                    26
                                                        Figure A.5 – Expansion of the Meat Market


                                       5000                                                                                beef
                                                                                                                           pork
                                                                                                                           chicken
domestic consumption (in 1,000 tons)




                                       4000



                                       3000



                                       2000



                                       1000



                                         0
                                              1970             1980                1990                2000               2010


                                   Notes: This figure shows the expansion of the meat market after the end of the Soviet Union.




                                                                                 27
Figure A.6 – Potential Number of Steady States in the 2-Good Becker-Murphy Model

                                          100



                                          80




                         share of vodka
                                          60



                                          40



                                          20



                                            0
                                                                age


                                                    (a) one equilibrium

                                          100



                                          80
                         share of vodka




                                          60



                                          40



                                          20



                                            0
                                                                age


                                                     (b) three equilibria

                                          100



                                          80
                         share of vodka




                                          60



                                          40



                                          20



                                            0
                                                                age


                                                (c) infinitely many equilibria

 Notes: These figures show the dynamic behavior of the share of vodka in the two-good habit
 formation model, starting from different initial conditions, i.e., different initial consumption shares.
 The three figures correspond to the three parametrizations specified in the text. Panel (a) has one
 stable steady state, Panel (b) has three steady states, two stable and one unstable, and Panel (c)
 has an infinite number of steady states.

                                                             28
                                                                                      Figure A.7 – Placebo Tests for Anti-Alcohol Campaign
                                         70%
                                                                                                                                                                                                        7.5                                              share of vodka




                                                                                                                                                 βDD : I(treatment window) x I(rural)
                                         60%
                                                                  sample window                                                                                                                                                5
       Share of samogon in total vodka




                                         50%                                                                                                                                                            2.5

                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0
                                         40%

                                                                                                                                                                                        −2.5
                                         30%
                                                                     treatment                                                                                                                                 −5
                                                                      indicator
                                         20%
                                                                                                                                                                                        −7.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1965−1969




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1970−1974




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1975−1979




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1980−1984




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1985−1989




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1990−1994




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1995−1999
                                         10%


                                          0%                                                                                                                                                                                                    5−year treatment window of individuals turning 17 during those years
                                            1970                   1975               1980           1985   1990         1995

                                                            (a) research design for placebo tests                                                                                                                                     (b) placebo tests with vodka consumption

                                          7.5                  share of vodka                                                                                                                                                      7.5                          tea consumption (weekly freq.)
 βDD : I(treatment window) x I(rural)




                                           5                                                                                                                                            βDD : I(treatment window) x I(rural)          5


                                          2.5                                                                                                                                                                                      2.5


                                           0                                                                                                                                                                                          0


                                         −2.5                                                                                                                                                                                  −2.5


                                          −5                                                                                                                                                                                       −5


                                         −7.5                                                                                                                                                                                  −7.5
                                                1975−1979




                                                                          1980−1984




                                                                                             1985−1989




                                                                                                             1990−1994




                                                                                                                                1995−1999




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1965−1969




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1970−1974




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1975−1979




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1980−1984




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1985−1989




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1990−1994




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1995−1999
                                                            5−year treatment window of individuals turning 30 during those years                                                                                                                             5−year treatment window of individuals turning 17 during those years


                                                (c) placebo: (non)-response of 30-year olds                                                                                                                                                                  (d) placebo tests with tea consumption

Notes: This figure shows the design of the placebo tests (Panel a) together with the difference-in-difference estimates for
vodka with men turning 17 in the 5-year treatment window (Panel b) respectively 30 (Panel c) and for tea consumption
shares (Panel d). The anti-alcohol campaign is shaded in gray. Dashed lines are two standard error confidence bands
using robust standard errors clustered by individual.




                                                                                                                                            29
                                                        Figure A.8 – Taste Formation as a Function of Age – Robustness to Different Kernels

                                                 48
                                                                                                         taste−formation by age:                           empirical kernel
                                                                                                         using empirical kernel
βDD : Exposure to Campaign x I(rural)




                                                                                                                                               .2




                                                                                                                                              .15




                                                                                                                                     weight
                                                  0
                                                                                                                                               .1




                                                                                                                                              .05


                                        −39
                                                       10   12   14   16     18    20    22    24    26  28       30   32    34                 0
                                                                           age during anti−alcohol campaign                                         1980                      1985    1990       1995


                                                       (a) response to anti-alcohol campaign by age                                                            (b) empirical weighting kernel

                                                  48                                                                                           .2
                                                                                                         taste−formation by age:                           uniform kernel
                                                                                                         using uniform kernel
         βDD : Exposure to Campaign x I(rural)




                                                                                                                                              .15
                                                                                                                                    weight




                                                   0                                                                                           .1




                                                                                                                                              .05



                                                 −40
                                                       10   12   14   16      18    20     22    24    26    28   30    32    34               0
                                                                             age during anti−alcohol campaign                                       1980                      1985    1990       1995


                                                       (c) response to anti-alcohol campaign by age                                                        (d) 5-year uniform weighting kernel

                                                      Notes: This figure shows the robustness to using different weighting kernels (right panels) when estimating
                                                      the alcohol consumption response to the anti-alcohol campaign by age (left panels). Panels (a) and (b)
                                                      use a 5-year empirical kernel and Panels (c) and (d) a 5-year uniform kernel. Dashed lines are two
                                                      standard error confidence bands using robust standard errors clustered by individual. The anti-alcohol
                                                      campaign is shaded in gray in the right panels, and the maximum impact of the campaign on the age of
                                                      taste formation is shown with a vertical dashed line in the left panels.




                                                                                                                                   30
                                                 Figure A.9 – Long-Run Share of Beer Consumption of Urban and Rural Adolescents

                                                        rural           urban                                                                                                                          50             rural           urban
                                            50
Share of beer in total alcohol




                                                                                                                                                                      Share of beer in total alcohol
                                            40                                                                                                                                                         40




                                            30                                                                                                                                                         30




                                            20                                                                                                                                                         20

                                                 1980            1985                    1990                                             1995                                                              1980              1985                    1990         1995
                                                                 year in which individual turned 17                                                                                                                           year in which individual turned 17



                                                                (a) main specification                                                                          (b) using birth place or current population<250k


                                            50          rural            urban                                                                                                                         50             rural          urban
           Share of beer in total alcohol




                                                                                                                                                           Share of beer in total alcohol



                                            40                                                                                                                                                         40




                                            30
                                                                                                                                                                                                       30




                                            20
                                                                                                                                                                                                       20
                                                 1980             1985                    1990                                            1995                                                              1980              1985                    1990         1995
                                                                  year in which individual turned 17                                                                                                                          year in which individual turned 17



                                            (c) using birth place or current population<100k                                                                                                                       (d) using current population<100k

                                                                                                                                  rural          urban
                                                                                                                    50
                                                                                   Share of beer in total alcohol




                                                                                                                    40




                                                                                                                    30




                                                                                                                    20
                                                                                                                         1980             1985                    1990                                                        1995
                                                                                                                                          year in which individual turned 17



                                                                                                                                (e) using current population<250k

                                  Notes: This figure shows the long-run shares of beer consumption of consumers who lived in a rural and
                                  urban area when they turned 17 as a function of the year in which when they turned 17, focusing on
                                  individuals that were adolescents in the years surrounding the anti-alcohol campaign. Panel (a) applies
                                  the main definition of what constitutes a rural area used throughout the main text. Panels (b) to (e)
                                  shows robustness to using different definitions of rural areas in line with the analysis in Table A.2, Panel C;
                                  see Section C.3. Dashed lines are two standard error confidence bands.

                                                                                                                                                         31
Figure A.10 – Long-Run Alcohol Consumption Patterns of Urban and Rural Adolescents

                                                     80
                    Share of beer in total alcohol                rural              urban




                                                     60




                                                     40




                                                     20
                                                          1970            1980               1990               2000   2010
                                                                              year in which individual turned 17


                                                                          (a) share of beer consumption

                                                      5
                    Average of log total alcohol




                                                     4.5




                                                      4




                                                                  rural               urban
                                                     3.5
                                                           1970            1980              1990              2000    2010
                                                                              year in which individual turned 17


                                                                          (b) average log total alcohol

Notes: This figure shows—for the entire sample period—the long-run shares of beer consumption (panel a)
respectively the long-run average log of total alcohol consumption (panel b) of consumers who lived in a
rural and urban area when they turned 17 as a function of the year in which when they turned 17. To
avoid having cells with too few observations, we combine two consecutive birth cohorts (e.g., birth years
1960 and 1961). Dashed lines are two standard error confidence bands.




                                                                                             32
                                        Table A.1: Share of Vodka and Binge Drinking

                                                (1)        (2)       (3)        (4)        (5)       (6)        (7)       (8)
Share of vodka (not in percent)                0.263*             -0.860*** -1.138*** -2.017*** -1.239*** -1.870*** -2.235***
                                               [0.151]              [0.119]   [0.124]   [0.115]   [0.162]   [0.172]   [0.247]
Monthly alcohol intake (in grams of alcohol)             0.006*** 0.006*** 0.006***
                                                          [0.000]  [0.000]  [0.000]
Daily alcohol intake (in grams of alcohol)                                                        0.021*** 0.021***
                                                                                                   [0.001]  [0.001]

Age, region, and year FEs                                                       Yes       Yes                  Yes        Yes
Real income and relative price                                                  Yes       Yes                  Yes        Yes
Socio-economic demographics                                                     Yes       Yes                  Yes        Yes
Monthly alcohol intake FE                                                                 Yes
Daily alcohol intake FE                                                                                                   Yes
Observations                                   19,781    19,781     19,781    19,781     19,781    19,781     19,781     19,781
R-squared                                       0.000     0.487      0.489     0.511      0.734     0.082      0.128      0.182
Notes: The dependent variable is the number of days the respondents reports drinking alcohol. Columns 1 and 2 show that
individuals with a larger share of vodka and with a higher level of alcohol intake both consume alcohol more frequently. However,
Columns 3 to 8 show that individuals who consume the same amount of alcohol (per month or per day) but use a larger share of
vodka consume less frequently. Hence, conditional on the level of alcohol intake, consumers with a larger share of vodka consume
more alcohol when drinking and hence have a higher propensity to binge drink. Columns 3 and 6 uses a minimal specification
without any controls. Columns 4 and 7 adds a full set of controls. Socio-economic demographics include education, marital status,
body weight, and subjective health status. Columns 5 and 8 control for the level of alcohol non-parametrically. Robust standard
errors in parentheses are clustered by individual; ***, **, * denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level,
respectively.
                                                                      Table A.2: Sensitivity Analysis of the Anti-Alcohol Campaign

                                                                                               A. RLMS Sample Attrition                                              B. Comparison with Retail Sales Data
                                                                                                                                                    using one                              match retail
                                                  drop Moscow and             ATE by                   ATE by              using individual's                           using years
Specification:                                                                                                                                   observation per                           sales vodka
                                                   St. Petersburg           survey round            years in sample        first observation                          2008-2011 only
                                                                                                                                                   individual                                 shares
                                                          (1)                   (2)                        (3)                    (4)                    (5)                (6)                (7)

I(became adolescent during campaign) × I(rural)        6.602***               5.909**                   6.757**                6.935***              6.066**             7.356***            5.330**
                                                        [2.139]               [2.483]                   [2.876]                 [2.591]              [2.572]              [2.589]            [2.283]
I(became adolescent during campaign) ×                                         -0.132
I(rural)                                                                       [0.378]
    × (survey round)
I(became adolescent during campaign) ×                                                                   -0.202
I(rural)                                                                                                 [0.329]
    × (years in sample)
I(became adolescent during campaign)                    -1.460                 -1.100                    -1.074                  -1.460               -0.961              -2.376              -1.494
                                                        [1.639]                [1.477]                   [1.477]                 [2.100]              [2.069]             [2.591]             [1.718]
Alcohol intake (in grams of ethanol)                     Yes                    Yes                       Yes                     Yes                  Yes                  Yes                Yes
Year, age, region, rural FE                              Yes                    Yes                       Yes                     Yes                  Yes                  Yes                Yes
Real income and relative price                           Yes                    Yes                       Yes                     Yes                  Yes                  Yes                Yes
Socio-economic demographics                              Yes                    Yes                       Yes                     Yes                  Yes                  Yes                Yes
Observations                                            25,245                 29,083                    29,083                  6,881                6,881               12,477              29,083
R-squared                                                0.154                  0.153                    0.153                   0.128                0.133                0.192               0.167



                                                                                         C. Using Different Definitions of I(rural)                                    D. Additional Robustness Checks

                                                    using current          using current          using birth place or    using birth place or   using birth place     exclude beer      use two control
Specification:
                                                  population < 100k      population < 250k        current pop. < 100k     current pop. < 250k          only             expansion             groups

                                                          (8)                   (9)                       (10)                    (11)                 (12)                (13)                (14)

I(became adolescent during campaign) × I(rural)        5.995***               5.167**                   5.812***               5.264***                3.911             6.668***
                                                        [1.965]               [2.042]                    [1.964]                [1.982]               [2.968]             [2.067]
I(became adolescent during campaign)                    -2.177                 -2.038                    -1.428                  -1.426               -0.810              -2.059
                                                        [1.566]                [1.723]                   [1.488]                 [1.571]              [2.423]             [1.549]
I(became adolescent before campaign) × I(urban)                                                                                                                                              7.070***
                                                                                                                                                                                              [2.124]
I(became adolescent after campaign) × I(urban)                                                                                                                                               5.307**
                                                                                                                                                                                             [2.533]
I(became adolescent before campaign)                                                                                                                                                         -4.156**
                                                                                                                                                                                              [2.004]
I(became adolescent after campaign)                                                                                                                                                          -4.485**
                                                                                                                                                                                              [2.000]
Alcohol intake (in grams of ethanol)                     Yes                    Yes                       Yes                     Yes                  Yes                  Yes                Yes
Year, age, region, rural FE                              Yes                    Yes                       Yes                     Yes                  Yes                  Yes                Yes
Real income and relative price                           Yes                    Yes                       Yes                     Yes                  Yes                  Yes                Yes
Socio-economic demographics                              Yes                    Yes                       Yes                     Yes                  Yes                  Yes                Yes
Observations                                            29,083                 29,083                    29,083                  29,083               14,264              20,490              20,490
R-squared                                                0.153                  0.153                    0.152                   0.152                0.125                0.088               0.088



                                                                                                           D. Additional Robustness Checks (continued)

                                                      all rounds,          very long run,              campaign               drop heavy          include minors        control for       Honoré (1992)
Specification:
                                                      1994-2011               2006-11                  1985-1990               drinkers             (age 14-17)      permanent income       estimator
                                                         (15)                   (16)                      (17)                    (18)                 (19)                (20)                (21)
I(became adolescent during campaign) × I(rural)        4.661***               8.635***                  5.172***               6.760***              5.065**              5.012**            6.094***
                                                        [1.765]                [2.446]                   [1.903]                [2.135]              [1.980]              [1.980]             [0.394]
I(became adolescent during campaign)                    -1.898                 -2.748                    -1.639                  -1.161               -0.958              -1.787            -0.490***
                                                        [1.291]                [2.029]                   [1.443]                 [1.568]              [1.481]             [1.509]             [0.166]
Alcohol intake (in grams of ethanol)                     Yes                    Yes                       Yes                     Yes                  Yes                  Yes                Yes
Year, age, region, rural FE                              Yes                    Yes                       Yes                     Yes                  Yes                  Yes                Yes
Real income and relative price                           Yes                    Yes                       Yes                     Yes                  Yes                  Yes                Yes
Socio-economic demographics                              Yes                    Yes                       Yes                     Yes                  Yes                  Yes                Yes
Income deciles x 10-year age group FEs                                                                                                                                      Yes
Observations                                            29,276                 11,734                    20,490                  16,291               30,017              29,083              29,083
R-squared                                                0.121                  0.099                    0.088                   0.194                0.177                0.157                 -
Notes: The dependent variable is the share of vodka consumption (in %). Socio-economic demographics include education, marital status, body weight, and subjective health status. The length of the
anti-alcohol campaign is defined to last from 1986 to 1990 based on Figure 2 and adolescence is defined as being 17 years old based on Section 5. The main effect I(rural) indicates the place of
residence when becoming adolescent and is included in all specifications. Robust standard errors in parentheses are clustered by individual; ***, **, * denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and
10% level, respectively.
                Table A.3: Classification of Non-Alcoholic Goods into Traditional and New ‘‘Western’’ Goods

New Goods       Traditional Goods                                          Classification

                                    After the collapse of the Soviet Union, chicken started to be produced on special chicken
                                    farms that used new technologies which more efficiently dealt with the cold weather and
chicken         pork and beef
                                    significantly lowered production costs. These changes lead chicken sales to exceed that of
                                    more traditional meets such as pork or beef within less than two decades.
                                    Cottage cheese was a popular type of breakfast in the Soviet Union. After the collapse of the
yogurt          cottage cheese      Soviet Union, the import of new technologies by foreign companies made mass production
                                    and storage of yogurt viable so that it became the most popular type of breakfast nowadays.

                                    Apples, pears, plums are locally grown fruits, while subtropical fruits such as bananas
                                    pineapples, or mango do not grow in Russia or any of the fifteen former Soviet republics.
subtropical
                local fruits        Therefore, subtropical fruits were barely available to consumers in the Soviet Union, but
fruits
                                    imports rose sharply after the collapse of the Soviet Union making them a popular and
                                    inexpensive alternative.

                                    Chocolate existed in the Soviet Union but was very expensive since cocoa beans do not grow
                                    locally. Therefore, many desserts were based on jam and honey, which are local. Today,
chocolate       jam and honey
                                    chocolate is a significant part of Russian imports, and the relative price of chocolate has
                                    decreased dramatically.

                                    The technology to mass produce frozen fruits was introduced only after the collapse of the
frozen fruits   dried fruits        Soviet Union. Drying was the main technology for storing fruits over longer periods in the
                                    Soviet Union.

                                    Ultra-heat treated (UHT) and ultra-pasteurized milk as well as the Tetra Pak technology
long-lasting    short-lived         were introduced only after the collapse of the Soviet Union and contributed to making long-
milk            milk                lasting milk popular. Before that, fresh milk or short-lived milk based on high-temperature,
                                    short-time (HTST) pasteurization was the only type of milk available for purchase.

                                    Salted Salmon started to be imported only after collapse of the Soviet Union, mostly from
salted salmon   salted herring
                                    Norway. During the Soviet Union, herring was the main salted fish available.
              Table A.4: Descriptive Statistics of Other Non-Alcoholic Goods

   Share of subtropical fruits in fresh fruits                5028    18.9  33.0   26.3
   Share of chocolate in desserts                             3350    83.1  35.4 100.0
   Share of long-lived milk in milk                           7488     5.5  21.1    0.0
   Share of frozen fruits in preserved fruits                  680    20.7  39.7    0.0
   Share of yogurt in breakfast                               5914    54.5  40.1 100.0
   Share of salmon in salted fish                             3650    25.8  41.8   60.4
   Share of chicken in meat (NOBUS)                           9492    51.4  43.6 100.0
   Share of chicken in meat (RLMS)                            6513    59.6  42.0 100.0
Notes: Data from the National Survey of Household Welfare and Program Participation
(NOBUS), which was conducted in 2003 by the World Bank in collaboration with the Russian
Statistical Office. Expenditures are measured at the household level.
                                                     Table A.5: Effect of Alcohol Tastes on Mortality - Extensions of Anti-Alcohol Campaign Analysis

                                                              A. Using 1-Year Age Bins of Regional Mortality       B. Reduced-Form: Medium- and Long-Run           C. Reduced-Form: Cause-Specific

Dependent variable :                                            log(male mortality), age 20-65     vodka share            log(male mortality), age 20-65         alc. poisoning     external   cancer
                                                                (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)             (5)            (6)              (7)           (8)             (9)       (10)
Share of vodka                                                0.934***     0.960***     0.177***
                                                               [0.289]      [0.307]      [0.043]
I(became adolescent during campaign) × I(rural)(a)                                                    4.435***       4.011***       7.332***        3.004***        23.991***       7.666***    -1.129
                                                                                                       [0.935]        [0.517]        [1.569]         [0.475]         [5.575]         [2.421]   [7.240]
Log(total alcohol)                                                          -0.491        0.211         0.360                                                         0.036        0.055***    -0.005
                                                                            [0.376]      [0.229]       [0.224]                                                       [0.048]         [0.020]   [0.032]
I(became adolescent during campaign)(b)                      -5.888***    -6.183***    -5.198***     -7.506***       -6.999***      -7.753***      -6.392***       -17.508***      -8.872***     2.124
                                                               [0.817]      [0.866]      [0.599]       [0.725]         [0.312]        [0.808]        [0.386]         [3.907]         [1.603]   [4.734]

Sum of diff-in-diff and diff coefficients, (a)+(b)                                                                   -2.988***       -0.422        -3.388***         6.482*          -1.206     0.995
                                                                                                                       [0.407]       [1.360]         [0.389]         [3.658]         [1.739]   [5.811]

Log population                                                  Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes            Yes            Yes               Yes           Yes             Yes       Yes
Year, age, region, rural FE                                     Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes            Yes            Yes               Yes           Yes             Yes       Yes
Observations                                                   1,400        1,400        1,400         1,400          52,345         11,412            40,933        1,327           1,343     1,273
R-squared                                                      0.679        0.675        0.755         0.752          0.573          0.501             0.435         0.804           0.764     0.585
1st-stage F-statistic                                          16.57        15.74
P-value of test that coefficient equals value in Table 3       0.27         0.31                       0.05
Sample period                                                                    1998-2011                           1989-2014      1989-1997      1998-2014                      1998-2011
Estimator                                                       IV            IV          OLS          OLS             OLS            OLS            OLS              OLS            OLS       OLS
Notes: Table uses male alcohol consumption data and mortality rates by year, region, age and type of settlement (urban/rural). Panel B covers additional years 2012-2014, which are not contained in
the RLMS sample used to measure the age-specific alcohol consumption in Panel A. Reduced-form regressions in Panel B are weighted by population because they do not use data from the RLMS,
which is not representative at the sub-national level. Panel C reports the reduced-form results corresponding to the IV estimates reported in Panel B of Table 3. Robust standard errors in parentheses
are clustered by region; ***, **, * denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
                                Table A.6: Identification of Long-Run Tastes for Alcoholic Drinks using Migrants

                                                       A. Migrants to Cities              B. Immigrants from other Soviet Republics
 Dependent variable:                                      Share of vodka                                 Share of wine
                                                          (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)        (5)         (6)         (7)        (8)
                                                (a)
 I(born in a rural now living in an urban area)        11.232***   2.647**
                                                        [0.984]    [1.062]
 I(immigrated from Georgia or Moldova)                                         4.010***   2.924**
                                                                                [1.514]   [1.443]
 Share of wine by country of origin (leave-out mean)                                                  0.394***     0.988*      0.609
                                                                                                       [0.138]     [0.507]    [0.406]
 Share of wine in aggregate alcohol sales of country of origin                                                                           0.056***
                                                                                                                                          [0.006]
                                            (b)
 I(always lived in the same urban location)                          0.270                  0.291                             -0.095     0.711***
                                                                    [0.901]                [0.222]                            [0.357]     [0.013]
 Alcohol intake (in grams of ethanol)                              0.046***               -0.012***                          -0.012***    -0.000
                                                                    [0.004]                 [0.001]                            [0.001]    [0.000]

 Year, age, geography FE                                             Yes                    Yes                                Yes         Yes
 Socio-economic demographics                                         Yes                    Yes                                Yes         Yes
 Real income and relative price                                      Yes                    Yes                                Yes         Yes
 Observations                                           19,107      19,107      44,028     44,028      43,819      43,819     43,819      43,819
 R-squared                                              0.016       0.181        0.000     0.051        0.000       0.000     0.015        0.352
 Difference (a)-(b)                                                2.377**                 2.632*                              0.704
                                                                   [1.007]                 [1.448]                            [0.719]
 Weak-IV F-statistic (Kleibergen-Paap)                                                                              54.2       74.8
 Sample mean of dependent variable                         54.4      54.4     4.2        4.2        4.2         4.2       4.2         4.2
                                                                                                                                   st
 Specification                                             OLS       OLS     OLS        OLS        OLS          IV        IV      1 stage
Notes: Socio-economic demographics include education, marital status, body weight, and subjective health status. Geographical FE are region
FE in columns 1-4 and city-level FE in columns 5-8. Robust standard errors in parentheses are clustered by individual; ***, **, * denote
statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
                            Table A.7: Identification of Long-Run Tastes for Non-Alcoholic Goods using 1990s Market Expansions

                                                               A. Share of New ‘‘Western” Goods (NOBUS)                                         B. RLMS
                                      all new    subtropical                           long-lasting    frozen     salted
 Dependent variable (in shares):                                chocolate   yogurt                                          chicken                chicken
                                       goods        fruits                                milk          fruits   salmon

                                        (1)          (2)           (3)        (4)          (5)           (6)       (7)         (8)           (9)             (10)


 I(born in 1990s)                                                                                                                         16.232***     9.408*
                                                                                                                                           [4.465]      [4.945]
 I(born in 1980s)                    11.930***    8.621***      9.157*** 26.248***        2.909       30.807** 15.196*** 10.737***        11.214*** 7.005***
                                      [1.152]      [2.557]       [1.728]  [2.297]        [1.769]      [13.912]  [4.253]   [3.067]          [1.457]   [2.669]
 I(born in 1970s)                    7.173***     5.551***      6.814*** 19.252***        1.764       27.584*** 15.885***    -2.302       6.655***      4.952**
                                      [0.743]      [1.589]       [1.530]  [1.830]        [1.106]       [6.890]   [2.542]     [1.905]       [1.704]      [2.359]

 Log(real income)                     -0.032       0.211*        -0.165      -0.166      -0.002        -0.621*   -0.048      -0.000                     -0.164
                                      [0.048]      [0.113]       [0.138]     [0.127]     [0.059]       [0.357]   [0.162]     [0.122]                    [0.187]
 Family size                          -0.201        0.873       5.574***    2.869***     -0.357         2.672     1.813     -7.309***                  -7.333***
                                      [0.350]      [0.813]       [0.995]     [0.912]     [0.432]       [2.678]   [1.190]      [0.890]                    [0.846]
 Age                                                                                                                                                    -0.103
                                                                                                                                                        [0.074]
 Relative price of chicken to pork                                                                                                                       4.524
                                                                                                                                                        [5.027]
 Relative price of chicken to beef                                                                                                                      -0.440
                                                                                                                                                        [4.765]
 Region x product FE                   Yes
 Region FE                                          Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes       Yes         Yes                            Yes
 Year FE                                                                                                                                                     Yes
 Observations                         44,186       6,576          4,584      7,504       10,075          845      5,110       9,492         6,513        6,513
 R-squared                             0.365       0.052          0.061      0.102        0.059         0.196     0.043       0.067         0.011        0.094
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses are clustered by individual; ***, **, * denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
                          Table A.8: Effect of Vodka and Samogon on Mortality from Alcohol Poisoning

                                                     2nd Stage:              1st Stage:                  2nd Stage:       1st Stage:
Dependent variable:                                alc. poisoning   samogon share vodka share          alc. poisoning   samogon share
                                                        (1)              (2)              (3)                (4)              (5)
Share of vodka                                       4.140***
                                                      [1.488]
Share of samogon                                      2.671*                                              2.964***
                                                      [1.363]                                              [1.039]
I(became adolescent during campaign) × I(rural)                        -0.711          6.254***          26.098***          -0.711
                                                                       [1.124]          [1.957]            [6.343]          [1.124]
I(rural)                                                              5.077***           0.360                             5.077***
                                                                       [0.739]          [1.319]                             [0.739]
Log(total alcohol)                                    -0.221*           0.005          0.059***             0.020            0.005
                                                      [0.121]          [0.008]          [0.013]            [0.054]          [0.008]
I(became adolescent during campaign)                 -10.021*           0.096           -1.871           -17.794***          0.096
                                                      [5.278]          [0.600]          [1.302]            [4.513]          [0.600]

Log population                                          Yes              Yes             Yes                 Yes              Yes
Year, age, region, rural FE and log income              Yes              Yes             Yes                 Yes              Yes
Observations                                           1,327            1,327           1,327               1,327            1,327
R-squared                                              0.599            0.293           0.238               0.737            0.293
1st-stage F-statistic                                  52.05            40.32           9.770               47.18            47.18
Estimator                                               IV              OLS             OLS                  IV              OLS
Notes : This table extends the analysis shown in Table 3 using regional alcohol sales by year, region, age and type of settlement
(urban/rural) from 1994-2011 and alcohol poisoning fatalities. Note that while Columns 2 and 5 report the same coefficients, the F-
statistics are different. Column 2 reports the F-statistic for joint significance of two instruments, I(rural) and I(became adolescent
during campaign) × I(rural), with the corresponding two 1st-stage regressions shown in Columns 2 and 3. Column 5 reports the F-
statistic for significance of one instrument, I(rural), with the corresponding single 1st-stage regression shown in Column 5. The set of
additional controls includes log population, log regional GDP per capita and year, age, region and rural FE. Robust standard errors
in squared brackets are clustered by region. ***, **, * denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
